





BAGOBO  MYTHS

BY LAURA WATSON BE NED ICT

THE fOllowing stories were obtained from the Bagobo people, one of the groups of pagan Malays in southeastern Mindanao, Philippine Islands. Their habitat is on the eastern folds of the Cabadangan mountain-range, in the vicinity of Mount Apo, the highest peak, and on the foothills thence sloping down to the west coast of the Gulf of Davao. They practise a primitive agriculture — raising corn, rice, camotes, and several vegetables — in fields and little gardens at the edge of the forests. Their garments are of home-grown hemp;  and their artistic interests centre largely around the decorative designs produced in dyeing, weaving, and embroidery.
In spite of physical barriers interposed by mountain-spurs, frequent swift-flowing rivers, and dense undergrowth in the forests, there is considerable intercourse between the small villages, each of which contains from two to twenty or more houses. The people take long journeys on horse and on foot over the trails to assemble at ceremonial festivals and for purposes of trade, as well as for social visiting. On such occasions, stories and songs are repeated.
That the component parts of the stories have been drawn from numerous and widely separated sources, is apparent, even at a cursory glance. Among these sources, the folk-lore material of  Sanscrit  writers seems to have left a distinctive impress upon the Bagobo mythical romance. Against a Malay background, and blended with native pagan elements, are presented chains of episodes, characteristic personalities, methods for securing a magical control of the situation, that suggest vividly parallel literary forms in the Sanscrit saga. Still more, one is conscious of a prevailing Indian atmosphere, that may sometimes elude analysis, yet none the less fails not to make  itself felt. But as to the line of ethnic contacts which has transfused this peculiar literary quality into Malay myth, — whether it is to be traced solely to the influence exerted by Hindoo religion and Hindoo literature during ages of domination in the Malay archipelago, or whether we must reconsider the  hypothesis  of  an  Indonesian  migration, — this is a problem of great complexity, for which no satisfactory  solution has yet been offered.
Modern foreign increments  that  have  filtered  into  the stories from the folk-lore of neighboring wild tribes — notably that of the Bilan, the Tagacolo, and, to a less extent, the Culaman and Ata — will have to be sifted out eventually.   In  illustration  of  this point, one tale known  to   be outside of Bagobo sources is here introduced. The story of “Alélti’k

i §	Journal of American Folk-Lore

and Alébii’tud” was told by an Ata boy  to a  Bagobo at  the coast, who immediately related it  to me.  It  was unquestionably passed on in Bagobo circles, and has become a permanent accession. Yet this was the sole case that came under my observation of a social visit made by an Ata in a Bagobo house; for the Ata live far to the north- west of the Bagobo, and are extremely timid, and “wild ” in the popular sense. Recent ethnic influences from higher peoples, pre-eminently the Moro and the Spaniard,  will  have  to  be  reckoned  with.  The story of “The Monkey and the Turtle” is clearly modified from a Spanish source.
The myths here presented include only those of which no texts were recorded. A part of the material was given in the vernacular and interpreted by a Bagobo; a part was told in English, or in mixed English and Bagobo. The stories were taken down in •9oy, on Mount Merar in the district of Talun, and at Santa Cruz on the coast.
As regards subject-matter, the stories (s’/oraa') tend to cluster into groups fairly distinguishable in type. Foremost  in  significance  for the cultural tradition of the people is the init, a long, romantic tale relating in highly picturesque language the adventures of the mythical Bagobo, who lived somewhere back in the hazy past, before existing conditions were established. Semi-divine some of them were, or men possessing magical power. The old Mona people; the Malaki, who portrayed the Bagobo’s ideal of manhood ; and the noble lady called Bia, — these and other well-marked characters figure in the Bfs/.
Another class of stories deals with the demons known as Buso, who haunt graveyards, forests, and  rocks.  These  tales  have  been  built up by numerous accretions from the folk-lore of many generations. The fear of Buso is an ever-present element in the mental associations of the Bagobo, and a definite factor in shaping ritual forms and magical usages. But the story-teller delights to represent Buso as tricked, fooled, brought into embarrassing situations.
Still another type of myth is associated with cosmogony and natural phenomena. It is probable that more extended research would dis- close a complete cosmogonic myth to replace the somewhat fragmen- tary material here offered.
The number of explanatory animal tales thus far collected is sur- prisingly small.	Doubtless there are many more to  be  gathered. Yet, in view of the comparatively scanty mammalian fauna of Minda- nao, we might anticipate a somewhat limited range of animal subjects. It will be observed that these groups of stories, tentatively thus classified  for convenience,  are  not separated  by  sharp lines.	Buso figures prominently in the ofsf; animals play the part  of heroes in Buso tales; while in nature myths the traditional Mona are more or
' The general name for a story, of w hatever type.

Bagobo M ytlis	i $
less closely associated with the shifting of sky and sun. But this is merely equivalent to saying that all the tales hang together.
A word as to the form of the stories and  the  manner  of  narration. Here we find two distinct styles dependent on the content of the  myth. The tales of animals, cosmogonic myths, and the  folk-lore of  Buso, are all told in prose, with many inflections of the voice, and often accom- panied  by an  animated  play of  dramatic  gesture.  In  marked  contrast is the style of the mythical romance, or u/s’f, which is recited in a rapid monotone, without change of pitch, with  no gestures, and  with a regard to accent and quantity that gives a rhythmic swing suggestive of  a metrical rendering.
Although Bagobo songs are often designated as men’s songs and women’s songs, in the case of the stories I have found as yet no monop- oly by either sex of any special type.  The unt, however, is often told by a young woman just after she leaves the loom, when darkness drops. She sits on the floor, or lies on her back with hands clasped  behind  her head, and pours out her story in an unbroken flow to the eager young men and girls who gather to listen. Again, I have seen a girl of thirteen the sole auditor while a  boy  but  little older  than she rolled off an ctrl that seemed interminable, with never a pause for  breath. The children did not glance at  each  other;  but  the face of each was all alight with joy at the tale.

I.	MYTHS ASSOCIATED WITH NATURAL PHENOMENA

1.	COSMOGONY
In the beginning, Diwata' made the sea and the land, and planted trees of many kinds. Then he took two lumps of earth,° and shaped them like human figures; then he spit on  them,  and  they  became man and woman. The old man was called Tuglay,• and the  old woman, Tuglibung.• The  two  were  married,  and  lived  together. The Tuglay made a great house, and planted seeds of different kinds that Diwata gave him.
Diwata made the sun, the moon, the stars, and the rivers. First he made the great eel (basi‘y‘), a fish that is like a snake in the river, and
' Among the Bagobo the name “ diwata ”  is  used  rather  as a  collective  than  as  a specific term, and refers to the gods in general, or to any one of them. Pamulak Manobo, creator of the earth, is the diwato here referred to.
•	In Malayan-Arabic tradition, Adam was moulded from a lump of  clay  mixed  with water (cf. W.  W.  Skeat,  Malay  Magi*  ['9  L  Ph  s i—sa) ;  but  the  suggestion  may  as well have come from a )esuit story.
•	Tuglay, the “old man " of Bagobo myth, and Tuglibung, the “ old woman,” were the Mona, who lived on the earth before time began. Tradition says that they were acquainted with only the rudest of Bagobo arts and industries; that they were very poor, and dressed themselves in the soft sheath torn from the cocoanut-trees. Tuglay and Tuglibung are not specific, but general, names for all those old people of the tales.

i6	Journal oJ American Fold-Lore
wound' it all around the world. Diwata then made the great crab (#oytitnaag), and put it near the great eel, and let it go wherever it liked. Now, when the great crab bites the great eel, the eel wriggles, and this produces an earthquake.
When the rain falls, it is Diwata throwing out water from the sky. When Diwata spits, the showers fall. The sun makes yellow clouds, and the yellow clouds make the colors of the rainbow. But the white clouds are smoke from the fire of the gods.

2.	IN THE DAYS OF THE MONA
Long ago the sun hung low over the earth.  And  the  old  woman called Mona said to the sky,  “You  go  up  high,  because  I  cannot pound my rice when you are in the way.”
Then the sky moved up higher.
Mona' was the first woman, and Tuglay° was the first man.  There were at that time only one man and one woman  on  the earth.  Their eldest son  was  named  Malaki ;  their eldest daughter, Bia.  They  lived at the centre of the earth.
Tuglay and Mona made all the things in the world ; but the god made the woman and the man. Mona was also called Tuglibung. Tuglay and Tuglibung got rich, because they could see the god.
But the snake was there too, and he gave the fruit  to  the  man  and  the woman, saying to them, “ If you eat the fruit, it will  open  your  eyes.”
Then they both ate the fruit. This made the god angry.
After this, Tuglibung and Tuglay could not see the god any more.•

3.	WHY THE SKY WENT UP
In the beginning, when the world was made, the sky lay low down over the earth. At this time the poor families called “ Mona ” were living in the world. The sky hung so low, that, when they wanted to pound their rice, they had to kneel down on the ground to get a play for the arm. Then the poor woman called Tuglibung said to the sky, “Go up higher! Don't you see that I cannot pound my rice well?”
So the sky began to move upwards. When it  had gone up about  five fathoms, the woman said again, “Go up still more!”
This made the sun angry at  the woman, and he rushed up very high.
'  The  Malays of  the  peninsula  have a similar  tradition  as to  the  snake element (cf.
Skeat, f. c., p. 6).
° The name “ Mona ” is ordinarily applied to the old man as well as to the old woman of prehistoric days.
•	A generic name for the old man of  the ancient  myths.  The word seems to be related to ittgtil (“ old”), which is used only of persons. “An old thing” ie iapi.
•	With ready ease the Bagobo incorporates elements that have come from Catholic sources, yet without breaking the thread of his narrative.

Bago6o 3fy/6i	i2
In the old days, when the sun as well as the sky was low down, the Mona had a deep hole in the ground, as large as a house, into which they would creep to keep themselves from the fierce heat of the sun.
The Mona were all very old; but after the sun went up very high, they began to get babies.'

4.	WHY THE SKY WENT UP
In the beginning, the sky hung so low over the earth, that the people could not stand upright, could not do their work.
For this reason, the man in the sky said to the sky, “Come up!” Then the sky went up to its present place.

. THE  SUN  AND  THE MOON
Long ago the Sun had to leave the Moon to go to another town. He knew that his wife, the Moon, was expecting the birth of a child ; and, before going away, he said to her, “When your baby is born, if it  is a  boy, keep it; if a girl, kill it.”
A long time passed before the Sun  could  come  back  to the Moon,  and while  he was gone, the Moon gave birth  to her baby.  It  was a girl. A beautiful child it was, with curly hair like binubbHd,* with burnished nails  that looked  like gold, and having the white spots called  mof*• on its body. The mother  felt  very  sad  to  think  of  killing it,  and  so she hid it in the big box (#aéan•) where they kept their clothes.
As soon as the Sun returned, he asked the Moon, “How about our baby?”
At once the Moon replied, “It was a girl: I killed it yesterday.”
The Sun had only a week to stay at home with the Moon.  One  night he dreamed that a boy with white hair came to him from heaven. The boy stood close to him, and spoke these words: —
“Your wife got a baby, but it was a girl ; and she hid it away from you in the box.”
When the Sun wakened from sleep, he was very angry at the Moon, and the two fell to quarrelling about  tb.e baby.  The Moon  wanted  the child saved.
“You ought to keep it with you,” she urged.
'	A tradition ot the first peopling ot Mindanao was found by Mr. Cole at Cibolan. Cf.
The Phili pline Journal of Science, vol. vi, pp. • °9 ( 9+'-)
° Hemp warp that has been laced in a banded pattern  before  dyeing,  in  order  to produce decorative figures in a textile, is called bin ubbiid. Atter the binding-threads are clipped, there is an eflect ot rippling in the hemp, of which curly hair ie suggestive.
•	Such auepicious white spots are referred to in the text of a Bagobo song (in manu- script), in which the Divine Man who lives at the source of the streams is said to have the po»ioIi on his body.
•	A well-made box of hard wood in which fine garments are kept.
VOL.  XXVI. —NO. 99	*

i8	Journal of A mexican Fold-Lore
“No, no!” protested the Sun.  “ I cannot keep it,  because my body is so hot it would make your baby sick.”
“And I cannot keep it,” complained the Moon, “for my body is  very dark; and that would surely make the child sick.”
Then the Sun fell  into  a  passion  of  rage;  and  he  seized  his  big #OfZf Eton,' and slew the child. He cut its small body into numberless little bits, — as many as the grains of sand that lie along  the seashore. Out of the window he tossed the  pieces of  the shining little body;  and, as the gleaming fragments sparkled to their places in the sky, the stars came to birth.
6. ORIGIN OF THE STARS
All the old Bagobo men say that the Sun and the Moon once had a quarrel about the Moon’s baby.
The Moon had a baby in  her  belly; and  the Sun said,  “ If  our  baby is a girl, we will kill it, because a girl could not be like me.”
Then the Sun went on a journey to another town, and while he was gone, the baby was born; but it was a girl. Now, the Moon  felt  very sorry to think of her little child  being  killed,  and she  hid  it  in a  box. In a few days, the Sun came home  to  rest  with  his  wife.  Then  he asked her for the baby.
The Moon answered, “ I killed it yesterday: it was a girl.”
But the Sun did not believe what his wife said. Then he opened the  box to get his clothes,  and  there  he  saw  a  baby-girl.  And  the  Sun was very  angry.  He  seized  the  baby  and  cut  it  into  many  pieces, and threw the pieces out of the window. Then the pieces of the baby’s body became the stars.
Before the Sun and the Moon had their quarrel, they journeyed together through the sky, and  the sky  was  not far  above  the earth, as now, but it lay low down.

J. THE FATE OF THE MOON’S BABY
The Sun wanted the Moon to have a boy-baby so that it would be like its father. The Moon too hoped  to  give  birth  to a  boy.  But when the child was  born,  it  was  a  girl. Now,  at  that  time,  the  Moon was very hungry, and wanted to eat her own baby. Then  the Sun killed the girl-child, and ate it up himself.

8. THE BLACK MEN AT TITE DOOR OF THE SUN
The men  who live in  that  part of  the world  near  to where the sun
rises are very black.   They are called Manobo lagselata k'aIo.*	From
'	A long, one-edged sword that hangs at the left eide. in an elaborate scabbard, when a man is in full-dress.
•	Men (fa, “the;” -g-, a formal or euphonic infix; selat, “ door;” b' {ân]. “of;” alp,
“sun”) at the door of the eun. If onobo is a general term for “man,” “people.

Bagobo  M ylhs	i q

sunrise until noon, they stay in a hole in the ground to escape  the fierce heat of the sun. Just before sunrise, they  put their  rice in the big pot, with water, and leave it without  any  fire  under  the  pot. Then they creep into their hole in the ground.  The rising sun cooks  the rice; and, when the black men come out of the hole at noon, their meal is all ready for them. From noon until sunset,  and  then  all night, the black men play and  work.  But before  the sun  rises, they fix their rice in the pot, leave it for the sun to cook, and go down again into the big hole.

.   STORY   OF   THE  ECLIPSE
Before time began, very long ago, a great bird called “minokawa”' swallowed the moon. Seized with fear, all the people began to scream and make a great noise. Then the bird peeped down to see what was the matter, and he opened his mouth. But as soon as he opened his mouth, the moon sprang out and ran away.
The minokawa-bird is as large as the Island of Negros or Bohol. He  has a beak of steel, and his claws too are of steel. His eyes are mirrors, and  each  single feather  is  a  sharp sword.  He  lives  outside   the  sky, at the eastern horizon, ready to seize the moon when she reaches there from her journey under the earth.
The moon makes eight holes in the eastern horizon  to come  out of, and eight holes in the western horizon to go into, because every day the big bird tries to catch her, and  she  is  afraid.  The  exact  moment  he tries to swallow her is just when she is about to come in through one of the holes in the east to shine on us again. If the  minokawa  should swallow the moon, and swallow the sun too, he would  then  come down to earth  and  gulp down  men also.  But  when  the moon is in  the  belly of the big bird, and the sky is dark,  then  all  the  Bagobo  scream  and cry, and beat agongs,* because  they  fear  they  will  all  “get  dead.” Soon this racket makes the minokawa-bird look down and “open his mouth to hear the sound.” Then the moon  jumps  out  of  the  bird’s mouth and runs away.
All the old men know about the minokawa-bird in the o/s’f stories.
'	The Visayans believe that an eclipse of the moon  is caused by an enormous animal that seizes the moon,  and holds her in his mouth.     Cf. this Journal,  vol. xix (igo6),  p. log. ' Large percussion instruments made by the Chinese, imported from Singapore into
Mindanao, and widely used by the wild tribes.

zo	Journal oJ American Fold-Lorc
II.	THE “ULIT:” ADVENTURES OF MYTHICAL BAGOBO AT THE DAWN OF TRADITION
I.    LUMABAT   AND  MEB U’YAN
Long ago Lumabat' and his sister (tubé’•) had a quarrel because Lumabat had said, “You shall go with me up into heaven.” And his sister had replied, “No, I don’t like to do that.”
Then they began to fight each other. Soon the woman sat down on the big rice mortar,3 and said to Lumabat, “Now I am going down below the earth, down to Gimokudan .4 Down there I shall begin to shake the lemon-tree. Whenever I shake it, somebody  up  on  the earth will die. If the fruit shaken down be ripe, then an old person will die on the earth ; but if the fruit fall green, the one to die will be young.”
Then she took a bowl filled with pounded rice, and poured the rice into the mortar for a sign that the people should die and go down to Gimokudan.	Presently the mortar began to turn round and round while  the  woman  was  sitting upon  it.	All the while, as the mortar was  revolving,  it  was slowly  sinking into the earth.	But just as it began to settle in the ground, the woman dropped handfuls of the pounded rice upon the earth, with the words:  “See!  I  let  fall this rice. This makes many people  die, dropping down  just  like grains of rice. Thus hundreds of people go down; but none go up into heaven.” Straightway the mortar kept on turning round, and kept  on going lower down, until it disappeared in  the  earth,  with  Lumabat’s sister still  sitting on it.	After this, she came to be known as Mebii'yan. Before she went down below the earth, she was known only as Tubé’ ka
Lumabat (“ sister of Lumabat”).
Mebii'yan is now chief of a town called Banua Mebii'yan (“ Me- bfi’yan’s town”), where she takes care of all dead babies, and gives them milk from her breasts. Mebii’yan is ugly to look at, for her whole body is covered with nipples. All nursing children who still want the milk, go directly, when they die, to Banua Mebii'yan, instead of to Gimoku- dan, and remain there with Mebii’yan until they stop taking milk from her breast. Then they go to their own families in Gimokudan, where they can get rice, and “live” very well.
'	The first of mortals to reach heaven, and become a god (cf. the “Story of Lumabat and Wari”). In the tales that I have thus far collected,  Lumabat  does  not  figure as a culture- hero.
•	The word indicating the relationship between brother and sister, each of whom is
tube’ to the other, whether elder or younger.
•	The mortar in which rice is pounded is a large, deep wooden bowl that stands in the house. With its standard , it is three feet or more in height.
•	The place below the earth where the dead go (gimoâ«d, “ spirit;” -azi, plural ending) ;
that is, [the place of] many spirits.

Bagobo M ytlis	zi

All the spirits stop at Mebii’yan’s town, on their way to Gimokudan. There the spirits wash all their joints in  the  black  river  that  runs through Banua Mebii’yan, and they wash the  tops of  their  heads too. This bathing (9amofogo')  is for  the  purpose of  making  the spirits  feel at home, so that they will not run away  and  go  back  to  their own bodies. If the spirit could  return to its  body,  the  body  would  get  up and be alive again.

2 • STORY OF LUMABAT AND WARI
Tuglay and Tuglibung° had many children. One of them was called Lumabat. There came a time when  Lumabat  quarrelled  with  his sister and was very angry with her. He said,  “ I will go to  the  sky, and never come back again.”
So Lumabat started for the sky-country, and many of his brothers and sisters went with him. A part of their journey lay over the  sea,  and when they had passed the sea, a rock spoke to them and said, “Where are you going?”
In the beginning, all the rocks and plants and the animals could talk* with the people.
Then one boy answered the rock, “We are going to the sky-country.”
As soon as he had spoken, the boy turned into a rock. But his brothers and sisters went on, leaving the rock behind.
Presently a tree said, “Where  are  you  going?” “We are going to the sky,” replied one of  the  girls.
Immediately the girl became a tree. Thus, all the way along the journey, if any one answered, he became a tree, or stone, or rock, according to the nature of the object that put the question.
By and by the remainder of the party reached the border of the sky. They had gone to the very end of the earth, as far as the horizon. But here they had to stop, because the horizon kept moving up and down (supa-su ). The sky and the earth  would  part,  and  then  close together again, just like the jaws of an animal in eating. This move- ment of the horizon began as soon as the people reached there.
There were many young men and women, and they all tried to jump through  the  place  where  the  sky and  the  earth  parted.  But the edges of the horizon are very sharp, like a hampilan,4 and they came together with a snap whenever anybody  tried  to  jump  through ; and  they  cut him into two pieces. Then the parts of his body became stones, or
'	The same word is used of the ceremonial washing at the feetival of Glnum. Ordinary
bathing is f›odigus.
•	See footnote 3, p. t 5, am 3, P. 16.
•	This is also an element in Visayan myth (cf. Maxfield and Millington's collection in thie Journal, vo1. xx I'9°7l. p, i oz). For the Malay tradition, ct. Skeat, Male y f ac•’«. - °°s-
•	See footnote i, p. x8.

22	Journal of American Fold-Lore
grains of sand. One after another of the party tried to jump through,
for nobody knew the fate of the one who went before him.
Last of all, Lumabat jumped —quick, quicker than the rest; and before the sharp edges snapped shut, he was safe in heaven. As he walked along, he saw many wonderful things. He saw many #om- pilans standing alone, and fighting, and that without any man to hold them. Lumabat passed on by them all. Then he came to the  town where the bad dead live. The town is called “Kilut.”' There, in the flames, he saw many spirits with heavy sins on them. The spirits with little sins were not in the flames; but they lay, their  bodies covered with sores, in an acid that cuts like the juice of a  lemon.  Lumabat went on, past them all.
Finally he reached the house of Diwata,' and went up into the house. There he saw many ditrala,  and  they  were  chewing  betel-nut.°  And one ds“mata spit from his mouth the ?ssr 4 that he had finished chewing. When Lumabat saw the isse  coming  from  the  mouth  of  the  god,  it looked  to  him like a  sharp  knife.  Then  Diwata  laid   hold   of   Luma- bat, and Lumabat  thought  the  god  held  a  sharp  knife  in  his  hand. But it was  no  knife:  it  was  just  the  rose.  And  Diwata  rubbed  the rose on Lumabat’s belly, and with one downward stroke  he opened  the belly, and took out Lumabat’s intestines (be/who).
Then Lumabat himself became a god. He was not  hungry  any more, for now his intestines were  gone. Vet  if  he  wanted  to eat,  he had only to say, “Food, come now!” and at once all the fish were there, ready to be caught. In the sky-country, fish do not have to be caught. And Lumabat became the greatest of all the diwata.
Now, when Lumabat left home with his brothers and sisters, one sister and three brothers remained behind. The brother named  Wari felt sad because Lumabat  had  gone  away.  At  last  he  decided  to follow him. He crossed the sea, and reached the border  of  the  sky, which immediately began to make the opening and shutting motions. But Wari was agile, like his brother  Lumabat;  and  he  jumped  quick, just  like  Lumabat,  and got  safe  into  heaven.  Following  the  same path that his brother had  taken,  he  reached  the  same  house.  And again Diwata took the s‘sse, and attempted to open Wari’s belly; but Wan protested, for he did not like to have his intestines pulled out. Therefore the god was angry at Wari.
' A synonyme for Gimokudan  (“ the city of  the dead “).  It  is not ordinarily associated in the mind of the Bagobo with any  idea  of  retribution.  This episode shows traces of Jesuit influence.
•	See footnote i , p. i 5.
•	The popular name “ betel-nut,” has been retained in these  stories  to designate  the  fruit of the areca-palm. Strictly speaking, “ betel ” is the leaf of  a climbing  plant (bityo) that is chewed with the nut.
•	The solid part of the betel-nut that remains after the j uice has been extracted by long chewing.

Bagobo If yths	z

Yet Wari staid on in the  house for  three days.  Then  he went out on the clod' that joined the front and back part of the gods’ house, whence he could look down on the earth.  He saw his home town, and it made him happy to look at his fields of sugarcane and bananas, his groves of betel and cocoanuts. There were his bananas ripe,  and  all his fruits ready to be  plucked.  Wari gazed, and  then  he wanted  to get back to earth again, and he began to cry; for he did not like to stay in heaven and have his intestines taken  out,  and  he  was  homesick for his own town.
Now, the god was angry at Wari because he would not let him open  his belly. And the god told Wari to  go home,  and  take his dogs with him. First the god fixed some food for  Wari  to  eat  on  his  journey. Then he took meadow-grass (Boros), and tied the long blades together, making a line long enough to reach  down  to  earth.  He tied  Wari and the dogs to one end of the line; but  before he lowered  the  rope, he said to Wari, “ Do not eat  while you  are  up  in  the  air, for if  you eat,  it  will set   your  dogs  to  quarrelling.   If   I  hear  the  sound  of  dogs  fighting, I shall let go the rope.”
But while Wari hung in the air, he got very hungry, and, although
he had been let down only about a  third  of  the  distance  from  heaven  to  earth,  he  took some  of  his food  and ate it.	Immediately the dogs began  to  fight.	Then Diwata in the sky heard the noise, and  he dropped  the  rope of meadow-grass.	Then Wari fell down, down; but he did not strike the ground, for he was caught in the  branches of  the  tree  called lani po.	It was a tall tree, and  Wari  could  not  get  down. He began to utter  cries;  and  all  night  he  kept  crying,  “Aro-o-o-o-i!” Then  he turned  into a ku1ago-bird.•	At night, when you hear the  call of the kulago-bird, you know that it is the voice of Wari.
The kulago-bird has various  sorts  of  feathers,  feathers  of  all  kinds of birds and chickens; it has the hair  of  all  animals  and  the  hair  of man.   This  bird  lives  in  very  high  trees  at   night,  and   you  cannot  see it. You cannot catch it. Yet the  old  men  know  a  story  about  a kulago-bird once having been caught  while  it  was  building  its  nest. But this was after there came to be many people on the earth.
The three dogs went right along  back  to  Wari’s  house.  They found Wari’s sister and two brothers at home, and staid there with them. After a while, the woman and her two brothers had many children.
“ In the beginning,” say the old men, “brother and sister would
marry each other, just like pigs. This was a very bad custom.”
' A sort of bridge or platform connecting the main body of the native houee with the shelter that serves as kitchen, when this is separate from the living-room.
•	A  fabulous  bird.  probably  associated  with  the  screech-owl   LAluco  candidiisl  of  the Philippines.	lt is a bird of ill-omen.  Compare  A.  Newton,  Dictionary  o/  Birds,  pp. 62p—68o ( 93 96).

*4	Journal of Amexican Folb-Lore
3-     HOW   MAN   TURNED   INTO   A   MONKEY
Before the world was made, the monkey looked like man, and was called tnaaoéo,' and was actually human. But  after  the  world  and people were made, the monkey took its present form.
When people began to live in the world, they had many children. One man was called Lumabat.  His father had a number of  children, so that Lumabat had many brothers and sisters.
One day a brother of Lumabat was climbing up over the roof, and  in his hand he had a long ladle made of cocoanut-shell. He held the ladle behind his back, at the base of his spine, until by and by a tail began to grow. The ladle had turned into a tail, and presently Luma- bat’s brother became a monkey. After that, a few other people turned into monkeys. But all this came about before Lumabat went  to heaven.
4 TnE TUGLi BUNG AND THE TUGLAY
Before time began,' an old woman (Tuglibung) and an old man (Tuglay) lived in a town at the centre of the  world.  There  came  a season of drought, when their  bananas  spoiled,  and  all  their  plants died from the hot sun. Tuglibung and Tuglay were very hungry, and looked skinny, because they had nothing to eat.
One night as the old man slept, he dreamed that a little boy with white hair came close to him, and said, “Much better it would be, if you would stay here no longer; much better, that you go to the T'oluk Waig3 (‘water-sources’), where there is a good place to live.”
So the old folks started on their journey to the source of the rivers. On their way, they stopped at one place that seemed good, and staid for about a month ; but there was little to eat, and they were always hungry. At last, one day, the man climbed up into a tall tree, whence he could see the whole earth, even to the border of the sky. Far away he could see a little smoke, just like a cigarette. Then  he climbed down the tree in a hurry, and told his wife what he had seen.
“ I will go and find out where that smoke comes from,” he said, “and see if I can get some bananas and things, — all we can eat.”
So the man started out  and  travelled  a  long  way,  leaving  his  wife at  home.  As he approached  the  place  where  he had seen  the smoke,  he found himself in a vast field full of fruit-trees and sugarcane-plants. The sugarcane grew as big as trees; the bananas were as huge as the trunks of  cocoanut-palms;  and  the  papaya-fruit  was  the  size  of  a great clay jar. He walked  on  until  he  reached  a very large  meadow, full of long wavy grass, where there were many horses and carabao and other animals. Swoon after he left the meadow-grass, he could make
' General term for “man,” ” people.”
•	The writ has a stereotyped opening with the phrase undo’me {undo «Inc), “ no year.”
* The fabulous source of all the mountain-streams.

Bagobo M ylhs	z3
out, some distance ahead of him, a big house with many smaller houses grouped around it. He was so scared  that  he could  not see  the houses very well. He kept his eyes on the ground at his feet.
When he came up to the big house, he saw lying under it piles of human bones.  He then knew that the Datu of  the Buso' lived  there. In all the other houses there were buso living too. But he went bravely up the steps of the big house, and sat down on the floor. Right away, while he sat there, the children of Buso wanted to eat  him.  But Tuglay said, “ No, no! don’t eat me, because I just came to get bananas of many diflerent kinds.”
Then the man made a bargain with the Datu of the Buso, and said, “Give me some bananas, and I will pay you two children for them. Come to my house in nine days, and you shall have one boy and one girl for the bananas.” But Tuglay had no children.
Then the Buso gave Tuglay a basket of bananas, and let him go away.
Now, while her husband was away, the woman gave birth to twins,
— a boy and a girl. And when the man got home he was pleased, and said, “Oh! that’s fine! You got some babies while I was away.”
But the man felt very sorry to think of giving  his  children  to  the Buso, and he went from place to place, hoping to find some friend who would help him. All the time, the days of the Jaffa  (“ time  of  con- tract”) were slipping by. He could get  nobody  to help him.  Now it lacked only two of the nine days’ /a/la. And while the children were asleep, Tuglay said to his wife, “Let us run away, and leave our babies here asleep, because to-morrow the Buso will come.”
Then Tuglay and Tuglibung ran away, and left their children. They ran and ran until they reached the T'oluk Waig;  but they could  not  get away from the Jaffa. The nine days of /offtt had caught up with them.
At home, the children woke up and found no mother and father there, and they began to cry. They  thought  they  would  run after their parents. So they left the house, and forded the river, and began  to run.
When the nine days were up, the  Buso came  to Tuglay’s  house  for his pay. When he found nobody at home, he ran after the children, carrying with him many iron axes and big bolos, and accompanied by a crowd of other buso. In all there were three thousand buso, — two thousand walking, and  one  thousand  flying.  The  children  had  the start; but the three thousand buso kept  gaining  on  them,  until  they  were close behind.
' The anthropomorphic and zoomorphie evil  personalities,  whose  number  is  legion. The traditional concept of Buso among the Bagobo has essentially  the  same  content  as that of Asuang with Visayan peoples. Both Buso and Asuang suggest the  Rakshasa  of Indian myth.

26	Journal of American Fold-Lore
As they ran, the little boy said to his sister,  “When  we get  to  that  field over there, where there are ripe bananas, you must not speak a word.”
But when they  reached  the  banana-tree,  the  girl-child  cried  out, “ Brother, I want to eat a banana.”
Then she ate a banana; but she felt so weak she could run  no  longer. She just lay down and died. Then the boy-child looked about for a place to put his sister’s body. He looked at the fine branched trees, full of fruit, and  saw  that  each  single  fruit  was an ogong,'  and the leaves, mother-of-pearl.
To one of the trees, the boy said, “ May  I  put  my sister here?”  And the tree said that he might do it.
Then the boy laid his sister on a branch of the tree, because the child
was dead.
After this, the boy ran back toward the Buso who led the rest, and called out to him, “ I’m going to run  very fast. Chase  me now, and  catch me if you can!”
So the boy ran, and the Buso chased him. Hard pressed, the boy sprang toward a big rock, and shouted to it, “O rock, help me! The Buso will catch me.”
“Come up!” said the rock, “ I’ll help you, if I can.”
But when the boy climbed  up,  he found  that it  was  not  a  rock,  but a fine house, that was giving him shelter.  In that house lived  the Black Lady (Bra t’ metum*), and she received the boy kindly.
As soon as the Buso came up to the rock, he smiled, and  said, “The boy is here all right! I’ll break the rock with my axe.”
But when he tried to break the rock with axe and  polo,*  the  hard stone resisted ; and the Buso’s tools were blunted and spoiled.
Meantime, in the Black Lady’s house the  boy was getting ready for a fight, because the Black Lady said, “Go down now; they want you down there.”
Then with sharp sword and long  spear,  bearing  a  fine  war-shield, and wearing ear-plugs of shining  ivory,  the  boy  went  down  to  meet the  Buso. When  he went down  the  steps, all the other  httso  had  come, and were  waiting  for  him  in  front  of   the   house.   Then  they  all  went to fighting the one boy, and he met them all  alone.  He  fought  until every one of  the  three thousand  buso fell down dead.  At last, one only of  the buso  stood  up,  and  he  was  the  great  Datu  of   Buso.   But  even he fell down  before  that  mighty  boy,  for  none  could  conquer the  boy. He  was  matulus.• After  all  was  done,  the  boy   married   the   Black Lady, and lived well in her house.
'   See footnote z,	+9	• Bio, “ lady ; ” I’ (to), “ the ;" ttietum, “ black.”
° A stout work-knife, with broad, one-edged blade, and square tip; used to  hew down trees, and cut kindling-wood.
•	A term regularly used of the great Malaki, and combining the sense of “all-wise ”  and “ invincible.” athletes is often used with a connotation of having magical power.

Bogobo  M ylhs	*7

. ADVENTURES OF THE TUGLAY'
It was eight° million (Kali) years  ago,  in  the  days  of  the  Mona,• that the following events took place.
The Tuglay lived in a fine house the walls of which were all mirrored glass,  and  the  roof  was  hung  with  brass  chains.  One  day  he went out into the woods to snare jungle-fowl, and he slept in the woods all night. The next day, when he turned to go home, he found himself  puzzled as  to  which  trail  to  take.  He  tried  one  path  after  another, but  none  seemed   to  lead  to  his  house.   At  last  he  said  to  himself,  “ I have lost my way: I shall never be able to get home.”
Then he walked on at random until he came to a vast field of rice, where great numbers of men were  cutting  the Foley.•  But  the  rice- field belonged to Buso, and the harvesters were all buso-men. When they saw Tuglay at the edge of their  field,  they  were glad, and  said to one another, “There’s a man! We will carry him home.”
Then  the  buso  caught Tuglay,  and  hastened  home with him.	Now, the great Buso's mansion stretched across the tops of eight million mountains, and very many smaller houses were on the sides of the mountains, all  around the  great  Buso’s  house ;  for  this  was  the  city of  the   buso where they had taken Tuglay.	As he was carried through the groves of cocoanut-palms on Buso’s place, all the Cocoanuts called out, “Tuglay, Tuglay, in a little while the Buso will eat you!”
Into the presence of the great chief of all the buso, they dragged
Tuglay. The Datto Buso was fearful to look at. From his head grew one great horn of pure ivory, and flames of fire were blazing from the horn. The Datto Buso questioned the man.
“First of all, I will ask you where you come from, Tuglay.”
“ I am come from my house in T'oluk Waig,” replied the man.
And the great Buso shouted, “ I will cut off your head with my sharp
bras!” •
“But if I choose, I can kill you with your own sword,” boldly
answered Tuglay.
Then he lay down, and let the Buso try to cut his neck. The Buso swung his sharp sword ; but the steel would not cut  Tuglay’s neck. The Buso did not know that no knife could wound the neck of Tuglay, unless fire were laid upon his throat at the same time. This was eight million years ago that the Buso tried to cut off the head of Tuglay.
Then another day the Tuglay spoke to all the buso, “ It is now my turn: let me try whether I can cut your necks.”
'	See footnote 3, P s . alSO 5. . i6.
•	The number sacred in ceremonial and song.
* See footnote z, p. i6.
•	Visayan word for rice growing in the field ; Bagobo, ’mrna.
'	The long sword of the Moro, with a wavy, two-edged blade.

28	Journal oJ A mexican Fold-Lore
After this speech, Tuglay stood up and took from his mouth  the chewed betel-nut that is called i’sse, and made a motion as if he would rub the i‘sse on  the great  Buso’s  throat.  When the Buso saw  the isse, he thought it was a sharp knife, and he was frightened. All  the lesser  buso began to weep, fearing that their  chief  would  be  killed;  for the i‘sse appeared to all of them  as a  keen-bladed  knife.  The tears of  all  the buso ran down like blood ; they wept streams and streams of  tears that all flowed together, forming a deep lake, red in color.
Then Tuglay rubbed the chewed betel on  the  great  Buso’s  throat. One pass only he made with the i’sse, and the Buso’s head was severed from his body. Both head and  body of  the mighty  Buso rolled  down into the great lake of tears, and were devoured by the crocodiles.
Now, the Tuglay was dressed like a poor man, — in bark (éñntif') garments. But as soon as he had slain the Buso, he struck a blow at  his own legs, and the bark trousers fell off. Then he stamped on the ground, and struck his body, and immediately his jacket and kerchief of bark fell off from him. There he stood, no longer the poor Tuglay, but a Malaki T’oluk Waig,° with a gleaming #om§s‘fon in his hand.
Then he was ready to fight all the other buso. First he held the bampilan in his left hand, and  eight  million  those  fell  down  dead. Then he held the Co»tpifos in his right hand, and eight  million  more buso fell down dead. After  that,  the  Malaki  went  over  to  the  house  of Buso’s daughter, who had but one eye, and that in the middle of her forehead. She shrieked with fear  when  she saw  the  Malaki  coming; and he struck her with his #atn§s/an, so that she too, the woman-buso,  fell down dead.
After these exploits, the Malaki T’oluk Waig went on his way. He climbed over the mountains of benati,° whose trees men go far to seek, and then he reached the mountains of barayung and  balati  wood. From these peaks, exultant ox-er his foes,  he gave a good  war-cry that re-echoed through the mountains, and went  up  to  the  ears  of the gods. Panguli'li and Salamia'wan ' heard it from  their  home  in  the Shrine of the Sky (Tambara ba Langit) , and they said, “Who chants the song of war (ig-sungal) ? Without doubt, it is the Malak T’o1uk Waig, for none of all the other mafa#i could shout just like that.”
' The Babogo say, that, before the invention of weaving hemp, all the people clothed themselves in the soft, inflammable layers of the sheath that envelops the trunk of cocoa- nut-palms.
•	The semi-divine being who dwells at the mythical source of the mountain-streams (znafa#i, “ good man; ” I’ [/o], “ the; ”  ofu/t,  “ source;”  ivoig,  “ water ”).  Traditionally there are many of these inaiaéi, devotionallv there is but one.
•	A very hard, fine-grained wood susceptible of  high polish, in color  grading, according to age, from yellow to golden tan, and used to make handles for the most valuable swords.
•	These gods are of high rank. Salamia'wan occupies  the  second  heaven,  and  Pan- gu1i’1i, the ninth.

Bagobo M ytlis	*9
His duty performed, the Malaki left the ranges of balati and bara- yung, walked down toward the sea, and wandered along the  coast until he neared  a great gathering of  people who had met for  barter.   It was market-day, and all sorts of things were brought  for  trade. Then the Malaki T’o1uk Waig struck his legs and his chest, before the people caught sight of him; and immediately he was clothed in his old bark trousers and jacket and kerchief, just like a poor man. Then he approached the crowd, and saw the people sitting on the ground in little groups, talking, and offering their things for sale.
The Malaki Lindig Ramut ka Langit' and all the other mafaéi ' from the surrounding country were there. They called out to him, “Where are you going?”
The Tuglay told them that he had got lost, and  had  been travelling a long distance. As he spoke, he noticed, sitting among a group of young men, the beautiful woman called Moglung.
She motioned to him, and said, “Come, sit down beside me.”
And the Tuglay sat down on the ground, near the Moglung. Then the woman gave presents of textiles to the Malaki Lindig Ramut ka Langit and the other mahdi in her  crowd.  But  to  the  Tuglay she gave betel-nut that she had prepared for him.
After that, the Moglung said to all the radii, “This time  I  am going to leave you, because I want to go home.”
And off went the Moglung with the  Tuglay,  riding  on  the  wind. After many days, the Moglung and the Tuglay rested on the moun-
tains of barayung, and,  later,  on  the  mountains  of  balakuna-trees. From these heights, they looked out over a vast stretch of  open  coun- try, where the deep, wavy meadow-grass glistened like gold;  and pastured there were  herds  of  cows  and  carabao  and  many  horses. And beyond rose another range of mountains, on the highest of which stood the Moglung’s house. To  reach  it  they  had  to  cross  whole forests of cocoanut and betel-nut trees that covered eight million mountains. Around the house  were  all  kinds  of  useful  plants  and trees. When they walked under the floor ° of the house, the  Moglung said, “My grandmother is looking at me because I have found another grandchild for her.”
Then the grandmother (Tuglibung) called to them, saying, “Come up, come up, my grandchildren!”
' Malaki who lives at  the  horizon  (findig, “ border;”  yo›riuf,  “ root;"  ba,  preposition “of; ” langit, “ sky ”),
•	Although the name moJoâi properly ie  limited  to  men  of  high  moral  character, yet actually the story-teller calle all the young men ›riafa#i round whom the action centres. Often it means simply an unmarried man.
•	A typical Malay house presents the appearance of a pile-dwelling,  the  floor  being raised several feet above the ground, and tied  to  the  heavy  upright  timbers which  run  to the roof and form the framework of the house.

3O	JOurnal OJ American Folb-Lore
As soon as they entered the house, the Tuglay sat down in a corner of the kitchen, until the grandmother offered him a better place, say- ing, “Do not stay in the kitchen. Come and sleep on my bed.”
The Tuglay rested eight nights in the grandmother’s bed. At the  end of the eight nights the Moglung said to him, “Please take this betel-nut that I have prepared for you.”
At first Tuglay did not want to take it; but the next day, when the Moglung again offered the betel, he accepted it from her  and  began to chew. After that, the Tuglay took off his trousers of bark and his jacket of bark, and became a Malaki T’oluk Waig. But the Moglung wondered where the Tuglay had gone, and she cried to her grand- mother, “Where is the Tuglay?”
But the Malaki stood there, and answered her, “ I am the Tuglay.”
At first the Moglung was grieved,  because  the  Malaki  seemed  such a grand man, and she wanted Tuglay back.
But before long the Malaki said to  her, “I  want  you  to marry me.” So  they  were  married.		Then the Moglung opened her gold  box, and took out a fine pair of trousers (saroa’r') and a man’s  jacket (ompo#' pa manna), and gave them to the Malaki as a wedding-gift. When they had been living together for a while, there came a day when the Malaki wanted to go and  visit a man  who was a great worker in brass, — the Malaki Tuangun; ° and the  Moglung  gave  him directions  for  the  journey,  saying,  “You  will  come  to  a place where a  hundred roads meet.	Take the road that  is marked  with  the  prints of  many  horses and carabao.	Do not stop at the place of the cross-
roads, for if you stop, the Bias who makes men giddy will hurt you.”
Then the Malaki went away, and reached the place where a hundred roads  crossed,  as  Moglung  had  said.	But he stopped there to rest and  chew  betel-nut.	Soon he began to feel queer and dizzy,  and he fell  asleep,  not  knowing anything.	When he woke up, he wandered along up the mountain  until  he  reached  a  house  at  the  border of  a big meadow,  and  thought  he would stop and ask his way.	From under the house he called up, “Which is the road to the Malaki Tuangun?”
It was the Bra’s voice  that  answered,  “First  come  up  here,  and then I’ll tell you the road.”
So the Malaki jumped up on the steps and went in. But  when he was inside of her house, the Bia confessed that she did not know the way to the Malaki Tuangun’s house.
“I am the woman,” she said, “who made  you  dizzy,  because  I wanted to have you for my own.”
'	Short trousers of hemp, usually embroidered and beaded.
'	Short jacket of hemp (Aa. “of;” »ia»ra, “ man,” “boy,” the specific term for ‘' man ”).
'	Brass-smith.
•	A title of respect, which is best rendered by “lady ” or “ seflora.”

Bagobo  M yllis	$ i

“Oh! that’s the game,” said the Malaki. “But the Moglung is my wife, and she is the best woman in the world.”
“Never mind that,” smiled the Bia.  “Just  let me comb your hair.” Then the Bia gave him some betel-nut, and combed his hair until he grew sleepy.	But as he was dropping off, he remembered a certain promise he had made his wife, and he said to the Bia, “If the Moglung
comes and finds me here, you be sure to waken me.”
After eight days had passed from the  time  her  husband  left  home, the Moglung started out to find him, for he had said, “Eight days from now I will return.”
By and by the Moglung came to the Bia’s house, and found the Malaki there fast asleep; but the Bia did not waken him. Then the Moglung took from the Malaki’s toes his toe-rings (paniod'), and went away, leaving a message with the Bia: —
“Tell the Malaki that I am going back home to find some other mafa#i: tell him that I’ll have no more to do with him.”
But the Moglung did not go to her own home: she at once started  for her brother’s house that was up in the sky-country.
Presently the Malaki woke up, and when he looked at his toes,  he found that his brass toe-rings were gone.
“The Moglung has been here!” he cried in a frenzy. “Why didn’t you waken me, as I told you?” Then he seized his sharp-bladed éam@/aa, and slew the Bia. Maddened  by grief and  rage, he dashed to the door and made one leap to the ground, screaming, “All the people in the world shall fall by my sword!”
On his war-shield he  rode,  and  flew  with  the  wind  until  he  came to  the  horizon.  Here  lived  the  Malaki  Lindig  Ramut  ka   Langit.• And when the two inn/n#s‘ met, they began to fight; and the seven brothers of the Malaki Lindig that live  at  the  edge  of  the  sky, like- wise came out to fight. But  when  the  battle had  gone on but  a little time, all the eight tna/a#i of the  horizon  fell  down  dead.  Then  the angry Malaki who had slain the Bra and the eight young men went looking for more people to kill ; and when he had shed  the blood of many, he became a Buso with only one eye  in  his  forehead,  for  the buso with  one eye  are  the  worst  buso of  all.  Everybody  that  he met he slew.
After some time, he  reached  the  house of  the  great  priest  called “ Pandita,” and the Pandita checked him, saying, “Stop a minute, and let me ask you first what has happened to make you like this.”
Then the Buso-man replied sadly, “I used to have a wife named Moglung, who was the best of  all  the  6io;  but  when  I  went  looking for the Malaki Tuangun, that other Bia made me dizzy, and gave
'	Brass toe-ringa, corresponding to the panitising (“ finger-ringa").
° See footnote I, p. eg.

j2	Journal oJ American Fold-Lore
me betel, and combed my hair. Then she was my wife for a little while. But  I  have  killed her, and become a  buso, and I want to kill all the people in the world.”
“You had better lie down on my mat here, and  go to sleep,” advised the Pandita. While the Buso slept, the Pandita rubbed his joints with betel-nut; and when he woke up, he was a mofa#s’ again.
Then the Pandita talked to him, and  said,  “Only  a few days ago, the Moglung passed here on her way to her brother’s home in heaven. She went by a bad road, for she would have to mount the steep rock- terraces.	If you follow, you will come first to the Terraces of the Wind (Tarasu’ban ka Kara’mag'), then you reach the  Terraces  of  Eight- fold Darkness (Walu Lapit Dukilum'), and then the Terraces of the Rain (Tarasuban k’Udan°).
Eagerly the Malaki set out on his journey, with his #ohs‘r '  on  his back, and his betel-nut and buyo-leaf  in  the  Jabir.  He  had  not travelled far, before  he  came  to  a  steep  ascent  of  rock-terraces, —  the Terraces of the Wind, that had  eight  million steps.  The  Malaki knew not how to climb up the rocky structure that  rose  sheer  before him, and so he sat down at the  foot  of  the  ascent, and  took  his  #a6if oS  his  back to get out  some betel-nut.  After  he  had  begun  to chew  his betel, he began to think, and he pondered  for eight days how  he  could accomplish his hard journey.  On  the  ninth  day  he  began  to jump up the steps of the terraces, one by one. On each step he chewed betel, and then jumped  again;  and  at  the close  of  the  ninth day  he  had reached the top of  the  eight million steps, and  was off,  riding on  his shield.
Next he reached the sharp-edged rocks called the “Terraces of Needles” (Tarasuban ka Simat), that had also eight million steps. Again he considered for eight days how he could mount them. Then  on the ninth day he sprang from terrace to terrace, as before, chewing betel-nut on each terrace, and left the Tarasuban ka Simat, riding on his shield. Then he arrived at the Terraces of Sheet-Lightning (Tarasuban ka}Dilam-dilam) ; and he took his Zahir off his back, and prepared a betel-nut, chewed it, and meditated for eight days. On the ninth day he jumped from step to step of the eight million terraces, and went riding  off  on  his  war-shield.  When  he reached  the  Terraces of Forked-Lightning (Tarasuban ka Kirum), he surmounted them on the ninth day, like the others.
'	Rock-terrace (-an, plural ending; Aa, “of;” #aramag, “wind ”) of the Wind.
•	Terraces (sale, “eight;” /apif, “folded ;” dubilum, “night,” “darkness ”) of Eight-
fold Darkness.
•	Udan (“ rain ”).
•	A large carrying-bag worn by Bagobo men on the back, by means of straps over the shoulders. It is woven of hemp, often heavily beaded, and contains the betel-box, the lime-tube, and a tight case of woven rattan for flint, steel, medicine, and other necessaries-
^ The leaf of a vine that is chewed with betel-nut.

Bagobo  M yths	$ $
But now he came to a series of cuestas named “ Dulama Bolo Kam- pilan,”' because one side of  each  was  an  abrupt  clis  with the sharp edge of a #om@foa; and  the other  side  sloped  gradually  downward, like   a  blunt-working   bolo.		How to cross  these  rocks, of  which there were  eight  million,  the  Malaki  did  not  know;  so he  stopped and took ofl his fair,  cut  up  his  betel-nut,  and  thought  for  eight days.	Then  on  the  ninth  day  he   began   to   leap  over the  rocks, and he kept on leaping for eight days, each day  jumping  over  one million  of  the cueslas.	On the  sixteenth  day  he  was  off, riding on his shield.	Then he reached the Terraces  of  the  Thunder  (Tara- suban  ka  Kilat),  which  he  mounted,  springing  from   one terrace  to the  next, as  before, after  he  had   meditated   for  eight days.		Leaving these behind him  on  the  ninth  day,  he  travelled  on to  the Mountains of Bamboo (Pabungan Kawayanan),  covered  with bamboo  whose leaves  were  all sharp steel.		These mountains he could cross without the  eight  days’  thought,  because  their  sides sloped gently.	From the uplands he could see a broad sweep  of  meadow  beyond, where  the grass  glistened  like gold.	And when he had descended, and walked across the meadow, he had to pass through eight million groves of cocoanut-trees, where the fruit grew at the height of a man’s waist, and every cocoanut had the shape of a bell (Goreng-Goreng). Then  he reached a forest of betel-nut, where again the nuts could be plucked without the  trouble  of  climbing,  for  the clusters  grew at  the height of a  man’s  waist.	Beyond, came the meadows with white grass, and plants whose leaves were all of the rare old embroidered cloth called iomhoyotig.•		He then found himself at  the  foot-hills  of  a range of eight million mountains, rising from the heart of the  meadows, and, when he had climbed to their summit, he stood before a fine big house. From the ground he called out, “If anybody  lives in  this house, let him come look at  me,  for  I  want  to  find  the way  to  the Shrine in  the
Sky, or to the Little Heaven, where my Moglung lives.” But nobody answered.
Then the Malaki sprang up the bamboo ladder and looked in at the door, but he saw no one in the house.  He was weary, after his journey, and sat down to rest in a chair  made of  gold  that stood  there.  Soon there came to  his ears  the sound  of  men's  voices, calling out,  “There  is the Malaki T’oluk Waig in the house.”
The Malaki looked around the room, but there was no man there, only a little baby swinging in its cradle. Outside the house were many malais‘ from the great town of Lunsud, and they came rushing in the
'	Dulamo (“ soft rock”). This rock formation appears to be a cuesto structure.
•	An embroidery done by old women in former days, but now almost a lost art. 2"amfiapang was used  for  the  uppers  of  sleeves  for  rsta, andit formed  the  cmd  worn by  mothers  to  carry  the  baby.  There  is a  taboo on young  women  doing this special eort of needlework.
VOL. XXVI. —NO. 99-—3

3	Journal of American Fold-Lorc
door, each  holding a  keen  blade without handle (so68ng).	They all surrounded  the Malaki in the gold chair, ready to fight him.		But the Malaki gave them all some betel-nut from his #abs’r, and made the men friendly toward him.	Then all pressed around the Malaki to look at his babi’r, which shone like gold.	They had never before seen a man’s bag like this one.		“ It is the Jabir of the Malaki T’oluk Waig,” they said.	The Malaki slept that night with the other mafo#s‘ in the house. When morning came, the day was dark, like night, for the sun did not shine.	Then the Malaki took his #nm9i/on and stuck it into his belt, and sat down on his shield.		There was no light on the next day, nor  on the next.	For eight days the pitchy darkness lasted; but on the ninth day it lifted.		Quick from its cradle jumped the baby, now
grown as tall as the bariri-plant; that  is,  almost  knee-high. “Cowards, all of you!” cried the child to the Malaki Lunsud.
“You are no tnafa#s’ at all, since you cannot fight the Malaki T’oluk Waig.” Then, turning to the Malaki T’oluk Waig, the little fellow said, “Please teach me how to hold the spear.”
When the Malaki had taught the boy how to make the strokes, the two began to fight; for the boy, who was called the Pangalinan,' was eager  to  use  his  spear  against  the  Malaki.	But the Malaki had magical power (ma/ufus'), so that when the Pangalinan attacked him with sword or spear, the blades of his weapons dissolved into water. For eight million days the futile battle went on.	At last the Pangalinan gave it up, complaining to the Malaki T’oluk Waig, “How can I keep on fighting you, when every time I hit you my knives turn to water?” Disheartened, the Pangalinan threw away his spear and his sword.
But the Malaki would not hurt the Pangalinan when they were fight- ing; and as soon as the boy had flung his weapons outside the house, the Malaki put his arm around him and drew  him close.  After that, the two were friends.
One day the Pangalinan thought he would look inside the big gold box that stood in the house. It was his mother’s box.  The boy went and raised the lid, but as soon as the cover was lifted, his mother came out from the box. After this had happened,  the Pangalinan got ready to go and find the Moglung whom the Malaki had been seeking. The boy knew where she lived, for he was the Moglung’s little brother (/ñbé’°). He took the bamboo ladder that formed the steps to the house, and placed it so that it would reach the Shrine in the S›ky, whither the Moglung had gone. Up the bamboo rounds he climbed, until he reached the sky and found his sister. He ran to her crying, “Quick! come with me! The great Malaki T’oluk Waig is down there.”
' The “small boy” of the ancient tales (clit) , who in some magical manner becomes
great.
•	See footnote  4.   . z6.	• See footnote z, p. zo.

Bagofio M^ft S	3$
Then the Moglung came down from heaven with her little brother  to their house where the Malaki was waiting for her.  The Moglung and the Malaki were very happy to meet again, and they slept together that night.
Next day the Moglung had a  talk with  the Malaki, and said, “Now I want to live with you ; but you remember that other woman, Maguay Bulol, that you used to sleep with. You will want her too, and  you  had better send for her.”
So the Malaki summoned Maguay Bulol, and in a few  minutes  Maguay Bulol was there.  Then  the  Malaki  had  two wives,  and  they all lived in the same house forever.

6. THE TUGLAY AND THE BIA
Long ago, in the days of the Mona, the Tuglay lived on a high mountain. He lived very well, for  his  cocoanut-trees  grew  on  both sides  of  the  mountain.  But  he  had  no  hemp-plants,  and  so  he  had to make his clothes of the soft dry sheath that covers the trunk of the cocoanut-palm  (6ñtiñ/).  This  stuff  caught  fire  easily,  and  many  a time his clothes ignited from the flame where his dinner  was cooking, and then he would have to make fresh garments from bunut.
One day he looked from his house over the neighboring  mountains, and saw the village of Koblun. He thought it looked pretty  in  the distance. Then he looked  in  another  direction,  and  saw  the  town  of the Malaki Tuangun, and said, “Ah! that is just as nice looking as the Koblun town. I will go and see the town of the Malaki Tuangun.”
Immediately he got ready for the journey. He took his spear (that was only half a spear, because the fire had burned off a part of the handle) and his shield, that was likewise only half a shield. He started out, and walked  on  and  on  until  he  reached  the  mountains  called “ Pabungan Mangumbiten.”
Now, on another mountain there lived a young man named the Malaki Itanawa, with his little sister. They lived alone together, for they were orphans. The young girl said to  her  brother,  “Let  us  travel over the mountains to-day.”
And the boy answered, “Yes, my sister, we will go.”
And the two climbed over the hills, and they reached the Pabungan Mangumbiten  soon  after the Tuglay.	And they were astonished to see  the great Tuglay.	But when the Tuglay saw the young girl, who was named Bia Itanawa Inelu,' he was so bewildered and startled that he turned away his eyes, and could not look at the sister and brother. Then the girl prepared a betel-nut  and  offered  it  to the Tuglay, but  he  did  not  like  to accept it.	But when she had pressed it upon
him many times, he took the betel and chewed it.
' Bra, “ lady; ” iaefu, “ orphan,” — the orphan lady I tanawa.

36	Journal of American Folb-Lore
Then the girl said, “Come with my brother and me to my  house,  for we have no companion.”
But when the girl saw the Tuglay hesitate, she asked him, “Where
were you going when we met you?”
The Tuglay answered, “I want to go to the town of the Malaki Tuangun, for to my home has come the word that the Malaki is a mighty man, and his sister a great lady.”
Then the girl looked at the Tuglay, and said, “ If you want to make ready to go to the Malaki Tuangun's town, you ought to  put  on your  good trousers and a nice jacket.”
At that, the Tuglay looked mournful ;  for  he was a  poor  man, and  had no fine clothes. Then, when the girl saw how the case stood, she called for beautiful things, such as a malaki wears, — fine hemp trou- sers, beaded jacket, good  war-shield  and  brass-bound  spear,  ear-plugs of  pure  ivory,  and  eight  necklaces  of  beads   and   gold.   Straight- way at the summons of the Bia, all the fine things appeared ; and the Tuglay got ready to go away. He was no longer the poor Tuglay.  His name was now the Malaki Dugdag Lobis Maginsulu. Like  two  big moons, his ivory ear-plugs shone ; when he moved his shield,  flames  of living fire shot from it ; and when he held up  his spear,  the  day  would grow dark, because he was a  brave  man.  His  new  clothes  he  sent' upon the swift wind to the Malaki Tuangun’s town.
When the Tuglay started, the Bia gave him her own brass betel-box (éo/o#Io') to take with him. It  was a #nfo#s’a  that made  sounds,  and was called a “screaming #afo#ia.”
“May I eat the betel-nut from your box?” asked the man; and she
replied, “Yes, but do not throw away the other things in the box.”
The Malaki Dugdag Lobis Maginsulu walked  on until he reached the town of the Malaki Tuangun, and sat down on the ground 3 before the house. The Malaki Tuangun was a great brass-smith: he made én/a#ia and other objects of brass, and hence was called the Malaki Tuangun Katakia. As soon as he heard the other mnfn#s‘ call from outside, “ May I come up into your house?” he sent down eight of his slaves to look and see who wanted to visit him.
And the eight slaves brought word to their master that the Malaki
Dugdag Lobis Maginsulu waited to enter.
' When a Bagobo makes an expedition  over  the  mountains to attend a Jesfa, he wears hie old clothes, and carries his elaborately ornamented  garments  in  the  bag on  his back. On nearing the end of the journey, he goes behind a tree, or into the jungle, and puts on his fine clothes.
•	A box with three compartments, — for betel-nut, buyo-leaf,  and  calcined  shell, — cast  in  brass or  bell-metal  from  a  wax  mould.  This type  has rectangular  surfaces,  and is to be distinguished from the ftapufaii, a type marked by its circular, or elliptical, or polygonal top and base.
•	It is the custom of the natives to wait for the host to say, “ Come up,” before mounting the ladder or notched log leading to the door.

Bagobo M ytlis	$
Then  the  Malaki  Tuangun  Katakia  called  to  his  visitor,  “Come  up, if you can keep from bringing on a fight, because there are many showers in my town.” '
Then the other inaR#s’ went up the steps into the house, and the Malaki Tuangun said  to him,  “You  shall  have a good  place  to sit  in my house, — a place where nobody ever sat before.”
Then the Malaki Tuangun prepared a betel-nut  for his guest.  But the Malaki Dugdag Lobis Maginsulu would not take the betel-nut from him. So the Malaki Tuangun called his sister, who was called Bia Tuangun Katakia, and said to her, “You go outside and prepare a betel-nut for the Malaki.”
As soon as the Bia had finished preparing the betel, she took the (screaming?) balabs“a from the Malaki, and  set  it on  the floor.  Then the Malaki  Dugdag  Lobis  Maginsulu  took  the  betel-nut  from  the lady. When he had finished chewing it, he stood up and  went  to  the place where the Bia Tuangun Katakia was sitting, and he  lay  down beside her, and said, “Come,  put  away  your  work,  and  comb  my hair.”
“No, I don't like to comb your hair,” she replied.
The Malaki was displeased at this retort, so at last  the woman  agreed to comb his hair,  for  she did  not  want  to see  the  Malaki  angry.  By and by the Malaki felt sleepy while his hair was being combed ; and he said to the Bia, “Do not wake me up.”
He fell asleep, and did not waken until the next day. Then he married the Bra Tuangun Katakia.
After they had been married for three months, the Bia said to the Malaki, “The best man I know is the Manigthum. He was my first husband.”
But the Manigthum had left home, and had gone off to do some big fighting. He killed the Malaki Taglapida  Pabungan,•  and  he killed the Malaki Lindig Ramut ka Langit.•
After the Manigthum had slain these great men, he came  back to  the home of his wife. When he came near the house he saw, lying down on the ground under the kinarum-tree,• the things that he had given his wife before he went away, — pendants of pearl, bracelets
' The reference here is a little ambiguous. It  is  suggeeted  that  a  traneposition  of clauees may throw light on  the  meaning.  Transposed  and  expanded,  the  invitation would read thua: “ Come up into  the  house for shelter, since  there  are  many  showers  in my town. Come up, provided you can keep from bringing on a fight.”
•	The good man [of theJ Folded Mountains (taglopida, “folded;” pa6ungan, “moun- tains”).
i yindig, “ border;” rarritif, “ root;” la, preposition “ of;” tengit, “ eky.”
* A low-growing tree yielding a black dye, which for a very long time hae been used
by women to color hemp.

38	Journal of A meri’can Fold-Lore

and leglets of brass, gold necklaces (#ntnogs‘'), hair-ornaments of dyed goats'-hair and birds’-down,  finger-rings,  and  leg-bands  of  twisted wire hung with bells. As he looked at  the  beautiful  ornaments  all thrown on the ground, he heard  the  voice  of  the  Malaki  Dugdag  Lobis Manginsulu calling to him, “Do  not come  up, because your wife  is mine.”
Then the two tno/o#s’ went to fighting with sword and spear. After a sharp fight, the Manigthum was killed, and the Malaki Dugdag Lobis Maginsulu had the Bia for his wife.

-7 THE MALAKI’s sIsTER AND THE BASOLO
There is a certain mountain that has a sharp, long crest like a #otn@ifon.	Up on this mountain stretched many fields of hemp, and groves of cocoanut-palms, that belonged to the Malaki and his sister. Near to these hemp-fields lived the Basolo-man, under a tall bara- yung-tree.		His little house was full of venison and pig-meat and lard,  and  he  kept  a dog  to hunt  pigs  and deer.	Although his hut looked small and poor, the Basolo possessed treasures of brass and beads  and fine textiles.	He had a Jabir,* from which darted forked
lightning; and in the bag was a betel-box and a necklace of pure gold.
One day when the Malaki’s sister  went  to  look  at  her  hemp,  she felt curious to  go  inside  the  Basolo’s  house.  The  Basolo  was  lying on the floor,  fast  asleep,  when  the  woman  entered.  She  looked  at  the things in the house, and  saw  hanging  on  the  wall  the  Basolo’s  bag with the lightning  playing  on  it.  Now  the  bag was an  old  one, and had a  lot  of  mud  in  it;  but  the  woman  thought  it  must  be  full of gold, because the lightning never ceased  to flash  from  it.  So she crept across the floor, and took the bag from off the end of the bamboo slat on which it hung. Still the Basolo slept, and still the lightning continued to play upon  the  bag.  The woman  looked  inside  the  bag and saw a fine gold betel-box, and when she lifted the lid, there  in the box lay a necklace of pure gold. Swiftly she closed the  box,  and stealthily drew  it  out  of  the  bag.  Into  the  folds  of  her  hemp  skirt she slipped the precious box with the gold necklace inside, and very quietly ran down the bamboo ladder at the house-door.
When she got home, her brother smiled, and said to her, “\Vhat has happened to you, my sister?”
Bright flashes of lightning seemed to be coming from the girl. She looked almost as if she were made of gold, and the lightning could not escape from her. Then she took out the betel-box and the necklace,
' A bead necklace, the most highly valued  of  all  Bagobo ornaments.  One section  is a gold or silver cord, several inches long, made of small over-lapping scales of the precious metal. The necklace is thought  to  be  of  Moro  manufacture,  and is valued  by the  Bagobo at from one to four ogoags.
•	See footnote 4. p. 3z.

Bagobo M yths	i9
and showed them to her brother, saying that she had found them in the Basolo’s hut.
The Basolo awoke, and found his brass #afn#s’o and his fine necklace gone.
“Who has been here?” he cried.
In a frenzy he hunted through his #a6s’r, throwing out of it his old work-knife and his rusty spear-head and all  the  poor  things  that  he  kept in his bag. Then  he  began  to  moan and  weep for  his betel-box and gold necklace.
By and by he started out to find his lost things.  In  the soft soil close to the house, he found the footprints of the woman; and, follow- ing the prints, he traced her to the Malaki’s house. Right there the footprints ended. The Basolo stood at the foot of the  steps,  and called, “Who has been in my house?”
Then he ran up the ladder and rushed  into the  house,  screaming  to  the Malaki’s sister, “ Give me back  my gold  necklace!  If  you  don’t give it back, I’ll marry you.”
Quick came the woman’s answer, “ I don’t like you, and I will not marry you.”
But her brother was angry because she refused to marry the Basolo. At last she agreed to the match, and  said  to the  Basolo, “Yes, I will marry you ;  but I can’t let you live in my house.	You must stay
in your own house over yonder.”
So the Basolo and the Malaki’s sister agreed to meet and try ' each other (/afa6ono). Then the Basolo went home.
Not long after this, there came a day when many men went out to hunt the wild pig and the deer. And from  her  house  the  woman heard the sound of many men gathering in the meadow. There were Malaki T’oluk Waig and other mafo#i, who were there ready for the chase. And the girl thought, “I will go out and see the men.”
Immediately she hurried to dress herself carefully. She put on nine waists one over another, and similarly nine skirts (pana frisan) ,- and then she girded herself with a chain of brass links that went a thousand times round her waist. Over her left shoulder she hung her small beaded basket (Warhol) that was decorated with row upon row  of little tinkling bells, a million in all, and each bell as round as a pea.
But the Basolo knew that the girl was dressing to go out, and he was angry that she should want to go where there were so many  men gathered. In order to keep watch  on  her  movements,  he climbed  up into a hiding-place behind the great leaves of an  areca-palm,°  and waited.  Presently  he saw  the woman  walking  to  the  meadow.  And she staid there just one night. But the Malaki was alarmed when he
' A trial-marriage before the Bagobo ceremony is not uncommon.
•	The tree that bears betel-nuts, and is commonly called “ betel-nut tree.”

o	Journal of American Fold-Lore
found  that  his sister  had  gone out  to  see the men.	And after he had taken off his clothes, he began to put them on again to follow his sister.
Then, when the girl’s brother and all the other tnafa#i had assembled  in the meadow, the Basolo came down from the tree and went home. When he got into his house, he took off his coat, and became a Malaki T’oluk Waig. His body shone like the sun (you could  hardly  look at him), and all his garments were of gold. He had on nine  jackets,  one over another, and nine pairs of trousers. Then he called for his horse, whose name was Kambeng Diluk;' and Kambeng neighed  into the air, and waited, prancing, before the house. Soon the Malaki T'oluk Waig mounted his horse, and sitting on a saddle of mirrored glass, he rode toward the meadow. Then Kambeng Diluk began to run, just like the wind.
When they reached the meadow, there were many people there. The
Malaki’s wife was sitting on the grass, with men grouped around her, and she was laughing with them. But she did not recognize her husband when he came riding  up.  After  everybody  had  arrived, they set fire to the long grass, and burned oS the meadow, so as to bring the wild pigs and the deer out of ambush. Then many men entered the chase and ran their horses; but none could catch the deer  or the wild boar, except only the great Malaki, who had been the Basolo: he alone speared much game.
When the burning of the meadow and the hunt were finished, many men wanted to marry the Malaki T’oluk Waig’s wife, and many of them embraced her. But the Malaki T’oluk Waig stood up, fierce with passion. His body was almost like a flame to look at. And he fought the other mafa#s’, and killed many, until at last all were dead but one, and that was the woman’s brother.
When all was done, the Malaki mounted his horse and rode back to his home. His house was all of gold, and yet it looked just like a mean little hut nestled under  the  barayung-tree.  Then the  Malaki  picked up his coat and put it on: at once he became a Basolo again. He then went over to the woman’s house and waited there for her to come back. By and by she came loitering along, crying all the way, because she was afraid to meet her husband. But the Basolo staid right along  in the house, and lived with  the  woman  and  her  brother.  Then, after they had tried each other, they were married with Bagobo ceremony. The Basolo took off his coat, and again became a Malaki T'o1uk Waig. They lived well in their house, and they had a big hacienda of hemp and cocoanuts and banana-plants.
' Possibly a form of bambin (“ goat”); ditch (“ little ”); i.e., “ little goat,” a name that would be selected readily by a Bagobo for a fleet horse.

Bagobo  M ylhs	@ I

8. THE MONA'
When the Mona lived on the earth, there was a certain man who said to his wife, “I want to go out and make some traps.”
So that day he went out and made about thirty traps, of sticks with nooses attached, to snare jungle-fowl.		His work finished, he returned home.	Next day he went out to look at his traps, but found that he had caught, not a wild chicken, but a big lizard (paIas•) with pretty figured  patterns on its back.	The man said to the lizard, “Halloo!” Then he released the lizard, and gave  him  his own  carrying-bag and  work-knife,  and  told  him to  go straight  to his house.	But the lizard was afraid to go to the man’s house, for he suspected that the man wanted to make a meal of him.	Instead, he ran up a tree, taking with him the knife and the bag.	The tree overhung a clear brook, and
the lizard could see his reflection (clung°) in the water.
No fowl could the  man snare that day, and  he went  home.  As soon  as he reached the house, he said to his wife, “Are you all done cleaning that lizard?”
“What lizard are you talking about?” returned the woman. “There’s no lizard here.”
“I sent one here,” insisted the man, “and I’m hungry.” “We have no lizard,” repeated his wife.
In a hot temper the man went back to his traps, and there saw the tracks of the lizard, leading, not towards his house, but exactly in the opposite direction. Following  the  tracks, he reached  the  brook, and at once caught sight of the lizard’s reflection in the water. Immedi- ately the man jumped into the water, grasping for the image of the slippery lizard ; but he had to jump out again with empty hands. He tried again. Hour after hour  he  kept  on  jumping,  until  he  got so wet and cold that he had to give it up and go home.
“The lizard is right over there in the  brook,”  he  told  his  wife; “but I could not get hold of him.”
“I’ll go and look at him with you,” she said.
So together they reached the brook; and the woman glanced first into the water, and then up into the tree.
“You foolish man,” she smiled. “Look in the tree for your lizard.
That’s just his shadow (oJutig°) in the water.”
The man looked  up, and  saw the  lizard  in the  tree.  Then he started to climb up the trunk, but found himself so chilled and stiff from  jumping into the water, that he kept slipping down whenever  he  tried  to climb. Then the woman took her turn, and got part way up the
'	See footnote s, p. i6.
° One of the Agamt‹ts.
° The came word is uaed for the reflection in the water and for the shadow east on the ground, since both phenomena are regarded aa manifeatatione of the came epirit (gitiiobud).

Hz	Journal oJ American Folk-Lore
tree. The  man  looked  up at  his wife,  and  noticed  that she  had sores on parts of her body where she could not see them, and he called to her, “Come down! don’t climb any higher; you’ve got  sores.”  So  she climbed down.
Then her husband wanted to get some medicine  out  of  his  bag  to give her for the sores; but the lizard had his bag.
“Throw down my bag and knife to me!” he shouted up to the  lizard, “because I must get busy about fixing medicine for my wife.”
And the lizard threw down to him his knife and his bag.
As soon as they got home, the man made  some  medicine  for  his wife; but the sores did not  heal.  Then  he  went  to  his friend  Tuglay and said, “What is the medicine for my wife?”
Tuglay went home with the man ; and  when they reached  the house, he told him what he was about to do. “Look!” said the Tuglay.
Then the man looked, and saw the Tuglay go to his wife and consort with her.
And the husband let him do it, for he said to himself, “That is the medicine for my wife.”
When the Tuglay was done with the woman, he said,  “Go  now  to your wife.”
Then the man went to her, and said, “This is the best of all.”
After that, the man cared for nothing except  to be with  his wife.  He did not even care to eat. He threw out of the house all the food they had, — the rice, the sugarcane, the bananas, and all  of  their other  things.  He threw  them  far away.   But after  they  had  taken no food for several days, the man and the woman began to grow thin and weak. Still they did not try to get food, because they wanted only to gratify their passion' for each other.  At  last  both  of  them  got very skinny, and finally they died.
I I I. FOLK-LORE OF THE BUSO
I .  HOW  TO  SEE  THE  BUSO
The Buso live in the  great  branching  trees  and  in  the  graveyard. The night after a person has been buried, the  Buso  dig  up the  body  with their claws, and drink all the blood, and eat the flesh. The bones  they  leave,  after  eating  all  the  flesh  oS  from  them.  If  you  should go to the graveyard at night, you would hear a great noise.  It  is the  sound of all the Buso talking together as  they  sit  around  on  the  ground,  with  their  children  playing  around  them.  You   cannot  see the Buso ; but if you do get a glimpse of  one of  them,  it  is only for a few minutes. He looks like a shadow.
In the beginning, everybody could see the Buso, because then the
'	The Mona were aged people, without sexual passions; hence this episode presents a situation out of the ordinary.

Bagobo M yths	43

Buso and the people were friendly together. Nobody died in those days, for the Buso helped the men, and kept them from dying. But many years ago the Buso and man had a quarrel, and after that nobody could see the Buso any more.
Now, there is one way to see Buso; but a  man  must  be  very  brave to do it. While the coffin for a dead man is being made, if you cut some chips from it and carry them to  the  place where the tree  was felled for the box, and lay the chips on the stump from which the wood was cut, and then go again on the night of the funeral to the same place, you will see Buso. Stand near the stump, and you will see passing before you (i) a swarm of fireflies; (z) the intestines of the dead person; (5) many heads of the dead person;  (4)  many arms of the dead person; (5) many legs of the dead person; (6) the entire body passing before you ; (y) shadows flitting before you; and finally (8) the Buso. But no one yet has been brave enough to try it.
“ But one thing I did when my uncle died,” said my boy informant. “ I chipped a piece of wood from the coffin, and tied it to a long string, like a fly to a fish-hook. This I let down between  the slats of  the  floor, as I stood in the room where the dead body lay, and I held the line dangling.  As a fish catches at  the bait, so Buso seized  that  bit   of wood, and for about two minutes I could feel him pulling at it from under, the house. Then I drew  up the string with  the wood.  Buso  was there under the house, and smelt the chip from the coffin.”

2. BUSO AND THE WOMAN
In a little house there lived a man and  his wife  together.  One night, after they had been married for a long time, the man told his wife that he would like to go fishing.
“Oh, yes! my husband,”  said  the  woman  eagerly.  “Go, and  bring me some nice fish to-morrow, so that we can have a good meal.”
The man went out that same night  to fish.  And  his wife  was left alone in the house.
In the night, while her husband was away, the Buso came, and tried to pass himself off as her husband, saying,  “You see I am  back.  I  got no fish, because I was afraid in the river.” Then the Buso-man made a great fire, and sat down by it.
But the woman did not  believe  that  it was her  husband.  So she hid her comb in a place on the floor, and she said to her comb, “ If the Buso calls me, do you answer. Tell him that  I  have  run  away because I have great fear of the Buso.”
Then, when the Buso called, the Comb answered just as the woman had told it.  By and  by the Buso went away.  In the morning,  the  man came back from fishing, because daylight had come. And he had a fine catch of fish. Then the woman told him all that had happened,

J4	Journal oJ American Folb-Lore
and the man never again let his wife sleep alone in the house. After that, everything went well ; for Buso was afraid of the man, and never again attempted to come there.

3 -   THE   BUSO’S BAsKET
Two children went out into the field to tend their rice-plants. They said these words to keep the little birds away from the grain: —
“ One, one, maya-bird,' Yonder in the north ; Keep off from eating it, This my rice.”
Just then they heard the sound of a voice, calling from the great pananag-tree,' “Wait a minute, children, until I make a basket  for you.”
“What is that?” said the boy to his sister.
“Oh, nothing!” answered the little girl. “ It’s the sound of something.”
Then the children called to their father and mother; but only from
the pananag-tree the answer came, “Just wait till  I finish  this basket to hold you in.”
Down, then, from the tree came the great Buso, with a big, deep
basket (such as women carry bananas and camotes• in) hanging from his shoulders. The frightened children did not dare to  run away; and  Buso sat down near by in the little hut  where  the  rice  was  kept. Soon he said to the children, “ Please comb out my nice hair.”
But, when they tried to comb his hair, they found it swarming with
big lice and worms.
“Well, let’s go on now,” said the Buso.	Then he stuffed the children into his deep burden-basket, and swung the basket upon his back.
On the instant the little girl screamed out, “Wait a minute, Buso! I’ve dropped my comb.	Let me down to pick it up.”
So the Buso sat down on the ground, and let the girl climb out of the basket.	He sat waiting for her to find her comb; but all the time she was  picking  up  big   stones,  and   putting  them  into  the  basket.	Her brother got out of the basket too, and then both girl and boy climbed up into a tall betel-nut tree,• leaving Buso with a basket full of stones on his back.
Up to his house in the pananag-tree went Buso with the heavy basket.	When his wife saw him, she laughed and shouted very loud.
'	A emall bird that steale grain from the growing corn and rice. A clapper of eplit bamboo ie sometimes made to ecare away the maya.
•	One of the thick-branching treee haunted by demone.
•	A native sweet-potato. The Bagobo name is âasifo.
•	See footnote s. - 39-

Bagobo M yths	q$
She was glad, because she thought there was a man in the basket, all ready to eat. But, when Buso slipped the basket down from his shoulders, there was no human flesh in it, but only big stones.
Then the angry Buso hurried back to look for the two children. At last he caught sight of them far up in the betel-nut tree, and wondered how he could get them. Now, at the foot of the tree  there was a growth of the wild plant called “ bagkang;” and Buso said words to make the bagkang grow faster and taller: —
“Tubu, tubu, bagkang, Grow, grow, bagkang,
Baba, baba mamiia’n.”' Handle, handle, betel-nut.
But the children, in their turn, said: —
“ Tubu, tubu, mamaa'n, Grow, grow, betel-nut,
Baba, baba bagkang.” Handle, handle, bagkang.
By and by, when the bagkang-stems had grown so tall as almost to reach the clusters of betel-nuts at the top of  the  trunk,  the boy and girl said to each other. “Let us pick betel-nuts, and throw them down on the bagkang.”
And as soon as they began to pick, the betel-nuts  became so big  and heavy that the bagkang-plants fell down when the betel-nuts dropped on them.
Then the Buso went away; and the children climbed  down  in  haste, ran home, and told their mother and father how the Buso had tried to carry them off.

‹  .   THE  BUSO-CHILD
Datu Ayo was a great man among the Bagobo, well known through- out the mountain-country for his bravery and his riches. He had gathered in his house many products of Bagobo workmanship in textiles and  brass and fine weapons.  At  his death, human sacrifices  of slaves were oflered up for him. It was not many years ago that he went down to the great city of the dead, and many of his children and grandchildren are living now. His sons like to think about  their father’s renown; and, as a reminder, the eldest son, Kawayun, always
'	Buso is eaying a charm to make the stern of the bagkang-plant grow tall enough to form a handle for the betel-nut tree, so that the children may be dragged down (tube, “grow;” fiat'a, “rattan strap forming the basket-handle;” mamSd’n, “betel-nut ”). The children, for their part, say other magic words  to  make  the  tree  grow  at  an  equally  rapid rate, eo that ite branches may swing above the bagkang as a handle for it. The Bueo’e formula appears to have been the more effective of the two charme in producing a magically rapid growth.

6	Journal of American Folk-Lore

kept in his medicine-case two of the incisor teeth  of  the  great  Ayo, until he needed  money,  and  sold  the medicine-case  with  its contents. It had made Kawayun happy to look at his father’s teeth.
When Datu Ayo died, his wife  was  about  to  become  a  mother. Now, the Bagobo women  know  that,  when  they  become  pregnant, they must be very careful to  protect  themselves  from  the  evil  Buso. On going to bed at night, an expectant mother places near her the woman’s knife (go/ct), the Ham@ifan,' and all the other knives, to frighten Buso away. Failing this, the Buso  will  come  to the woman while she sleeps, and change  her  baby into a  Buso-child.  One night,  the wife of Datu Ayo lay down to  sleep  without  putting  any  knives near  her;  and  that  very  night  the  Buso  came,  and  he  transformed her child into a  Buso-child.  She  did  not  know  when  he  came,  nor did she even  think  that  a  Buso  had  been  near  her,  until  her  baby was born.
Everybody  around  the  woman  at  the  birth  saw   that  something was  the  matter  with  the  child.  It  was  little  and  frail,  and  as  weak as threads of cotton. Its body was flat, and its legs and  arms  were helpless and flabby. Then all the men said, “That is a Buso-child.”
As the little boy grew old enough to  creep,  he  moved  just  like  a fish, with a sort of  wriggling motion.  He could  not stand  on his feet,  for his legs were too weak to support his body; and he could not  sit down, but only lie flat. He could never be dressed in  8tn9a#'  and saroa’r,° and his body remained small and puny.
Now the boy is more than fourteen years old, but he cannot walk a step. He understands very well what is said to him, and he can talk, though not distinctly. When  he hears it said  that somebody is dead, he breaks into laughter, and keeps on laughing.  This  trait  alone would stamp him as a Buso-child.

J. THE BUSO-MONKEY

One day a man went out, carrying seventeen arrows, to hunt mon-  keys; but he found none. Next day he went again, and,  as he walked along on the slope of the mountain called Malagii’san, he heard  the sound  of  the  chattering  of  monkeys  in  the  trees.  Looking  up,  he saw  the  great  monkey  sitting  on  an a1umñ’yag-tree.   He took a shot at the monkey, but his arrow  missed  aim ;  and  the  next  time  he had no better luck.  Twice eight  he  tried  it;  but  he  never  hit  the  mark. The monkey seemed to lead a charmed life. Finally he took his seventeenth and last arrow, and  brought  down  his game; the monkey fell down dead. But a voice came from the monkey’s body that said,  “You must carry me.”
'  See footnote  i, p. I8.	'  See footnote z, p. 3o.	• See footnote i, p. 3o.



§8	Journal oJ American Folb-Lore
long, sharp thorns on its branches. And the man cried out to the lemon-tree, “Could you protect me, if I were to hide among your leaves and flowers?”
Instantly the lemon-tree answered, “Come right up, if you want to.” Then the man climbed the tree, and concealed himself in the branches,  among the flowers.	Very soon the Buso came under the lemon-tree,  and  shouted  to it, “ I smell  a man here.	You are hiding
him.”
The Kabayawa said, “Sure  enough,  here’s  a  man!  You  just climb up and get him.”
Then the Buso began to scramble up the tree ; but as he climbed, the thorns stuck their sharp points into him. The higher he climbed, the longer and sharper grew the thorns of the tree, piercing and tearing, until they killed the Buso.
It is because the monkey sometimes turns into a Buso that many Bagobo refuse to eat  monkey.  But some  of  the mountain  Bagobo eat monkey to keep off sores.

6. nOW THE MOON TRICKS THE BUSO'
The Moon is a great liar. One night long ago, the Buso looked over the earth and could not discover any people, because everybody was asleep. Then Buso went to the Moon, and asked her where all the people were to be found.
“Oh, you will not find a living person on the earth!” replied the Moon. “Everybody in the world is dead.”
“Good!” thought Buso. “To-morrow I shall have a fine meal of them.”
Buso never eats living flesh, only dead bodies.
Next morning, Buso started for the graveyard ; but on the way he met the Sun, and stopped to speak to him.
“How about the men on earth?” he questioned.
“They’re all right,” said the Sun. “ All the people are working and playing and cooking rice.”
The Buso was furious to find himself tricked. That night he went again to the Moon and asked for the men, and, as before, the Moon assured him that everybody was dead. But  the  next  morning  the  Sun showed him all the people going about  their  work  as  usual. Thus the Buso has been fooled over and over again. The Moon tells him every night the same story.

. THE BUSO AND  THE  CAT
The cat is the best animal. She  keeps  us from  the  Buso.  One night the Buso came into the house, and said to the cat, “ I should like to eat your mistress.”
'  See footnote,  p.  z 5.



“ I will let you do it,” replied the cat; “ but first you must count all the hairs of my coat.”
So the Buso began to  count. But  while  he  was  counting,  the  cat kept wriggling her tail, and sticking up her back. That made her  fur  stand up on end, so that the Buso kept losing count, and never knew where he left off. And while the Buso was still trying to count the  cat’s hairs, daylight came.
This is one reason why we must not kill the cat. If a Bagobo should kill a cat, it would make him very sick.  He would  get  skinny, and  die. Some Bagobo have been known to kill the cat; but they always got sick afterwards.

8. HOW A DOG SCARED THE BUSO
The Tigbanua’ are the worst of all the Buso; they want to be eating human flesh all the time. They live in great forests, — in the pananag- tree, in the magbo-tree, in the baliti-tree, and in the liwaan-tree.
One day a man went out to hunt, and he took his dog with him. On his way to the woods, he speared a very little pig. By the time he reached the great forest, night had  come.  He  made a  little shelter, and kindled a  fire. Then  he  cleaned  the  pig  and  cut  it  into  pieces, and tied three sticks of wood together, and placed them on two upright pieces of  wood  stuck in the ground.   On this logo he laid  the  pig-meat to broil over the flames.
By and by he got very sleepy, and thought he would go under the shelter and take a nap. But just then  he heard  voices  up  in  the  big trees. He listened, and heard the Tigbanua’ talking to one another.
The Tigbanua’ that lives in the liwaan-tree called out to the  Tig- banua’ that lives in the pananag-tree, “The mighty chief of all the Tigbanua', who lives in the sigmit-tree, gives this command to his people: Don’t make fun of the man, because he has  been  here many times before.’
And right there, under the trees, the man, standing by his dog, was listening to  the  talk  of  the Buso.  The  dog  was  sleeping  near  the  fire, and he was as big as the  calf  of  a  carabao.  Very  quietly  his  master spread his own sleeping-tunic (t+ss’) over the dog, and crept away, leaving him asleep in  the  warm  place.  The  man  hid  in  the  shelter, and waited.
Presently many of  the  Tigbanua’ began coming down  from  the trees,
for some of them did not give  obedience  (9atns’nug)  to  their  Datu. They gathered around the fire, and  sat  down.  By and  by, as  they sat near the fire, the penis (logo) of every oneof the Tigbanua’ began to grow bigger and bigger (fatiag-/otiag). All  at  once,  the  Tigbanua’  caught sight of the  tunic  spread  out, and  showing  the  form of  a  huge head and  body  under  it.     They all  thought it  was the  man; and  they rushed
VOL. XXVI.—NO. 99- 4-

5o	Journal  oJ   A merlcan Folk-Lore

up to it, and hugged it. But the dog woke up, jumped out from under the tunic, and bit the Tigbanua’. Then they all ran. One of them climbed up the tree to his own house, the dog holding on to his leg, and biting him all the time. But when  they were  halfway  up the  tree, the dog fell down and got hurt. And the Tigbanua’ called down to the dog, “Swell up, swell up!” (“Ps’gsa, @gso/”)
All the other Tigbanua’ were afraid of the big dog, and ran away. So the man slept well all night, because the Buso could not hurt him now.

. STORY OF DULING AND TRE TAGAMALING
Before the world was made, there were Tagamaling. The Taga- maling is the best Buso, because he does not want to hurt man all of the time. Tagamaling is actually Buso only a  part of  the time ;  that is, the month when he eats people. One month he eats human flesh, and then he is Buso; the next month he eats no human flesh, and then he is a god. So he alternates, month by month. The  month  he is  Buso, he wants to eat man during the dark of the moon; that is, between the phases that the moon is full in the east and new in the west.
The other class of Buso, however, wants human flesh all of the time. They are the Tigbanua’, the chief of whom is Datu of all the Buso. A Tigbanua’ lives in his own house, and goes out only to eat the bodies of the dead.
The Tagamaling makes his house in trees that have hard wood, and low, broad-spreading branches. His house is almost like gold, and is called “ Palimbing,” but it is made so that you cannot see it; and, when you pass by, you think, “Oh ! what a fine tree with big branches,” not dreaming that it is the house of a Tagamaling. Sometimes, when you walk in the forest, you think you see one of their houses; but when you come near to the place, there is nothing. Set you can smell the good things to eat in the house.
Once a young man named Duling, and his younger brother, went out into the woods to trap wild chickens. Duling had on his back a basket holding a decoy cock, together with the snares of running- nooses and all the parts of the trap. While they were looking for a  good spot to drive in the stakes for the snare, they heard the voice of Tagamaling in the trees, saying, “Duling, Duling, come in ! My mother is making a little fiesla here.”
The boys looked up, and could see the house gleaming there in the branches, and there  were  two Tagamaling-women calling  to  them. In response to the call, Duling’s younger brother went up quickly into the house; but Duling waited on the ground below. He wanted the Tagamaling-girls to come down to him, for he was enamoured (to/o- f8gati) of them. Then one girl ran down to urge Duling to come up

Bagobo  M yths	$ i

into the tree. And as soon as she came close  to him,  he caught  her  to  his breast, and hugged her and caressed her.
In a moment, Duling realized that the girl was gone, and that he was holding in his arms a nanga-bush, full of thorns. He had thought to catch the girl, but, instead, sharp thorns had pricked him full of sores. Then from above he heard the woman’s voice, tauntingly sweet, “Don’t feel bad, Duling; for right here is your younger brother.”
Yet the young man, gazing here and there, saw around him only tall trees, and could not catch a glimpse of the girl who mocked him.
Immediately, Duling, as he stood there, was turned into a rock. But the little brother married the Tagamaling-girl.
There is a place high up in the mountains of Mindanao, about eight hours’ ride west of Santa Cruz, where you may see the rock, and you will know at once that it is a human  figure.  There is Duling,  with  the trap and the decoy cock on his shoulder. Vou may see the cock’s feathers too.
I O.   THE   S’IRING
The S’iring' is the  ugly man that has long nails and  curly hair.	He lives  in  the  forest  trees.	If a boy goes into the forest without a companion,  the  S’iring  tries  to  carry him off.	When you meet a S’iring, he will look like your father, or mother, or some friend ; and he will hide his long nails behind his back, so that you cannot see them. It is the S’iring who makes the echo (â’ñ'd). When you talk in a loud voice, the S’iring will answer you in a faint voice, because he wants to get you and carry you away.
There was once a boy who went without a companion into the forest, and he met a man who looked just like his own father, but it  was a S’iring; and the S’iring made him believe that he was his father. The S’iring said to the boy, “Come, you must go with  me.  We will shoot some wild birds with our bow and arrows.”
And the boy, not doubting that he heard  his father’s voice, followed  the S’iring into the deep forest. After a while, the boy lost his memory, and forgot the way to his own house.  The  S’iring  took him  up on  a high mountain, and gave him food ; but the poor boy had now lost his mind, and he thought the food was a milleped one fathom long, or it seemed to him the long, slim worm called I+zro/s‘.
So the days went on, the boy eating little, and growing thinner and weaker  all the time.	When he met any men in the forest, he grew frightened,  and  would run away.	When he had been a long time in the forest, the S’iring called to him and said, “We will move on now.”
So  they  started off  again.	When  they  reached  the  high  bank  of a
'	The S’iring  are said  to appear  in  the  likeness of  some near  relative of  the  wanderer  in the forest (s-, prefix widely used by mountain Bagobo before an initial vowel of a proper name; iriag, “like” or “similar to ”).

$ z	Journal of American Folb-Lore

deep and swift-flowing river, the S’iring scratched the boy with his long nails. Straightway the boy felt so tired that he could no longer stand on his legs, and then  he dropped  down into the ravine.  He fell on the hard rocks, so that his bones were broken, and his skull split open.
All this time, the mother at home was mourning for her  son,  and crying all day long. But soon she arranged a  little shrine  (tambara') under the great tree, and, having placed there a white bowl with a few betel-nuts and some buyo-leaf as an  offering  for  her son, she crouched cm the ground and prayed for his life to the god in the sky.
Now, when the S’iring heard her prayer, he took some betel-nuts, and went to the place where the boy’s body lay. On the parts where the bones were broken, he spit betel-nut, and did the same to the boy’s head. Immediately the boy came to life, and felt well again. then theS’iring took him up, and carried him to the shrine where the mother was praying; but she could not see the S’iring nor her boy. She went home crying.
That night, as the woman slept, she dreamed  that a boy came close to her, and spoke about her son.  “To-morrow  morning,”  he  said, “you must pick red peppers, and get a lemon,° and carry them to the shrine, and burn them in the fire.”
Next morning, the woman  hastened  to gather the peppers, and  get a lemon, and with happy face she ran to the shrine under the big tree. There she made a fire, and burned the lemon and the red  peppers, as the dream had told her. And, as soon as she had done this, her son appeared from under the great  tree.  Then his mother caught him in  her arms, and held him close, and cried for joy.
When you lose your things, you may be sure that the S’iring has hidden them. What you have to do is to burn some red peppers with beeswax (tadu ba 9 ef?u#aa 3), and observe carefully the direction in which the smoke goes. The way the smoke goes points out where your things are hidden, because  the  S’iring  is  afraid  of  the wax  of  bees. He is afraid, too, of red peppers and of lemons.

I I. HOW IRO MET THE S’IRING
Not long ago, a young  man  named  Iro  went  out, about  two o'clock in the afternoon, to get some tobacco from one of the neighbors. Not
' The f amily altar seen in many Bagobo houses. It consists of two slim rods of bamboo (attached to the wall, and standing upright), split at the upper ends so as to support  each a bowl of white crockery, in which offerings of betel-nut, brass  bracelets,  and  other objects, are placed. Similar shrines are sometimes put up under trees or by a mountain-stream.
•	Red peppers and a piece or two of lemon laid under the house are effective in keeping Buso away from that vicinity; and the use of the same charm  here  against  the  S'iring suggests that the S’iring may not be separated by a very sharp line  from  the  Buso  who crowd the forests.
•	Tadu (“ wax “), ba (preposition '' of ” ), petiukan (” bees ”).

Bagobo M yths	$$
far from his house, he saw his friend Atun coming along; and Atun said to him, “I’ve got some tobacco hidden away in a place in the woods. Let us go and get it.”
So they  went along together.	When they reached the forest, Atun disappeared, and  Iro could  not see which way he had gone.	Then he concluded that it was not  Atun,  but  a  S’iring,  whom  he had  met. He started for home, and reached there about eight o’clock in the evening.	To his astonishment, he saw Atun sitting there in the house. Confused and wondering, he asked Atun, “Did you carry me away?” But his friend Atun laughed, and said, “Where should I carry you?
I have not been anywhere.”
Then Iro was convinced that a S’iring had  tried  to lure  him  into the forest.
When you have a companion, the S’iring cannot hurt you.

IV.	ANIMAL STORIES: METAMORPHOSIS, EXPLANATORY TALES, ETC.
I.	THE KINGFISHER AND THE MALAKI
There came a day when the kingfisher (doing') had nothing to drink, and  was   thirsty  for  water.	Then she walked along the bed of the brook, searching for a drink; but  the  waters  of  the  brook  were  all dried up.
Now, on that very day, the Maganud went up the mountain  to  get some  agsatn '  to  make  leglets  for  himself.  And  when  he  came  near to where the bulla grows,  he  stopped  to  urinate,  and  the  urine sprinkled one of the great bulla-leaves. Then he went on up the moun- tain. Just then, the kingfisher came along, still looking for a moun- tain-stream. Quickly she caught sight of the leaf of the bulla-tree all sprinkled with water; but the man  had  gone  away.  Then  the  king- fisher gladly drank a few drops of the water, and  washed  her feathers. But no sooner had  she  quenched  her  thirst,  and  taken  a  bath,  than  her head  began  to  pain  her.  Then  she  went  home  to her little  house in the ground.
Now, every day the kingfisher laid one egg, and  that day she laid her egg as usual. But when the egg hatched out, it was no feathered nestling, but a baby-boy, that broke the shell.
“Oh !” cried the frightened bird. “What will  become  of  me?”  Then she ran off a little way from her nest, and started to fly away.
t •j•his bird, often called a “ hornbill ” by foreigners in the Philippines, is probably the halcyon kingfisher (Ceyx euerythco j of the islands. The ground hornbill  is confined  to Africa; and the tree hornbill  of  the  Philippines doee not  make its nest at  the  foot of  trees. aa in this story.
•	A mountain-plant whose stem hae a thin, glossy, black eheath, that is stripped off and
used in twisting the decorative leglet called tikus.

34	Journal of A meri’can Fold-Lore

But the little boy cried out, “Mother, mother, don’t be afraid of me!”
So the kingfisher came back to  her  baby.  And  the  child  grew  bigger every day.
After a while, the boy was old enough to  walk  and  play  around. Then one day he went alone to the house of the Maganud, and  climbed up the steps and looked  in  at  the  door.  The  Maganud  was  sitting there on the floor of his house; and the little boy ran up to him and  hugged him, and cried for joy. But the Maganud was startled and dismayed ; for he was a chaste  salads,' and  had  no children.  Yet this boy called him “father,” and begged for ripe bananas in a very familiar manner. After they had  talked  for a little while,  the  Maganud  went with the child to the home of the kingfisher.
The kingfisher had made her nest at the foot of a great  hollow  tree. She had dug out a hole, about four feet deep, in the soft ground,  and  fixed a roof by heaping over the hole the powdered  rotten  bark of  the old tree. The roof stood up just a few inches above  the  ground;  and when the Maganud saw it, he thought it  was  a  mere  little  heap  of earth. Immediately, however, as  he  looked  at  the  lowly  nest,  it became a fine house with walls of  gold,  and  pillars  of  ivory.  The  eaves were all hung with little bells (Goreng-Sorting °) ; and the whole house was radiantly bright, for over it forked lighting played con-  tinually.
The kingfisher took off her feather coat, and became a lovely woman, and then she and the Malaki were married. They had bananas and cocoanut-groves, and all things, and they became rich people.

2 . THE WOMAN AND THE SQUIRREL
One day a woman went out to find water. She had no water to  drink, because all the streams were dried up. As she went along, she saw some water in a leaf. She drank it, and washed  her  body.  As soon as she had drunk the water, her head began to hurt. Then she went home, spread out a mat,  lay down  on  it,  and  went  to sleep. She slept for nine days. When she woke up, she took a comb and combed her hair. As she combed it,  a squirrel-baby  came out from her hair. After the baby had been in the house one week, it began to grow and jump about. It staid up under the roof of the house.
One day the  Squirrel  said  to  his  mother,  “O  mother!  I  want  you to go to the house of the  Datu  who  is called  ‘sultan,’ and  take these nine #otnngi ;; and these nine finger-rings to pay for  the  sultan’s daughter, because I want to marry her.”
' In a strict sense, the term riro/aâi is never applied to a man. unless he is young, un- married, and perfectly chaste. But this technical use is not always preserved.
•	Small bells cast from a hand-made wax mould, and extensively used for decorating baskets, bags, belts, etc.
•	See footnote i , p. 38.

Bagobo M yfhs	$ $

Then the mother went to the sultan’s house and remained there an hour. The sultan said, “What do you want?”
The  woman answered, “Nothing.	I  came for betel-nuts.”	Then the woman went back home.
The Squirrel met her, and said, “Where are my nine necklaces?” “ Here they are,” said the woman.
But the Squirrel was angry at his mother, and bit her with his little
teeth.
Again he said to his mother, “You go there and take the nine necklaces.”
So the woman started off again. When she reached the sultan’s house, she said to him, “ I am come with these nine necklaces and these nine finger-rings that my sonsends to you.”
“Yes,” said the sultan ;  “but  I want my house to  become gold, and I want all my plants to become gold, and everything I have to turn into gold.”
But the woman left the presents to pay for the  sultan’s daughter. The sultan told her that he wanted his house to  be turned  into gold that very night. Then the woman went back and told all this to her son.
The Squirrel said, “That is good, my mother.”
Now, when night came, the Squirrel went to the sultan’s house, and stood in the middle of the path, apd called to his brother, the Mouse, “My brother, come out! I want to see you.”
Then the great Mouse came out. All the  hairs of  his coat  were of  gold, and his eyes were of glass.
The Mouse said, “What do you want of me, my brother Squirrel?” “I called you,” answered the Squirrel, “for your gold coat. I want
some of that to turn the sultan’s house into gold.”
Then the Squirrel bit the skin of the Mouse, and took off some of the gold,  and  left  him.	Then he began to turn the sultan’s  things  into gold.	First of all, he rubbed the gold on the betel-nut trees of the sultan; next, he rubbed all  the  other  trees and  all the  plants;  third, he  rubbed  the   house  and  all  the   things in  it.	Then the sultan’s town you could see as in a bright day.	You would think there was no night there — always day.
All this time, the sultan was asleep. When he woke up, he was so frightened to see all his things, and his house, of gold, that he died in about two hours.
Then the Squirrel and the daughter of the sultan were married. The Squirrel staid in her father's home for one month, and then  they went to live in the house of the Squirrel’s mother. And they took from the sultan’s place, a deer, a fish, and all kinds of food. After the sultan’s daughter had lived with the Squirrel for one year, he took off his coat and became a Malaki T’oluk Waig.'
'  See footnote  z, p. z8.

Journal oJ Amcrican Fold-Lore

.   THE    CAT
Very long ago the cocoanut  used  to be the head of the cat.	That is why  the cat  loves cocoanut so much.	When the Bagobo are eating cocoanut, they let the cat jump up and have some too, because her head  once turned  into a cocoanut.	When the cat hears the Bagobo scraping cocoanut in the kitchen, she runs quickly to get some to eat. We cut off some of the fur from  the  tip  of the cat’s tail, and put the hairs under one of the big stones (sigung) where the fire burns.
This is why the cat loves the house where she lives.
When the cat dies, her giino#od /aéotronoa' goes down to Gimo- kudan, where the spirits of dead people go.

4. wirr TnE BAGOBO LIKES THE CAT
An old man was fishing ip the brook; but the water kept getting muddy, and he did not know what was the matter. Then  he went away, and he walked and walked. After he had gone some distance,  he saw in the mud a big lion° that eats people. The Lion had been sleeping in the mud. He said to the man,  “If  you’ll  pull  me out of the mud and ride me to my town, I will give you many things.”
Then the man drew the Lion from the mud.
The Lion stood still a while, and then said, “ Now you must  ride  on me.”
So the man mounted the Lion, and rode until they came to a large meadow, when the Lion said, “Now I am going to eat you.”
The man replied, “But first let us go and ask the Carabao.”
The Lion consented, and they went on until they reached the Carabao.
“This Lion wants to eat me,” complained the man.
“Yes, indeed! eat him, Lion,” answered the Carabao, “for the men are all the time riding on my back, and whipping me.”
There were many Carabaos in the field, and they all agreed to ’this.
Then the man said to the Lion, “You may eat  me ;  but  we will  first go and tell the Cows.”
Soon they reached the Cows’ home, and the man told them that the Lion wanted to eat him.
At once the Cows exclaimed, “Yes, eat him, Lion, because  all  day long the people drive us away from their fields.”
“All right!” assented the man; “but first let us speak to the Dogs.”
When they came to the Dogs’ home, the man cried, “The Lion is going to eat me.”
' The good soul that goes to the city of the dead, and continues to live much as on earth.
The gimoâud tebang, or bad soul, becomes a Buso after death.
•	The “lion ” is borrowed from some foreign source, since in the Philippines there are
no large carnivorous mammals.

Bagobo M ytlis	57
The Dogs said to the Lion, “ Devour this man; for every day, when men are eating, they beat us away from the food.”
At last the man said, “Sure enough, you will eat me up, Lion; but  let us just go to the Cat.”
When they reached the Cat’s home, they found her sitting at the door, keeping her nice house. It had groves of cocoanut-palms around it. The Cat lived all alone.
The man said to her, “This Lion wants to eat me.”
“Yes, Lion,” the Cat replied; “but  first  you  make a deep hole in the ground. We will race each other into the hole. If  you  jump in  first, then I shall lose and you will win.”
And the Lion ran, and jumped into the hole. Then the Cat covered him with earth and stones until he was dead. But before he died, the Lion called to the Cat, “Whenever I see your excrement (lot), I shall eat it.” That is why the Cat hides her  excrement,  because  she  is afraid the Lion will come.
Now, the Lion is the dog of the Buso.

5- HOW THE LIZARDS GOT THEIR MARKINGS
One day the Chameleon (9n/ns') and the Monitor-lizard (ibid•) were out in a deep forest together. They thought they would try scratching each other’s backs to make pretty figures on them.
First the Chameleon said to the  Monitor-lizard, “You  must scratch a nice pattern on my back.”
So the Monitor went to work, and the Chameleon had a fine scratch- ing. Monitor made a nice, even pattern on his back.
Then Monitor asked Chameleon for a scratching.  But  no sooner had Chameleon begun to work on Monitor’s back than there came the sound of a dog barking. A man was hunting in the  forest  with his  dog. The sharp barks came  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  two  lizards; and the Chameleon got such a scare, that his fingers shook, and the pretty design he was making went all askew. Then he stopped short and ran away, leaving the  Monitor  with a  very shabby marking  on his back.
This is the reason that the monitor-lizard is not so pretty as the chameleon.
' The so-called “chameleon” of the Malay Peninsula and the Malay lelands is Calorie,
one of the Agomida (cf. H. Gadow, Amphibio and Reptiles, pe- s i-s 8).
•	A semi-aquatic lizard of the Philippines that lays edible eggs, and otherwise answers
to the description of the Moraoics, or Monitor.

38	Journal oJ American Folk-Lore

6. THE MONKEY AND THE TORTOISE'
One day, when a Tortoise was crawling slowly along by a stream, he saw a baby-monkey drinking water. Presently the Monkey ran up to the Tortoise, and said, “Let’s go and find something to eat.”
Not far from the stream there was a large field full of banana-trees.
They looked up, and saw clusters of ripe fruit.
“That’s fine!” said the Monkey, “for I’m hungry  and  you’re hungry too. You climb first, Tortoise.”
Then the Tortoise crawled slowly up the trunk; but he had got up only a little distance when the Monkey chattered these words, “Roro s’punno, roro s’punnol”° (“Slide down, slide down, Tortoise!”)
At once the Tortoise slipped and fell down. Then he started again  to climb the tree; and again the Monkey said, “Roro s'punnol” and again the Tortoise slipped and fell down. He tried over and  over again; but every time he failed, for the Monkey always said, “Roro s'punno !” and made him fall. At last he got tired and gave it up, saying to the Monkey, “Now you try it.”
“It’s too bad!” said the Monkey, “when we’re both so hungry.” Then the Monkey made just three jumps, and reached the ripe fruit. “Wait till I taste and see if they’re sweet,” he cried to the Tortoise, while he began to eat bananas as fast as he could.
“Give me some,” begged the Tortoise.
“All right!” shouted  the Monkey;  “but  I forgot  to notice whether it was sweet.” And he kept on eating, until more than  half  of  the  fruit was gone.
“Drop down just one to me!” pleaded the Tortoise. “Ves, in a minute,” mumbled the Monkey.
At last, when but three bananas were left on the tree, the Monkey called, “Look up! shut your eyes” (Longag-to / §udung-au yoti tnofa-

The Tortoise did so.  The  Monkey  then  told  him  to  open  his mouth, and he obeyed. Then the Monkey said, “I’ll peel this  one  piece  of banana for you ” (Luilan-bo ’ni‘ sébad abok sogs’ ng4).
Now, the Monkey was sitting on a banana-leaf, directly over the Tortoise; but, instead of banana, he dropped his excrement into the Tortoise’s mouth. The Tortoise screamed with rage; but the Monkey
' This story, in an abbreviated form, was found by Clara Kern Bayliss at Laguna  (ef. this Journal, vol. xx*, P- 46 (*9° I-
•	Roro, “slide;” s prefix (euphonic or formal, used by mountain Bagobo before vowels
and many consonant sounds, as the labral p here) ; pirnno, “ tortoise.”
*   Longog,   “look;”   -âa   (suffix,  second   person   nominative),   “you;”   pudung, “shut;”
-nu  (pronominal suffix),  “your;”  you  (demonstrative pronoun),  “that,”  “those;” mala,
“eyes.”
•	Lai? (transitive verb and noun), “peel,”  “shell;”  -ko (susix, first  person  pronominal), “ I;” ’ni (abbreviated from ini), “this,”  “ here,”  in  sense  of  “at  hand;”  sebod,  “one:” abo#, “piece;” saging, “banana.”

Bagobo M yllis	59
jumped up and down, laughing at him. Then he went on eating the remainder of the bananas.
The Tortoise then set himself to work at making a little hut of bamboo-posts, with  a  roof  and  walls  of  leaves.  The  upper  ends  of the bamboo he sharpened, and  let them  project  through  the  roof;  but the sharp points  were  concealed by  the  leaves.  It  was  like  a  trap  for pigs (saa#s’J).
When the Monkey came down from the banana-tree, the Tortoise said, “You  climb  this other  tall  tree,  and  look  around  at  the  sky. If the sky is dark, you must call to me; for the rain will soon come. Then you jump down on the roof of our little house here.  Never mind if it breaks in, for we can soon build a stronger one.”
The Monkey accordingly climbed the tree, and looked at the sky.
“ It is all very dark!” he exclaimed.
“Jump quick, then !” cried the Tortoise.
So the Monkey jumped ; but he got killed from the sharp bamboo- points on which he landed.
Then the Tortoise made a fire, and roasted the Monkey. He cut off the Monkey’s ears, and they turned into buyo-leaves.' He cut out the heart, and it turned into betel-nut. He  took  out  the  brain,  and  it became lime (a9og'). He made thet ail into 9oagotnon.• The stomach he made into a basket. He  put  into the basket  the  betel  and  the  lime and the pungaman and the buyo, and crawled away.
Soon he heard the noise of many animals gathered together. He found the monkeys and the deer and the pigs and the wild birds having a big rice-planting. All the animals were rejoiced to see the Tortoise coming with a basket, for they all wanted to chew betel. The monkeys ran up, chattering, and tried to snatch the betel-nuts; but the Tortoise held them back, saying, “Wait a minute! By and by I will give you some.”
Then the monkeys sat around, waiting, while the Tortoise prepared the betel-nut. He cut the nuts and the  pungaman  into  many  small pieces, and the buyo-leaf too, and gave them to the monkeys and the other animals. Everybody began to chew; and  the  Tortoise  went away to a distance about the length of one field (sebad #+aomaf), where he could get out of sight, under shelter of some trees.  Then he called to the monkeys, “All of you are eating monkey, just  like  your  own body: you are chewing up one of your own family.”
At that, all the monkeys were angry, and ran screaming to catch
the Tortoise.	But the Tortoise had hid under the felled trunk of an
' See footnote s. - a•-
•	A white  powder  (calcined  shell)  that  is  sprinkled  on the betel-nut.	It is made by burning certain shells to ashes, and mixing with water.
•	The stem of a mountain-plant that is chewed in lack of  betel-nut.  It  blackens  the teeth, like betel.

6o	Journal oJ American Fold-Lore
old Palma 6rova tree. As each  monkey  passed  close  by  the  trunk where the Tortoise lay concealed, the Tortoise said, “ Drag your mem- brum! here’s a felled tree” (Sñ9o Jane / 6osifi").
Thus every monkey passed by clear of the trunk, until the  last one came by; and he  was  both  blind  and  deaf.  When  he  followed  the rest, he could not hear the  Tortoise  call  out, “ Supa  tapo 1  basiâ’;” and his membrum struck against the fallen trunk. He stopped,  and became aware of the Tortoise  underneath.  Then  he screamed  to  the rest; and all the monkeys came running back, and surrounded the Tortoise, threatening him.
“What do you want?” inquired the Tortoise.
“You shall die," cried the monkeys. “Tell us what will kill you.
We will chop you to pieces with the axe.”
“Oh, no! that won’t hurt me in the least,” replied  the  Tortoise. “Vou can see the marks on my shell, where my father used to cut my body: but that didn’t kill me.”
“We will put you in the fire, then, and burn you to death,” chorussed
the monkeys. “Will that do?"
“Fire does not hurt me,” returned the Tortoise. “Look at my body! See how brown it is where my father used to stick me into the fire.”
“What, then, is best to kill you ?” urged the monkeys.
“The way to kill me,” replied the Tortoise, “is to take the punch  used for brass, he/i/,° and run° it into my rectum.  Then  throw  me into the big pond, and drown me.”
Then the monkeys did as they were told, and threw him into the pond. But the Tortoise began to swim about in the water.
Exultantly he called to the monkeys,  “This  is  my  own  home:  you see I don’t drown.” And the lake was so  deep that  the monkeys  could not get him.
Then the monkeys  hurried  to  and  fro,  summoning  all  the  animals in the world to  drink  the  water in the  lake.  They  all came, — deer, pigs, jungle-fowl, monkeys, and all the  rest, — and  began  to  drink. They covered their bag@sdts' with leaves, so that  the water  could  not run  out  of  their  bodies.  After  a  time,  they had drunk  so much  that the lake became shallow, and one could see the Tortoise’s back.
But the red-billed bakaka-bird that lived in  a  tree  by  the  water was watching; and as quick as the back of the Tortoise  came into sight, the bird flew down and picked off the leaves from the pagindis
' &os*ñ’, term used of any old §a/tna brava tree that has been broken down or felled • and lies on the ground (skin, "drag," ” lower;” iapo, “penie").
•	A short, pointed iron tool; used to punch ornamental designs in brass ornaments, especially bracelets and leglets.
•	In a slightly different version, the tortoise tells the monkeys to bore into his ear with  the fist, a brass wire that forms a part of the hinge of a betel-box.
•	The distal opening of the urethra.

Bagoho M ylhs	6i
of the deer. Then the water ran out from their bodies  until the lake rose again, and covered the Tortoise. Satisfied, the bird  flew  back into the tree. But the deer got fresh leaves  to cover  their  pagindis, and began to drink again. Then the bird flew to the monkeys, and began to take the leaves (rom the’ir f:iagindis; but one monkey saw him doing it, and slapped him. This made the bird  fall  down,  and then all the monkeys left the Tortoise in the lake, and ran to revenge themselves on the bird.
They snatched him up, pulled out every one of his feathers with their fingers, and laid him naked upon the stump of a tree. All the animals went home, leaving the bird on the stump.
Two days later, one Monkey came to look at the Bakaka. Little feathers were beginning to grow out; but the  Monkey  thought  the bird was dead.
“Maggots are breeding in it,” said the Monkey.
Three more days passed, and then the Monkey came again. The Bakaka's feathers had grown out long by that time; and the Monkey said, “ It was all rotten, and the pigs ate it.”
But the bird had flown away.  He flew to the north until he reached a meadow with a big tual-tree in the middle. The  tree  was  loaded with ripe fruit.1 Perched on one of the branches, the bird ate all he wanted, and when done he took six of the fruit of the tea/, and made a necklace for himself. With this hung round his neck, he flew to the house where the old Monkey lived, and sat on the roof. He dropped one /uaJ through the roof, and it fell down on the floor, where all the little monkey-children ran for it, dancing and screaming.
“Don’t make such a noise!” chided the old Monkey, “and do not take the html, for the Bakaka will be angry, and he is a great bird.”
But the bird flew down into the house, and gave one Just to the old Monkey.
“That is good,” said the old Monkey, tasting it.  “Tell  me where  you got it.” But the bird would not tell.  Then the old monkey stood up, and kissed him, and begged to be taken to the tual-tree.
At last the Bakaka said to all the monkeys, “Three days from now you may all go to the tual-tree. I want you off to go, the blind monkey too. Go to the meadow where the grass grows high, and there, in the centre of the meadow, is the tual-tree. If you see the sky and the air black, do not speak a word; for if you speak, you will get sick.”
At the set time, all the monkeys started for the meadow, except one female monkey that was expecting a baby. The deer and all the other animals went along, except a few of the females  who  could  not  go. They all reached the meadow-grass ; and the monkeys climbed up the tual-tree that stood in the centre of the field, until all the branches were
' A small edible fruit with an acid pulp and red-and-white skin.

6z	Journal oJ Ameri’can Fold-Lore

full of monkeys. The birds and  the  jungle-fowl  flew  up in  the tree ;  but the deer and the other animals waited down on the ground.
Then the sky grew black, for the Bakaka and the Tortoise were going around the meadow with  lighted  sticks  of  6s/r#oyo,'  and  setting  fire to the grass. The air w-as full of smoke, and the little monkeys were crying; but the old Monkey bit them, and said, “Keep still, for  the Bakaka told us not to speak.”
But the meadow-grass was all ablaze,  and  the flames  crept  nearer and nearer to the tual-tree. Then all the  monkeys saw  the  fire, and  cried, “Oh! what will become of us?”
Some of the birds and most of the chickens  flew  away;  but some  died in the flames. A few of the pigs ran away, but most of them died. The other animals were burned to death. Not a single monkey escaped, save only the female monkey who staid at home. When her baby was born, it was a boy-monkey. The  mother  made  it  her  husband,  and from this pair came many monkeys.
It was the same with the deer. All were burned,  except  one doe who staid at home. When her little fawn was  born, it  was a male.  She made it her husband, and from this one pair came many deer.

/. THE CROW AND THE GOLDEN TREES
The liver of the crow is “medicine” for many pains and for sickness. On this account the Bagobo kills the crow so that he may get his liver for “medicine.”  The liver is good  to  eat, either cooked or raw.  If you see a crow dead, you can get its liver and eat some of it, and it will be “medicine” for your body.
The crow never makes its nest  in  low-growing  trees,  but  only  in tall, big trees. Far from here, the old  men  say, in  the land  where  the  sun rises, there are no more living trees; for  the scorching  heat of  the sun has killed them all, and  dried  up  the  leaves.  There  they  stand, with naked branches, all  bare  of  leaves.  Only  two  trees  there  have not died  from  the  heat.  The  trunks  of  these  trees  are  of  gold,  and all  their leaves of  silver.   But if  any  bird  lights on one of  these  trees, it falls down  dead.  The  ground  under  the  two  trees is covered  with the bones of little  birds  and  big  birds  that  have  died  from  perching on the trees with the golden trunks and  the silver  leaves.  These  two trees are full of a resin  that  makes  all  the  birds die.  Only  the  crow can sit on the branches, and not die. Hence the crow alone, of all the birds, remains alive in the land of the sunrise.
No man can get  the  resin  from  these trees.  But  very long ago,  in the days of the Mona, there came a Malaki T’oluk  Waig  to  the  trees. He had a war-shield that shone brightly, for it had a flame of fire
' A light-weight bamboo with slender, thorny branches,  very inflammable,  and  used where a rapid-burning and intense fire is needed (Safe [“ house”], logo [“ wood ”]).  Thie wood is extensively used in building the lighter parts of the framework of a house.

Bagobo  M ytlis	6$

always  burning in it.	And this Malaki came to the golden trees and took the precious resin from their trunks.
V.    AN  ATA STORY'
ALELJ’R AND ALEBU’TUD'
Alélu’k and  Alébii’tud  lived together in their own  house.  They had no neighbors. One day Alélu’k said to his wife, “I must  go and  hunt some pigs.”
Then he started out to hunt,  taking  with  him his three dogs.  He did not’ find any wild pigs; but before long he sighted a big deer with many-branched antlers. The dogs gave chase  and  seized  the deer, and held it until the man came up and killed it with the sharp iron spike that tipped his long staff (lidalan•). Then the man tied to the deer’s antlers a strong piece of rattan, and dragged it home.
When he reached his house, his wife met him joyfully; and they were both very happy, because they had now plenty of meat. They brought wood and kindled a fire, and fixed over the fire a frame of wood tied to upright posts  stuck into  the  ground.  On the frame they laid the body of the deer to singe off the hair over the flames. And when the hair was all burned off, and the skin clean, Alélii’k  began  to cut off pieces of venison, and Alébii'tud got ready the big clay pot, and poured into it water to boil the meat. But  there  was  only  a little water in the house, so Alébii'tud took her bucket (se##adfl'), and hurried down to the river. When she reached there, she stood with  her bare feet in the stream, and dipped the bucket into the stream, and took it out full of water. But,  just as she turned  to climb up the river-bank, an enormous fish jumped out of the river, seized her, dragged her down, and devoured her.
At home, Alélu’k was watching for his wife  to come  back  bringing the water. Day after day he waited for her, and all  day long he was  crying from sorrow.
The man (Alélu’k) symbolizes a big black ant that  makes its nest  in a hollow tree. The woman  (Alébii’tud) is a little worm  that lives  in the 9ofma brava tree. The fish is another man who carried off Alélii’k’s wife.
NEw    YORK.
' This story came to the  Bagobo from a  young  man of  the  Ata  tribe, whose habitat is  the mountainous country in the interior, to the northwest of the Gulf of Davao.
•	“A1é1u’k ” and “A1€bu’tud ” are Ata names, for which the Bagobo forms are respec- tively Bungen and Batol.
* The long handle or rod of a spear, tipped with a sharp-pointed iron cone; equally useful for killing animals, and, driven into the ground. for supporting the spear when at rest. The same name (iidafon) is applied to the shaft of a spear lacking the blade, and carried by old people like a mountain-stafl.
•	A vessel formed of a single internode of bamboo, in which water is brought from the river, and kept in the house.


Aswang and Other Kinds of Witches: A Comparative Analysis Author(s): Kathleen Nadeau
Source: Philippine Quarterly of Culture and Society , September/December 2011, Vol. 39, No. 3/4 (September/December 2011), pp. 250-266
Published by: University of San Carlos Publications Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/23719118





Aswang and Other Kinds of Witches:
A Comparative Analysis


Kathleen Nadeau



The word witchlore, like folklore, is as abstract a category as are the words Diaspora, Globalization, and Culture. Folklore can contain religious or mythic elements but it  also  is  concerned  with  what we do in our everyday lives. It can be used to transmit values or to defuse the stress and pressure that can build up in our lives. Many ritual practices can be considered folklore such as those that are acted out at birth, marriage, or during religious festivals that are performed within the context of a family or community setting. This paper looks at some of the cultural motifs that distinguish and set apart Filipino tales of witches (like aswang, or flying half-bodied female viscera suckers) and, by extension, other nearby island Southeast Asian witch tales, from European witch tales of ugly hags flying around  on brooms.  It looks at some of the etiological roots, migrations, transmissions, and developments of these horror tales and at cultural constructions of gender and identity.
I first became interested in folklore when teaching a Peoples of Asia course in which we read The Balinese by Steve Lansing (1995). He wrote about a ritual battle between the forces of good and evil that occurred between a bear-like guardian and a bat-like creature with an elongated tongue that flew around at midnight  to suck out the  blood  of its victims. This bat-like creature, appearance-wise, reminded me

Kathleen Nadeau, Ph.D, Department of Anthropology, California State University, San Bernardino, can be reached at knadeau@csusb.edu.

Aswang  and Other Witches: A Comparison	251


of the viscera-sucking witches {aswang) of the Philippines and current among Filipinos in America.
In Bali, witches represent the many forces of vice in the world. In the United States, Balinese-Americans and Javanese-Americans, among other Southeast Asian American communities, still perform some ritual ways of transforming potentially dangerous and chaotic witch-like forces into virtuous behavioral and social  actions.  I began to wonder if classic Indian epics enacted in Balinese rituals offered an alternative interpretation of the relationship  between  Rangda  the witch and her arch foe, the gentle Balinese Barong or spirit brother. The Balinese Barong, like a human being from a Balinese cultural perspective, also might represent the culmination of the four spirit children who accompany a human child throughout  his  or  her lifetime. It is to the spirit children, associated with the four cardinal directions in the physical realm of the world, to whom all Balinese ritual offerings are made, with respect to a person’s life cycle.1 From this point, witches can be viewed as simply the culmination of worldly vices, while the spirit siblings once honored and controlled are reflective of what it means to be a model human being.
Philosophically, some of the moral lessons enacted in the Rangda versus Barong battle reminded me of similar teachings found in the Hindu story of Arjuna’s battle with his 100 rambunctious  cousins, as told in the great epic narrative of the “Mahabharata” in The Bhagavad-Gita (Sargeant 1994: 9-34). Briefly, the Mahabharata is a story about five brave and virtuous princes who married one beautiful princess. The five Pandava princes, fatherless in childhood, grew up together with one hundred  rambunctious  cousins.  The  Pandavas were born of the Gods, while their 100 cousins emerged out of an earthen jar (which like clay symbolizes human beginnings). As  a young man, the eldest cousin, succumbing to feelings of jealousy and greed, wanted to be crowned king, instead of Yudisthra, the rightful heir and eldest of the Pandava brothers. The cousin raised an army to challenge the Pandavas for the throne. One of the Pandava brothers, Arjuna, the perfect and righteous warrior, tried all peaceful means to compromise with this cousin but for naught. Without recourse, Arjuna dejectedly went into battle with his army against his own relatives.

252	Philippine Quarterly of Culture & Society


There are many symbolic meanings in  this  great  epic adventure of humankind. For example, that there are 100  cousins points not only to 100 named Hindu vices (Lansing 1995: 35), but also to the idea that there is might in numbers. However, the moral of the Mahabharata is not about might but goodness. In the end, goodness reigns over bad. Could it be that the five virtuous brothers in the Mahabharata are the equivalent of the five spirit siblings who watch over all Balinese children and who guard over village life? Could Rangda and the aswang witches, like the 100 cousins in this epic from India, represent those who succumb to worldly vices?  Is  it possible that there is a general philosophical connection between the stories of vampire heads afloat in the diasporic Indonesian, Malaysian, and Philippine communities? If so, what can we learn about the deeper meaning of the aswang and what it means to be a culturally gendered human being as used in contemporary Filipino story telling?  What does a comparative study of witchlore reveal about how women and children are looked at in the Philippines and by Filipinos in America?
Witch tales are generally made up of culturally defined beliefs in religious, paranormal and supernatural folklore. For example, Filipino-Americans tend to show  a  great  deal  of  deference  and  respect for elders, especially departed grand/parents and ancient cultural and national heroes and heroines, as well as magical and mythological figures and entities in their folklore. There are restless and unappeased spirits [anitos) of deceased ancestors and nature-spirits (e.g., diwatas} afloat in the Filipino diasporic communities. Filipinos continue to share cultural ties with ancient India and China. For example, some of their ancient mythological spirits and deities bear resemblance to Hindu gods and goddesses such as Lakshmi, the Hindu goddess of wealth and prosperity, referred to in the Philippines as Lakambini, which translates as noble princess of honor and fame. Lakampati or Lakan Bacor (Nadeau 2011: 337), one of the Filipino words for the guardian spirit watching over agricultural fertility, might conceivably play the same role in village life as the gentle but fierce fighting dragon-like Barong of ritual Balinese theater, who defeats Rangda, the Hindu queen of witches and harbinger of sickness and famine. Rangda’s Filipino shape-shifting sisters, colloquially

Aswang  and Other Witches: A Comparison	253


referred to as aswang, are similarly half-headed  female  viscera suckers with bulging eyes and lolling tongues, who fly by night searching for victims, especially pregnant mothers and infants, who they followed to America, where Filipinos continue to wear sacred amulets and make ritual offerings and prayers to ward them off.
Filipino-Americans have a long and proud history of migration to the Americas. Some of their earliest settlements like the historic Filipino fishing communities at Saint Malo and Manila Village in Louisiana date back to the early Spanish colonial period, with its galleon trade links that interconnected and brought together the Philippines and Mexico. In this community, aswang lore continues to proliferate in a variant form. Early Filipino sailors, who  jumped  ship to make their homes in the bayous, are said to have intermarried with local women to break the aswang cycle, since non-Filipinas are considered to be immune to carrying the aswang family line (Chincuanco 2011). After the founding of the United States, which colonized the Philippines (1898-1946), many more Filipinos migrated to work and make their homes in the United States. Many of them, even those who are practicing Catholics, Protestants, or Muslims, still perform ritual offerings in various religious guises for the peaceful repose of departed souls and to appease restless ghosts who might, otherwise, hover to haunt the living.
Filipinos come from ethnically and linguistically  diverse cultural backgrounds. Many are devout Christians, having been indoctrinated long ago by Spanish Catholicism or American Protestantism; others, especially from Mindanao in the Southern Philippines, are fervent practitioners of the Islamic faith. Still, they incorporate within their respective religious orientations a deeper connection to the ancient Filipino belief system that respects nature. There is even a popular cultural movement dedicated to the promotion of indigenous knowledge and gender equality, through the study of babaylanism, or the ancient Filipino shamanistic religion (Strobel 2005; 2010). That is, Filipinos everywhere are familiar with aswang storytelling, but from where do these tales derive? Are they just stories intended to scare children to keep them indoors at night?

254	Philippine Quarterly of Culture & Society


Roots of Aswanp-lore
Herminia Meñez in her path-breaking Explorations in  Philippine Folklore (1996) theorizes that the aswang, a self- segmenting vampire-like monster, is a product of  Spanish colonization. She suggests that the early Spanish friars slandered and maligned the Filipina priestesses and shamans in an effort to negate  the power of these women and institute a religious conversion of the island population. The friars transposed the shamans  into witches so  as to discredit them locally. Meñez further suggests that the myth  of the human viscera-sucker is found mainly among Christian communities in the Philippine lowlands, especially the Visayan and Bicol regions, but not among the non-Hispanized inhabitants of the uplands of Northern Luzon and Mindanao (Meñez 1996: 86).
Predominantly females, but also transvestites, played  the  role of shaman priestesses, mediums, and healers in  the  ancient Philippines. They participated in rituals and feasting ceremonies and officiated in giving offerings of food and drink to the ancestors and nature spirits. As mediums, they could interpret people’s dreams and signs in nature to predict the future. They were the keepers of sacred historical knowledge, who were called upon  during important  rituals to chant epic myths that influenced local values and mores (Schlegel 1998: 131).
However, Spanish colonization (1521-1896) of the Philippines brought an intolerant form of Christianity that was opposed to anyone who did not kneel to the cross and bow to the crown. Friars slandered and maligned the priestesses and shamans in an effort to negate the power of these women and institute a religious conversion of the population. The friars transposed shamans into witches to discredit them. Meñez explains that the colonizers attempted to instill  fear  in the people by calling shamans witches in consort with the devil. She argues that this is one of the probable reasons why witchlore of the flying half-headed female viscera sucker, a local variant of a witch, is found mainly in the early Christianized regions of the Philippines (Meñez 1996: 86).

Aswang  and  Other Witches: A Comparison	255


The changing status of women has been noted by some writers. Blanc-Szanton (1990: 345-83), for example, discusses such change in relation to the Spanish colonization processes. Then William Henry Scott (1992; 1994) provides detailed examples of pre-colonial women who enjoyed a politically and economically  more  balanced relationship with men than did their European counterparts.  Also, H. De la Costa (1961: 314-315) writes between the lines that women played more vital social roles as healers, warrior priestesses, and merchants before the colonial period. He documents that female merchants swam out to meet the galleon ships  when  they  first  arrived. He also notes that female shamans performed the role of midwives and healers and rallied forth together with men in rebellion against the colonial overlords. The Spanish Catholics, Meñez explains, with their dark and repressed attitudes  toward  sexuality,  were shocked by the natives’ easy-going manners when it came to sexual behavior (1996: 93). Gaspar (2010) notes that colonial  clerics zealously indoctrinated boys and men to take more control over women, put in place high standards for women’s chastity, and allowed only male elites to take on roles of political significance.
Spanish colonization changed many things about early society. They so vilified female shamans that they called them witches, colloquially referred to as aswang. Cut in half to remove them from their sexual organs, the viscera  sucker  concept  emerged  from  women’s midwifery work as they are always associated with this role. Shaman priestesses, with their large followings, were perceived by the Spaniards to be powerful competitors. So, they demonized the shamans and reinterpreted aswang lore into one based on the degradation of women healers and shamans in Europe. Yet, even a cursory look at the aswang complex in the Philippines and in nearby Malaysia and Indonesia reveals some significant cultural differences that include considerations of sex and gender, in comparison to witch tales of Europe.
The aswang displays a particular set of characteristics that resemble some of the witches' traits in Spanish and Portuguese lore. The aswang is a normal woman of considerable beauty by day. However, at night she is able to transform herself into a horrible flying

256	Philippine Quarterly of Culture & Society


"half-bodied" female monster which takes flight. She then preys on the unsuspecting, sleeping population as a food source, with the focus on infant or pregnant woman. Through a long tongue she sucks out the blood, viscera, and even the fetus. When compared to the early Spaniard's images of witches, the similarities include the aspect of flying, feasting on children and/or drinking blood, being horrible to see, operating primarily in the dark of night and being unsuspected by day. Bruja is the Spanish name for witch, often represented as a living vampire, usually a female, who can transform herself into  various kinds of animals. They are generally reported as attacking primarily children. Another creature found in Portugal is much more like the aswang. The bruxa, who is also female, is represented as being human by day and a bird by night. It sucks the blood of children (Bunson 2000; Melton 1998). However, the similarities end here.
The Spanish witches are not viewed as beautiful at any specific time. On the contrary, she is most often represented as an  ugly hag. She flies, but this is only through the use of a "magic" broom or through the application of a magical ointment and usually, aside from bruxa, has no means of flight as a result of some special anatomical peculiarity. Her means of going undetected  is  not  so  much  through  the use of disguise, as with the aswang, but through the image of being a helpless old lady. This suggests that the aswang myth is probably derived in the pre-colonial context of Southeast Asia, rather  than Spain. At the same time, it corroborates Meñez’s argument that the Spanish friars manipulated and used local myths to undermine the power and prestige of Philippine priestesses.
In the Philippines, different ethnic groups have different names for creatures like the aswang. The word aswang is a general category that everyone seems to understand, even when they use a different  term to describe their type of creature. For example, Cebuanos use the word ungu for ghost witches who ride through the streets at night looking for children, which are their favorite prey (Go  1979: 186- 203). The Tagalogs describe the manananggal as an older, beautiful woman capable of severing its upper torso in order  to fly into  the night with huge bat wings to prey on  unsuspecting  pregnant women  in their homes, using an elongated proboscis-like tongue that sucks

Aswang and Other Witches: A Comparison	257


the hearts of fetuses or blood  of unsuspecting  victims. There are other
variants.
In Malaysia, the myth of the penanggalan is similar to that of the aswang. This female monster consists of a head, which dangles entrails behind as it flies. The penanggalan actually separates from its whole, just like the aswang, leaving its motionless and gutless body hidden, while the flying head goes about its gruesome business.  It seeks out the blood of children or the blood of remaining childbirth. Another type of Malaysian vampire is the pontianak. The pontianak is usually a beautiful woman who died in childbirth  and  becomes undead, seeking revenge and terrorizing villages.  She often  appears  as a beautiful woman and there will be a strong scent of frangipani (local flower), which is also what happens when an aswang  appears  on the island of Cebu in the Philippines. Men who are not careful will be killed when she changes into a vampire, and she will eat babies and harm pregnant women. People  believe  that having a sharp object like a nail helps them fend off potential attacks by the pontianak, the nail being used to plug a hole at the back of the monster’s neck The Javanese vampire, the hannya, is likewise believed to have been formerly a beautiful woman. However, she was unfortunate enough to go insane. She feeds upon infants. The sundal bolong from Java is yet another vampire-like creature that drinks blood primarily from men (Bunson 2000; Melton 1998).

Gender and Cultural Differences in Witchlore
There are some significant cultural differences  that  separate and set apart the Southeast Asian vampire myths from those of Spain and Portugal. There are distinct differences in terms  of  the  way gender relations have been historically constructed in regional Southeast Asia in comparison to those of Spain, and by extension, Western Europe. From the perspective of the colonizers, a woman’s place was in the home. She was seen as the natural caregiver for children. The common theme of Spanish vampire folklore implies that female revenants, in particular, those who have died as a result of childbirth, return to prey on children. In some ways, this might be

258	Philippine Quarterly of Culture & Society


taken to imply that men feel powerless over the product of their own ancestral line and/or over the birthing  process  that  represents  a  threat to the continued relationship with their wives.
In general male vampires are quite common in European vampire lore and they are frequently represented as omnivorous, as well as being hypersexual. They are able to prey on whomever they choose, yet oddly enough female vampires are restricted to feeding on children. As a result, such gruesome folklore might be viewed as being highly reflective of the originating culture's gender roles. Within the European context, the female domain is centered on childbirth and childcare, while the masculine role might be viewed as the rational governor of a woman’s actions. This is in stark contrast to the gender roles in the cultures of Southeast Asia, especially in traditional Indonesia and the Philippines, in which men and women’s  gender roles are sometimes not rigidly applied and women have long since enjoyed more equality with men as compared to their early counterparts in the patrilineal societies of Europe, like Spain. The female undead of the Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia, and in other areas of this region are represented  as using sexual  appeal  primarily as a means of disguise, but the creature’s goal and function do not indicate that hypersexuality is an innate aspect of its character, nor a required means of attack. While male vampires exist  in  Southeast Asia, they are rare and do not play the same roles as that of their European counterparts. For example, the male bajang of Malaysia appears as a cat, but unlike the European vampires, it seeks out specifically children, much like the female vampires do. This seems to imply that in addition to greater gender equality in real life, there is some corresponding gender equality in folklore, as well.
The real fear of the Europeans may be based on the fear of uncontrollable women. In contrast, the fear in regional Southeast Asia may be of something or someone who may represent a danger to their children. A dangerous person from a Southeast Asian perspective may be someone who not only represents a physical threat but who has succumbed to this-worldly vices, and thereby, can mislead their children. Thus, the two mythical traditions stemming out of Southeast Asia and Europe are set on distinctly different and contrasting

Aswang and  Other Witches: A Comparison	259


theoretical bases. The pertinent origins of the various European witch tales trace back to the hysterical witch hunts and inquisitions of medieval times, whereas the Southeast Asian tales may have  something to do with the use of metaphors as a way of teaching children how to resist this-worldly vices such as selfishness, greed, jealousy or the lust for power, and,  thereby,  transform  themselves into nurturing human beings.
Prior to the colonial period in South and Southeast Asia, geographical boundaries separating countries, as we  know  them  today, were not in place (Reid 1988). Rather, boundaries were more fluid and there was a constant movement of people as local leaders  vied to gain a following around which vibrant centers of trade and power emerged. In ancient times (around AD 1000 — 1200), the Philippines, Indonesia, and Malaysia, being in close proximity to each other, were familiar with one another's oral and written traditions. Around AD 1000 — 1200, they shared the same writing system derived from the Brahmin scripts of India (Diringer 1948). In the Philippines, this writing system was called afibata.2 Theoretically,  the  aswang myth in all its variant forms needs to be looked at in the wider context of the maritime world of Southeast Asia in which it earlier surfaced. However, in the Philippines, early Spanish conquistadors  and  friars set out to destroy and, thereby, largely fragmented many  outward forms of pre-colonial religious practices and beliefs. Many may have been lost forever, although Filipinos passionately work to keep their richly diverse cultural heritage and traditional dances alive on stage. This did not occur in colonial Indonesia, where the Dutch were only interested in extracting local resources for their own  benefit. Thus, over time, Filipinos lost important ritual details associated with the aswang myth, while subliminal, unarticulated meanings remain. This explains why some Filipino farmers still make rice  offerings  at the four corners of their village so that spirits will protect them but, when asked why, they cannot elaborate, or when asked what aswang tales mean, respond that they are just ghost stories.3
One possible way to go to the core of the complex of myths associated with the aswang is to look at the calonarang dance-and musical performance, an exorcism of witches and demons that takes

260	Philippine Quarterly of Culture & Society


place in Bali, Indonesia (Bateson and Mead 1942; Belo 1949). Indonesians still have ready access to their cultural treasures  of  ancient religious texts and paintings that continue to be danced out in music and song.
Lansing describes the Balinese calonarang dance-and-music performance, an exorcism of witches and demons that takes place in Bali, Indonesia. Indonesia was colonized by the Dutch, whose only interest was in the extraction of local resources for purposes of their own economic gain, not in changing people’s religion. This is why the ancient calonarang ritual dance performance continues to be remembered. Lansing documents this ritual battle  between  the Barong, or village protector, and Rangda, the flying half-headed witch, as follows:
The Barong, to the Balinese, is the arch foe of Rangda, the witch who controls black magic and delights in the  feeding on corpses and the entrails of young children. They are the  main characters in a number of religious dramas. The dramas consist of the encounter of the two figures, from which ensues a battle that neither wins. In the course of the drama, the spiritual power (sakti) or “soul”  (roh) of Barong and Rangda may enter their human impersonators, and spectators are often driven into trance by the mere sight of Rangda (Lansing 1995: 43).

He takes us closer to understanding the ’hidden’ meaning of this ritual combat between ‘good’ and 'evil’ because  he  relates  it to  the ’inner’ and ‘outer’ worlds of the Balinese. The playful, gentle, and robust Barong represents the guardian of the village and all those who  inhabit it. At the village level, he is the four spirit guards combined who stand watch over the community. Each is posted in one of four cardinal directions and to them ritual offerings of rice are made. By extension, at the individual level, the Barong, most likely, is the culmination of four spirit siblings who accompany each child at birth. These spirit siblings are the recipients of sacred gifts at each of the crucial turning points in the span of a human lifetime. They are commissioned to help the child to grow into a good and virtuous human being. Hence, the gentle and fun-loving but strong and able

Aswang and  Other Witches: A Comparison	261


Barong  is  the  spirit  protector  who  controls  all  of  the  vices  in the

In opposition, Rangda, the queen, or culmination of approximately 100 witches that may correspond to known vices like anger, jealousy, and thievery, stirs up trouble. Lansing explains  that the Balinese have names for more vices than outsiders are usually aware of (Lansing 1995: 35). Rangda is the daughter of Durga, one of the fiercest Devi (Sanskrit ’goddess’) forms of Hinduism. Ancient Hindu scripture indicates that all goddesses are ultimately the same goddess, or devi, and it is interesting to note that, unlike the Christian vision of a solely male god who is untouched by sin, Hindu gods and goddesses contain within themselves emanations of both good  and evil. A well-known example is when Krishna encouraged Arjuna to take up arms against his ’flesh and blood’ cousins, who, otherwise, would forever wreak havoc on the world (Sargeant 1994: 9-34). That is, at its deepest root, there is only one god of which all others are emanations in Hinduism. Monaghan (1993) explains that Durga was the eldest female devi in the primordial war between gods and anti- gods. Her daughter Rangda is the one who sets loose the chaotic whirl of vices that tempt and torment the human spirit. She represents the unappeased, unfulfilled, and restless spirits who hover and  cause havoc for the living. Parker (2002) reiterates the story of Rangda:

The widow had a beautiful daughter who was of marriageable age, but because of the widow’s reputation for knowledge of sorcery, there were no suitors for her daughter’s hand. Furious, the widow took up her book, a palm leaf manuscript of magic invocations, which had been granted her as a boon by the Goddess of Destruction, Durgha, and went to a graveyard with  her  entourage of half a dozen young women. Dancing with her entourage of trainee witches, Rangda asked the Goddess Durgha for permission and power to ruin the country and its people. Durga agreed but requested moderation. Rangda and her entourage danced at the crossroads at midnight and shortly afterwards people everywhere fell victim to contagious illness. Many died. The king sent soldiers to kill her, but she spewed forth fire from her eyes, nostrils, ears, and mouth, killing the soldiers. The widow was incensed at the king’s actions, and, with her book and followers, she went to the graveyard again. Foreswearing moderation, she danced upon and

262	Philippine Quarterly of Culture & Society


desecrated the interred bodies, thus pleasing Durgha. Widespread destruction followed. The king then called upon the assistance of  his priest, Mpu Bharada, who devised a strategy. The only way that the priest could counter the disaster was to obtain and read the widow-witch’s palm leaf book. The priest’s pupil, Mpu Bahula, would ask for the widow’s hand in marriage. This was successful. After some time, this son-in-law managed to get his wife to give him Rangda’s book of magic invocations. He gave the book to his guru priest, Mpu Bharada, who then had the power to control life and death. He found the manuscript contained only the teachings of good conduct and religion, but that Rangda subverted these by 'going to the left, towards defilement’. He managed to resurrect the victims of the widow who had not yet decomposed, and he conquered the widow and then revived her, exorcizing and liberating her soul (89).

Following Douglas’s idea of pollution (Douglas 1966), Parker argues that women through their bodily functions have greater access to the means of sorcery. Women “as daughters, wives, mothers, and widows are more likely than men to be rendered ritually impure — hence to be vulnerable to bewitchment, and to wield ambiguous power” (Parker 2002: 90). Women have access to the placenta and after effects of childbirth, which are the tools of sorcerers. Parker implies that men, traditionally, served as midwives because  the  Balinese  believe  that men are more powerful than women in warding off sorcery  (Parker 2002: 89; Geertz 1994).
For purposes of comparison, another way of looking at the role men play in childbirth is to configure them into the more egalitarian structure of parenting in Bali. Both parents contribute to fulfilling the physical, emotional, and spiritual needs of the newborn, which is not considered an exclusively female task.  The parental  pair participate  in all of the rites of passage for their child. These rituals are geared towards giving offerings to the four spirit siblings who accompany the child at birth and “who will help to decide the fate of the child as it grows into adulthood” (Lansing 1995: 34-35). During the first three months of life, the child is most susceptible to witchcraft. If a witch can find a way to steal the placenta, she can use it to create  an invisible vampire spirit to attack her enemies. She makes the invisible vampire grow by feeding it with the malicious aspects of each of the

Aswang and  Other Witches: A Comparison	263


spirit siblings. However, the spirit siblings have a preponderance of positive qualities, which are nurtured and developed through the rituals surrounding childhood, and this cultural belief system is still alive today (Lansing 1995: 35).
In short, witches from a traditional South and Southeast Asian perspective may represent the many forces of vice in the world. In the case of Hindu Bali, rituals continue to be performed to  transform these potentially dangerous and chaotic forces into  virtuous  individual and social actions. The barong represents  the culmination of the four spirit children who accompany a  human  child  throughout his or her lifetime. It is to these inner spirit children, associated with the four cardinal directions in the physical realm of the world, to whom the Balinese make offerings over the course of the child’s development into adulthood. It is the contention of this paper that Filipina witches may represent the  spirits  unbound.  Witches  are simply the culmination of worldly vices, while children once honored and raised by parents, who respect their innate dignity, are  reflective of what it means to be a model human being.
Finally, this paper concludes  that  the  aswang myth  emerged out of the unique cultural context of the region in which it is situated. lt was tampered with, but not introduced by the  colonial  Spaniards nor Euro-American colonizers. Southeast Asian witchlore  runs  in deep waters sharing  some  of  the  ebb  and  flow  of  cultural  influences that also gave inspiration to the great epic narratives of ancient India.

Special Notice

Before using and/or reading any book published by BOOKYARDS.com, you must read and accept the following conditions:

By using and reading any book published by BOOKYARDS.com, it is presumed that you have accepted the following conditions:

BOOKYARDS goal is to promote and encourage a taste for reading in all people regardless of age.

In the pursuit of this goal, BOOKYARDS has created a bank of books from different sources that are intended for people of all ages, including the reproduction of printed editions.

Books found in BOOKYARDS E-bank are not submitted to any copyright and are therefore considered as being "Public Domain" in the U.S.A.

Any book can be copied, exchanged or otherwise distributed as long as such copy, exchange or distribution is not made in a lucrative purpose.

All formats of all books published on BOOKYARDS are the sole and exclusive property of BOOKYARDS.com, and cannot therefore be reproduced in any manner without the express authorization of BOOKYARDS.com

BOOKYARDS.com will not be held responsible for any damage whatsoever and of any nature that can be suffered, directly or indirectly, by
the use or download of the books published in BOOKYARDS.

You can notify BOOKYARDS on typing and / or other errors by writing to: service@bookyards.com

TRADITIONS OF THE TINGUIAN
A STUDY IN PHILIPPINE FOLK-LORE BY: FAY COOPER COLE
CATEGORY: CULTURAL AND SOCIAL STUDIES -- GENERAL




1915




Contents


Preface 3
Introduction 5
Tales of the Mythical Period 33 Ritualistic and Explanatory Tales 171 Fables 195
Abstracts 202



Preface

The following myths were collected by the writer in 1907-8 during a stay of sixteen months with the Tinguian, a pagan tribe of northwestern Luzon in the Philippines. The material, for the most part gathered
in texts, was partially translated in the Islands, while the balance was worked over during a brief visit to America in 1909. In this task
I was assisted by Dumagat, a full blood Tinguian, who accompanied me.

While not, in all cases, giving a literal rendering, I have endeavored to follow closely the language of the story-tellers rather than to
offer a polished translation. In some cases, where it was impossible to record the tales when heard, only the substance was noted, a fact which will account for the meagerness of detail evident in a few of the stories.

The Tinguian tribe numbers about twenty thousand individuals, most of whom are found in the sub-province of Abra, and in the mountains of Ilocos Sur and Norte. Their material culture, beliefs,
and ceremonials are quite uniform and exceedingly complex. It is my intention to publish a study of this people in the near future, but realizing that it will be quite impossible for readers unacquainted with Tinguian life to understand many references in the tales, I
have added such foot notes as will enable them to grasp the meaning of certain obscure passages.

In the introduction, an attempt has been made to bring together the culture of the people as it appears in the myths, and to contrast it with present day conditions and beliefs. In this way we may hope to gain a clearer insight into their mental life, and to secure a better idea of the values they attach to certain of their activities than
is afforded us by actual observation or by direct inquiry. It is also possible that the tales may give us a glimpse of the early conditions under which this people developed, of their life and culture before the advent of the European.

It should be noted at the outset that no attempt is here made to reconstruct an actual historical period. As will appear later, a part of the material is evidently very old; later introductions--to
which approximate dates may be assigned--have assumed places of great importance; while the stories doubtless owe much to the creative imaginations of successive story-tellers.

A comparison of these tales with the folk-lore of neighboring tribes would be of greatest value, but unfortunately very little material
for such a study is available. Under the circumstances it has seemed best to defer the attempt and to call attention in the footnotes to striking similarities with other fields.

In the main these tales are so closely associated with the religious beliefs of the present day that it is unlikely they will be found,
in anything approaching their present form, outside the districts dominated by this tribe. Nevertheless, isolated incidents corresponding to those of neighboring peoples or even of distant lands occur
several times.

Observation has led me to the belief that the religious organization and ceremonies of the Tinguian have reached a higher development than is found among the neighboring tribes, and that this complexity decreases as we penetrate toward the interior or to the south. If
this be true, it seems evident that the tales based on or associated with them must likewise grow weaker as we go from Abra.

I wish here to acknowledge my indebtedness to Dr. Franz Boas and

Dr. Berthold Laufer, whose interest and suggestions have been of greatest value in the preparation of the material for publication; also to express my gratitude to the late Robert F. Cummings, under
whose liberal endowment the field work was carried on. His constant interest made possible the gathering of the extensive Philippine collections now in the Museum, and it is a matter of deep regret
that he did not live to see all the results of his generosity made available to the reading public.


Fay-Cooper Cole,

Assistant Curator of Malayan Ethnology. Chicago, January, 1915.

Traditions of the Tinguian: A Study in Philippine Folk-Lore Introduction

For the purposes of our study, the tales have been roughly divided into three parts. The first, which deals with the mythical period, contains thirty-one tales of similar type in which the characters
are for the most part the same, although the last five tales do not properly fit into the cycle, and the concluding story of Indayo is evidently a recent account told in the form of the older relations.

In the second division are the ritualistic and explanatory myths, the object of which seems to be to account for the origin of or way of conducting various ceremonies; for the belief in certain spirits and sacred objects; for the existence of the sun, moon, and other natural phenomena; for the attainment of fire, food plants, birds
and domestic animals, as well as of magical jars and beads. Here it should be noted that some of the most common and important beliefs and ceremonies are, so far as is known, unaccompanied by any tales, yet are known to all the population, and are preserved almost without change from generation to generation.

Division three contains the ordinary stories with which parents amuse their children or with which men and women while away the midday hours as they lounge in the field houses, or when they stop on the trail to rest and smoke.

None of the folk-tales are considered as the property of the tellers,

but only those of the third division are well known to the people in general. Those of the first section are seldom heard except during the dry season when the people gather around bonfires in various parts of the village. To these go the men and women, the latter to spin cotton, the former to make fish nets or to repair their tools and weapons. In such a gathering there are generally one or more persons who entertain their fellows with these tales. Such a person is not paid for his
services, but the fact that he knows "the stories of the first times"
makes him a welcome addition to the company and gives him an enviable position in the estimation of his fellows.

The purely ritualistic tales, called _diams_, are learned word by word by the mediums, [1] as a part of their training for their
positions, and are only recited while an animal is being stroked with oil preparatory to its being sacrificed, or when some other gift is about to be presented to the superior beings. The writer has recorded
these _diams_ from various mediums in widely separated towns and has found them quite uniform in text and content. The explanatory tales
were likewise secured from the mediums, or from old men and women who "know the customs." The stories of the last division are the most
frequently heard and, as already indicated, are told by all. It is
evident even to the casual reader that these show much more evidence of outside influence than do the others; some, indeed, appear to have been recently borrowed from the neighboring christianized Ilocano. [2]


Tales of the Mythical Period

_Reconstruction of the Culture_.--In the first division certain actors occur with great frequency, while others always take the
leading parts. These latter appear under a variety of names, two or more titles often being used for the same individual in a single  tale. To avoid confusion a list of the fourteen principal actors
and their relationships are given in the accompanying table. It will appear that there are some conflicts in the use of names, but when it is realized that the first twenty-six myths which make up the cycle proper were secured from six story tellers coming from four different towns, the agreement rather than the disagreement is surprising. As a matter of fact there is quite as much variation between the accounts of the same narrator as between those gathered from different towns.

_Table of Leading Characters_ [3]

I.	Aponitolau. Son of Pagatipanan [male] [4] and Langa-an [female]
of Kadalayapan; is the husband of Aponibolinayen. Appears under the following names: (a) Ligi, (b) Albaga of Dalaga, (c) Dagdagalisit, (d) Ingiwan or Kagkagakag, (e) Ini-init, (f) Ling-giwan, (g) Kadayadawan,
(h) Wadagan, (i) Awig (?)

II.	Aponigawani. Sister of Aponitolau and wife of Aponibalagen.

III.	Aponibolinayen. Daughter of Pagbokasan [5] [male] and Ebang [female] of Kaodanan. Wife of Aponitolau.

Appears as (a) Ayo, (b) Dolimaman(?).

IV.	Aponibalagen. Brother of Aponibolinayen, and husband of Aponigawani; also appears as Awig.

V.	Kanag. Son of Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen. Appears as (a) Kanag kabagbagowan, (b) Balokanag, (c) Dumanau, (d) Ilwisan, (e) also at times is identified with Dumalawi, his brother.

VI.	Dapilisan, wife of Kanag.

VII.	Dagolayan. Son of Aponibalagen and Aponigawani. Also appears as Dondonyan of Bagonan--the blood clot child.

VIII.	Alokotan. An old woman who acts as a medium. Her home is at Nagbotobotan, where the rivers empty their waters into the hole at the edge of the world.

IX.	Gawigawen [male]. A giant who owns the orange trees of Adasin.

X.	Giambolan [male]. A ten-headed giant.

XI.	Gaygayoma. A star maiden who marries Aponitolau. The daughter of Bagbagak [male], a big star,--and Sinag [female], the moon--.

XII.	Tabyayen. Son of Aponitolau and Gaygayoma. Half brother of Kanag.

XIII.	Kabkabaga-an. A powerful female spirit who falls in love with Aponitolau.

XIV.	Asibowan. The maiden of Gegenawan, who is related to the spirit Kaboniyan. The mistress of Aponitolau.

In consequence of modern rationalism there is a tendency on the part of a considerable number of the Tinguian to consider these tales purely as stories and the characters as fictitious, but the mass of the people hold them to be true and speak of the actors as "the people who lived in the first times." For the present we shall take their point of view and shall try to reconstruct the life in
"the first times" as it appears in the tales.

The principal actors live in Kadalayapan and Kaodanan, [6] towns

which our chief story teller--when trying to explain the desire of
Kanag to go down and get fruit--assures us were somewhere in the air, above the earth (p. 141). [7] At other times these places are referred
to as Sudipan--the term by which spirits are supposed to call the present earth--while the actors are referred to as Ipogau--the spirit name for Tinguian. Whatever its location it was a place much like the present home of this people. The sky, the chief abode of spirits and celestial bodies, was above the land, and the heroes of the tales
are pictured as ascending to visit the upper realms. The trees, plants, and animals were for the most part those known to-day. The
ocean appears to have been well known, while mention is made of some places in Luzon, such as Dagopan and San Fernando in Pangasinan with which the people of to-day are not at all familiar (p. 89, 168).

We learn that each village is situated near to a river or waterway by the banks of which shallow wells are dug, and there we find the
women gathering under the shade of the trees, dipping up water to be carried to their homes, washing and combing their hair, and taking their baths (p. 48). They seldom go singly, for enemies are apt to
be near, and unless several are in the company it will be impossible to spread the alarm and secure help in case of attack (p. 43).

Leading up from the spring to the village are bamboo poles on which the heads of enemies are displayed (p. 43). In cases where the warriors have been especially successful these trophies may surround the whole settlement (p. 76). About the town is a defensive wall, generally of bamboo, but in some cases made up entirely of gigantic snakes (p. 43). Within this inclosure are many houses. The bamboo floors are raised high above the ground, while the thatching is of grass. Ladders lead up to little porches, from which doors open into the dwellings. At least part of the houses have a cooking room in addition to that used by the family, while structures containing a
ninth room are several times mentioned (pp. 43, 52, 85).

In one corner of the living room is a box containing blankets, above
which are pillows and mats used by members of the household and guests; an iron caldron lies on the floor, while numerous Chinese jars stand
about. A hearth, made up of a bed of ashes in which stones are sunk, is used for cooking. Above it is a bamboo food hanger, while near by stand jars of water and various cooking pots. Food baskets, coconut shell cups, and dishes, and a quantity of Chinese plates appear when the meal is served, while the use of glass is not unknown. Cups of gold, wonderful jars, and plates appear at times, but seem to be so rare as to excite comment (pp. 33, 98, 102, 105).

Scattered through the village are numerous small buildings known as _balaua_ (p. 43), which are erected for the spirits during the greatest of the ceremonies, and still inside the enclosure are the

rice drying plots and granaries, the latter raised high above the ground so as to protect their contents from moisture (p. 150).

About the town pigs and chickens roam at will, while half-starved hunting dogs prowl about below the kitchens and fight for morsels which drop from above (p. 99). Carabao are kept and used as food (p. 101), but in the cycle proper no mention is made of using them as work animals. [8] Game, especially deer and wild chickens, and fish are added to the domestic supply of food (p. 80), but the staple appears to be mountain rice. Beans, coconuts, oranges, sugar cane, betel-nuts, and tobacco are also cultivated (pp. 33, 107, 121, 138).

Clothing is scanty but nevertheless receives much attention. The poorest of the men wear clouts of banana leaf, and the women, when in danger of capture, don skirts of bark; but on most occasions we find
the man wearing a colored cotton clout, above which is a bright belt
of the same material, while for ceremonies he may add a short coat or jacket. A headband, sometimes of gold, keeps his long hair in place, and for very special events he may adorn each hair with a golden bead (pp. 74, 76, 81).

The cotton skirts of the women reach from the waist to the knees; the arms are covered with strands above strands of beads, while strings of agate beads surround the neck or help to hold the hair in place. To the real hair is often added a switch which appears to be valued highly (p. 89). Ornaments of gold adorn the ears, and finger
rings of the same metal are several times mentioned (pp. 39, 43, 124).

The tales afford us a glimpse of the daily life. In the early
morning the chilly mountain air drives the people from their mats to the yard, where they squat about the fires (p. 132). As it becomes light, part of the women begin pounding out the rice from its straw and husks (p. 144), while others depart for the springs to secure water (p. 101). In planting time husband and wife trudge together to the fields, where the man plants the seeds or cuttings, and his wife assists by pouring on water (p. 107). In midday, unless it is the busy season, the village activities are practically suspended, and we see the _balaua_ filled with men, asleep or lounging, while children may be playing about with tops or disk-like _lipi_ seeds (p. 139). As it becomes cooler, the town again takes on life; in the
houses the women weave blankets or prepare food, the older women feed the chickens and pigs (p. 93), while the workers from the fields,
or hunters with their dogs and game, add to the general din and excitement (p. 80). When night comes on, if it be in the dry season, bonfires spring up in different parts of the village, and about them
the girls and women gather to spin. Here also come the men and boys, to lounge and talk (p. 117). A considerable portion of the man's time
is taken up in preparation for or actual participation in warfare

(p. 74). We have already seen that the constant danger of enemies makes it advisable for the women to go in parties, even to the village spring. One tale informs us of a girl who is left alone to guard the rice field and is promptly killed by the _alzado;_ [9] another states that "all the tattooed Igorot are enemies" (pp. 43, 155, 161).

Revenge for the loss of relations or townspeople is a potent cause of hostile raids; old feuds may be revived by taunts; but the chief
incentive appears to be the desire for renown, to be known as "a man who goes to fight in the enemies' towns" (pp. 90, 59).

Warriors sometimes go in parties, sometimes alone, but generally in couples (p. 67). At times they lie in ambush and kill young girls
who go for water, or old men and women who pass their hiding place (p. 97). Again they go out boldly, armed with shield, spear, and headaxe; they strike their shields as they go and announce their presence to the enemy (p. 103). In five of the tales the heroes challenge their opponents and then refuse to be the first to use their weapons. It is only when their foes have tried in vain to injure them that they enter the conflict. In such cases whole towns are wiped out of existence and a great number of heads and a quantity of jars and other booty is sent back to the towns of the victors (p. 104). Peace
is restored in one instance by the payment of a number of valuable jars (p. 91).

Upon the return of a successful war party, the relatives meet them at the gate of the town and compel them to climb the _sangap;_
[10] then invitations are sent out to friends and relatives in neighboring towns to come and aid in the celebration of the victory (p. 140). When they arrive at the entrance of the village they are
met by the townspeople, who offer them liquor and then conduct them to the houses where they feast and dance to the music of _gansas_ (p. 126). [11] Finally the captured heads are stuck on the _sagang_
[12] and are placed by the gate, the spring, and, if sufficient in
number, surround the town (p. 140). Taking the heads of one's neighbors does not appear to be common, yet cases are mentioned where visitors are treacherously killed at a dance (pp. 78, 83).

The use of poison [13] is twice mentioned. In one case the victims are killed by drinking liquor furnished by the father of the girl about whose head they are dancing (pp. 148, 156).

Bamboo spears appear to be used, but we are explicitly told that they fought with steel weapons, and there are frequent references to headaxes, spears, and knives (pp. 65, 76, 120).

Marriage appears generally to be negotiated by the mother of the youth at his suggestion (p. 128). At times both his parents go to the girl's

home, and after many preliminaries broach the subject of their mission (p. 128). The girl's people discuss the proposition, and if they are favorable they set a day for the _pakalon_--a celebration at which the price to be paid for the bride is decided upon (p. 49). The parents
of the groom then return home after having left some small present, such as a jar or an agate bead, as a sign of engagement (p. 128) [14]. The _pakalon_ is held a few days later at the girl's home,
and for this event her people prepare a quantity of food (p. 72). On the agreed day the close friends and relatives of both families will
assemble. Those who accompany the groom carry jars and pigs, either in part payment for the bride, or to serve as food for the company
(pp. 72, 128). The first hours are spent in bargaining over the price the girl should bring, but when this is settled a feast is prepared, and then all indulge in dancing the _tadek_ (p. 59) [15]. When the payment is made a portion is distributed among the girl's relatives (pp. 72, 74), but her parents retain the greater part for themselves [16]. The groom cannot yet claim his bride, although in one case he is allowed to take her immediately after the _pakalon_ by making a special payment for the privilege (p. 74). A few nights later the groom goes to the girl's home carrying with him an empty jar with
which he makes the final payment (p. 73). The customary rice ceremony
[17] follows and he is then entitled to his bride (p. 73). Should the house or anything in it break at this time, it foretells misfortune
for the couple, hence precautions are taken lest such a sign should, by accident, be given (p. 60).

In all but two cases mentioned the girl and her husband go to live with his people. In the first instance their failure to do so raises a protest; in the second, the girl's parents are of much more importance than those of the groom, and this may explain their ability to retain their daughter (pp. 138, 159).

When the bride reaches her future home, she sits on the bamboo floor with her legs stretched out in front of her. The slats which she
covers are counted and a string of agate beads, equal in length to the combined width of the slats, is given to her. She now becomes a full member of the family and seems to be under the orders of her mother-in-law (p. 60).

The tales give constant sanction for the marriage of near relatives. Dumanau, we are told, marries his cousin [18], while we
frequently meet with such statements as, "We are relatives and it is good for us to be married", or "They saw that they were related and that both possessed magical power, so they were married (p. 35)". It appears that a man may live with his sweetheart and have children by her, yet leave her, and, without reproach, marry another better fitted to be his wife (p. 54). He may also accept payment for a wife who has deserted him, apparently without loss of prestige (p. 64). No

objection seems to be raised to a man having two wives so long as one of these is an inhabitant of the upper world (p. 111), but we find Kanag telling his former sweetheart that he cannot marry her
since he is now married to another (p. 138). Again, when two women lay claim to Aponitolau, as their husband, they undergo a test and the loser returns to her former home (p. 94). However, this rule does
not prevent a man from having several concubines (p. 120). Gawigawen, we are told, is accompanied to a _pakalon_ by eighteen young girls
who are his concubines (p. 59).

Divorce is twice mentioned, but it seems to call out protest only from the cast off wife (pp. 63, 149).

Closely associated with the celebration of a marriage seems to be a ceremony known as _Sayang_, during the progress of which a number of small structures--the largest known as _balaua_--are built. Judging
by their names and descriptions, we are justified in considering them "spirit houses" as they are to-day.

The details of the extended _Sayang_ ceremony are nowhere given, but so much is made plain:--At its beginning many people pound rice, for use in the offerings and for food, and _da-eng_ [19] is danced
(p. 40). After the _Libon_ [20] invitations are sent out, by means of betel-nuts covered with gold, to those whose presence is especially desired (p. 62). When the guests arrive at the village spring or
gate they are offered food or drink, and then while they dance they are sprinkled with water or rice, after which all go up to the town
(p. 41 note 2). A medium who knows the customs and desires of the spirits constructs a bamboo mat, which is known as _talapitap_, and on it offers food. To call their attention she frequently strikes
the ground with the _dakidak_--split sticks of bamboo and _lono_
[21]	(p. 40). The guests are not neglected, so far as regards food, for feasting and dancing occupy a considerable portion of their
time. The ceremonial dance _da-eng_ is mentioned, but the _tadek_
[22]	seems to be the one in special favor (pp. 41, 59).

One tale tells us that the _Sayang_ was held immediately following  a head hunt; and another, that Aponitolau went out to get the head of an old man before he started this ceremony (pp. 69, 76); however, the evidence is by no means conclusive that it is related to warfare.

On page 105 we are told that Kanag's half sister is a medium, and the description of her method of summoning the spirits tallies with that of to-day. At the _Sayang_ ceremony she is called to perform the _Dawak_ [23], with the assistance of the old woman Alokotan (p. 106). The _Dawak_ is also held in order to stop the flow of blood
from Aponitolau's finger (p. 113). The only other ceremony mentioned is that made in order to find a lost switch (p. 91).

Certain well-known customs are strongly brought out in our material. The first, and apparently most important, is the necessity of offering liquor and food, both to strangers and to guests
(p. 58). Refusal is so keenly resented that in one instance a couple decline to allow their daughter to marry a man whose emissaries reject this gift (p. 73). Old quarrels are closed by the tender of food or
drink, and friendships are cemented by the drinking of _basi_ [24] (p. 134). People meeting for the first time, and even friends who have been separated for a while, chew betel-nut together and tell their names and places of residence. We are repeatedly told that it is necessary to chew the nut and make known their names, for "we cannot tell our names unless we chew," and "it is bad for us if
we do not know each other's names when we talk." A certain etiquette is followed at this time: old men precede the younger; people of the home town, the visitors; and men always are before the women (pp. 45, 133). The conduct of Awig when he serves liquor to the _alzados_
[25] is that of to-day, i.e., the person who serves always drinks before passing it to others (p. 156).

Certain other rules of etiquette or restrictions on conduct come out in the tales. We learn that it is not considered proper for a man
to eat with the wife of another during his absence, nor should they start the meal before he comes in (p. 52). The master of a dance is deeply chagrined and chides his wife severely, because she insists on dancing before he has invited all the others to take their turns
(p. 70). Greediness is reproved in children and Aponitolau causes the death of his concubines whose false tales had led him to maltreat his wife (p. 116). Unfaithfulness seems to be sufficient justification
for a man to abandon his wife and kill her admirer (p. 78); but Kanag appears as a hero when he refuses to attack his father who has sought his life (p. 121).

Of the ceremonies connected with death we learn very little except that the women discard their arm beads, the mourners don old clothing, and all wail for the dead (pp. 44, 90). Three times we are told that the deceased is placed on a _tabalang_, or raft, on which a live rooster is fastened before it is set adrift on the river. In the tales the raft
and fowl are of gold, but this is surprising even to the old woman Alokotan, past whose home in Nagbotobotan all these rafts must go (p. 131).

Up to this time in our reconstruction of the life of "the first
times" we have mentioned nothing impossible or improbable to the present day Tinguian, although, as we shall see later, there are some striking differences in customs and ideas. We have purposely left the description of the people and their practice of magic to the last, although their magical practices invade every activity of their lives,

for it is here that the greatest variations from present conditions apparently occur.

These people had intimate relations with some of the lesser spirits, especially with the _liblibayan_ [26], who appear to be little more than their servants, with the evil spirits known as _banbanayo_,
and with the _alan_ (p. 123). The _alan_, just mentioned, are to-day considered as deformed spirits who live in the forests: "They are
as large as people but have wings and can fly; their toes are at the back of their feet and their fingers point backwards from their wrists." The several references to them in the tales such as "you
_alan_ girls whose toes on your feet turn out" indicate they were so considered in the first times (p. 161). Some of them are addressed as "you _alan_ of the springs," and in one instance a man dives down into the water where the _alan_ live (p. 148), but in general their homes seem to be similar to but much finer than those of the people
of Kadalayapan and Kaodanan. These spirits appear time after time as the foster mothers of the leading characters: Generally they secure
a drop of menstrual blood, a miscarriage, or the afterbirth, and all unknown to the real parents, change them into children and raise them (p. 83). These foster children are pictured as living in houses of
gold situated near springs, the pebbles of which are of gold or beads;
[27] the places where the women set the pots while dipping water are big plates or dishes, while similar dishes form the stepping stones leading up to the house. Articles of gold are found in the dwellings and valuable jars are numerous. When the true relationships of these children are established they always go to their blood parents, carrying with them these riches, which are a source of wonder and comment (pp. 43, 64).

The people of Kadalayapan and Kaodanan have many dealings with the celestial bodies. The big star Bagbagak appears as the husband of Sinag--the moon--and father of the star maiden Gaygayoma, who,
Aponitolau assures his wife, is a spirit. When this girl comes down to steal sugar-cane she takes off her star dress and appears as a
beautiful maiden; [28] she becomes enamored with Aponitolau and takes him to the sky, where he lives with her. They have a child, who later marries in Kadalayapan and thereafter stays below. Upon the occasion when Aponitolau visits his first wife and fails to return to the sky
at the appointed time, a great company of stars are sent to fetch him, with orders to devour him if he refuses to obey (p. 109, ff.).

In the first tale Aponitolau himself appears as "the sun," "the
man who makes the sun," as "a round stone which rolls," but when it is established that he is the son of a couple in Kadalayapan he apparently relinquishes his duties in the sky and goes to live in
the village of his people. With him goes his wife Aponibolinayen, who had been carried above by a vine. While at his post in the heavens,

Aponitolau is closely associated with the big star, whose duty it is to follow him in the sky. Again we are told that Aponitolau is taken
up by the spirit Kabkabaga-an, whom he marries and by whom he has a son (p. 114). In some instances this hero and his son Kanag converse with thunder and lightning, which appear at times not unlike human beings
(p. 100); but in the eighth relation the two kinds of lightning are pictured as dogs who guard the town of Dona.

These people enjoy unusual relations with inanimate things, and we find them conversing with spears and with jars. [29] In one case the latter appear to be pastured like animals, and surround Aponitolau when he goes to feed them with _lawed_ [30] leaves and salt (p. 51). Weapons weep blood and oil when taken down for the purpose of injuring certain persons (p. 43). A nose flute, when played by a youth, tells him of
his mother's plight (p. 152), while a bamboo Jew's harp summons the brothers of its owner (p. 162). Animals and birds are frequently in communication with them: The hawk flies away and spreads the news of the fight at Adasin [31] (p. 90); at the bidding of Dalonagan a spider spins a web about the town (p. 124); and Aponitolau is enabled to
fulfill the labors assigned him by the ten-headed giant only through the aid of spiders, ants, and flies (p. 101). [32] During certain dances the water from the river flows over the town and fish come up and bite the feet of the dancers (p. 59). Crocodiles are left to guard the sister of Aponibalagen, and when they fail to explain their
negligence they are whipped and sent away by their master (p. 87). A great bird is pleased with Aponitolau and carries him away [33] to its home, where it forces him to marry a woman it had previously captured (p. 92). In one instance an animal gives birth to a human child; a frog laps up the spittle of Aponitolau, and as a result becomes pregnant
[34] and gives birth to a maiden who is taken away by the spirits (p. 105). Another account states that the three sons of Aponitolau
and Aponibolinayen are born as pigs, but later assume human form
(p. 116). Kanag becomes a snake when he tries to secure the perfume of Baliwan, but is restored to human form when he bathes in a magic well (p. 137). These and other mysterious happenings, many of which are not explained as being due to their own volition, befall them;
thus Ingiwan, while walking, is confronted by an impassable hill and is compelled to cross the ocean, where he finds his future wife, but upon his return the hill has vanished (p. 86). In other instances the finger rings of people meeting for the first time exchange themselves (p. 92). The headband of Ligi flies away without his knowledge and alights on the skirt of a girl who is bathing in the river. As a
result she becomes pregnant, and when the facts become known Ligi is recognized as the child's father (p. 144). It seems probable that
the superior powers are responsible for these occurrences, for in
at least one instance the great spirit Kaboniyan steals a maiden and turns her into a flock of birds, who talk with and assist the owner
of a rice field (p. 151).

While they thus appear to be to a certain extent under the control of the spirits and to be surrounded by animals and inanimate things
with human intelligence and speech, the people of these "first times" possess great power over nature: Time and space are annihilated, for at their will daylight comes at once (p. 150), or they are transported
to a place in an instant (p. 92). At their command people appear:
Kanag creates betel-nut trees, then cuts the fruit into bits, which he
sows on the ground. From these come many people who are his neighbors, and one of whom he marries (p. 121). The course of nature is changed:
A field is planted in an instant; the crops mature in a few days, and the grain and fruits take themselves to the store-house (p. 150). A strike-a-light turns into a hill which impedes pursuers [35] (p. 75), while a belt or headaxe serves as a ferry across a body of water (p. 84). A storm is called upon to carry a person or a building to
a distance (p. 121), and a spring is created by killing an old man (p. 60). [36] Prepared food appears at a word; a stick when cooked becomes a fish, and though it is repeatedly broken and served it always appears ready for service at meal time (p. 33); a small jar containing a single grain of rice supplies an abundance of food; another jar no larger than a fist furnishes drink for a company and still remains a third full; while a single earring fills a pot with
gold [37] (pp. 47, 119, 123).

Quite as easy as the creation of beings is the causing of sleep or death. All the people of a village are put to sleep at the will of a single person (p. 145) and Albaga--while still at a distance--causes the death of Aponibolinayen (p. 44). At a word of command the
spears and headaxes of the people of Kadalayapan and Kaodanan go out and kill great numbers of the enemy, and the heads and booty take themselves in orderly fashion to towns of their new owners (pp. 66,
75). Many methods of restoring the dead to life are employed; spittle is applied to the wounds, or the victim is placed in a magic well,
but the common method is for the hero "to whip his perfume," [38] whereupon the dead follow his commands (pp. 152, 157).

The birth of a child, to a woman of these times, is generally preceded by an intense itching between the third and last fingers, and when this spot is pricked the child pops out "like popped rice." [39] Its growth
is always magical, for at each bath its stature increases by a span (p. 102). Within a few days the baby is a large child and then begins deeds of valor worthy of the most renowned warriors (pp. 95, 96).

The power of assuming animal forms appears to be a common possession, and we find the different characters changing themselves into
fire-flies, ants, centipedes, omen birds, and in one case into oil [40] (pp. 85, 99).

One of the most peculiar yet constantly used powers of these people is their ability to send betel-nuts on various missions. Whenever
an invitation to a ceremony or celebration is to be extended, nuts covered with gold are oiled and sent out. They go to the intended guest, state their errand, and, if refused, forthwith proceed to grow on his knee, forehead, or pet pig, until pain or pity compels him to accept (p. 146). In some cases it appears that the nuts themselves possess the magic properties, for we find Aponitolau demanding that
his conquered foes give him their betel-nuts with magic power (p. 91).

Relationships can be readily ascertained by the chewing of these nuts, for when the quids are laid down they are transformed into agate and golden beads and lie in such a manner that the associations are fully established (pp. 35, 36, 41).

Enough has been mentioned to show how important a part magic and magical practices play in the life of this people, but one further reference should be made, since it is found in nearly every tale. When the marriage price is settled upon, the mother of the groom exercises her power and at once fills the spirit house with valuable jars and the like; this is repeated until enough are gathered to meet the demands of the girl's people (p. 133). Even when the agreed sum has been delivered we often find the girl's mother herself practicing magic,
to secure additional payment, and by raising her elbows or eyebrows causing a part of the jars to vanish (pp. 133, 143).

Despite their great gifts we find that these people are not
all-powerful and that they deem it wise to consult the omens before starting on a task or a journey. The gall sack and liver of a pig are eagerly examined, [41] while the calls of birds, actions of animals, or signs received from the thunder and lightning regulate their
conduct. In cases where these warnings are disregarded misfortune or death always overtakes the individual (pp. 48, 49, 100 ff).

Death comes to them, but apparently is only a temporary state. The deceased are often revived by some magical process (p. 152), but if not the corpse is placed on a raft and is set adrift on the river. [42]
The streams and rivers, we are told, all flow past Nagbotobotan before they empty into the hole where all streams go. In this place lives the old woman Alokotan, who is related to the people of Kadalayapan and Kaodanan. Her duty it is to watch for dead relatives, to secure them, and make them alive again (p. 132). She is the owner of a magic pool, the waters of which revive the dead and renew youth.

_Comparison of the Reconstructed Culture with Present Day Conditions_.--Before passing to a consideration of the tales in the last two divisions of our material, it may be well to compare the life and beliefs of these "people of the first times" with those of the

living Tinguian. Kadalayapan and Kaodanan appear, in a vague way, to have been located in Abra, for we learn that the Ilocano, Don Carlos, went up the river from Baygan (Vigan) [43] to Kadalayapan; that the _alzados_ [44] lived near by; while the tattooed Igorot occupied the land to the south (pp. 77, 155). The villages were surrounded by defensive walls such as were to be found about all Tinguian villages until recent times, and which are still to be seen
about Abang and other settlements. Within the walls were many houses, the descriptions of most of which would fit the dwellings of to
day. The one thing which seems foreign to present conditions is the so-called "ninth room" which receives rather frequent mention. There is nothing in the tales referring to buildings or house construction which lends support to the contention of those who seek to class the Tinguian as a modified sub-group of Igorot. [45] The Bontoc type of dwelling with its ground floor sleeping box and its elevated one room kitchen and storage room is nowhere mentioned, neither is there any indication that in past or present times the Tinguian had separate sleeping houses for the unmarried men and boys, and for the girls, as do their neighbors to the south.

The other structures, such as the spirit houses, rice drying frames, and granaries were similar to those seen to-day in all the villages. Likewise the house furnishings, the musical instruments,
and even the games of the children were such as are to be found at present, while our picture of the village life given on page 9 still
fits nearly any Tinguian settlement in Abra. The animals mentioned are all familiar to the present people, but it is worthy of note
that in the first twenty-six tales, which make up the cycle proper,
the horse is not mentioned, nor does the carabao appear to be used as a work animal. Still more important is the fact that the terraced fields and the rice culture accompanying them, which to-day occupy a predominant place in the economic life of the people, are nowhere mentioned. On the other hand, the _langpadan_, or mountain rice, assumes a place of great importance. References to the cultivation of the land all seem to indicate that the "hoe culture," which is
still practiced to a limited extent, took the place of agriculture.

The clothing, hair dressing, and ornaments, worn by these people, agree closely with those of to-day. Beads seems to have been of prime importance, but could scarcely have been more prized or more used than at present. Unless she be in mourning, the hair and neck
of each woman are now ornamented with strings of beads, many of them of evident antiquity, while strands above strands cover the arms from
the wrist to the elbow or even reach to the shoulder. [46]

The wealth of a person seems to have been, to a large extent, determined by the number of old jars in his possession. As at the present time, they formed the basis of settlement for feuds, as payment

for a bride, and even figured in the marriage ceremony itself. The jars, as judged from their names, were evidently of ancient Chinese
manufacture, and possessed power of speech and motion similar to that of human beings; but in a lesser measure the same type of jars have similar powers to-day. [47]

The use of gold and jewels seems to have been common in the old times; the latter are seldom seen in the district to-day, but the use of bits
of gold in the various ceremonies is still common, while earrings of
gold or copper are among the most prized possessions of the women. [48]
Placer mining is well known to the Igorot of the south, who melt and cast the metal into various ornaments. So far as I am aware, this is not practiced by the present Tinguian, but may point back to a time when the industry was known in this region, or when trade relations with the south were much freer than in recent years.

The weapons of the warriors, which we are specifically told were of metal, are identical with those seen at the present time, while the methods of warfare agree with the accounts still told by the old men of their youthful exploits.

A survey of the tales brings out boldly the fact that a headhunt was one of the most important events in Tinguian life. To-day stress of circumstances has caused the custom to suffer a rapid decline, but
even now heads are occasionally taken, while most of the old men have vivid recollections of the days when they fought "in the towns of their enemies." A spirited account of a head celebration seen in the village
of Lagangilang--from which ten of these tales were collected--will be found in the writings of La Gironiere, already referred to. [49]
It is important to note that this account, as well as those secured from many warriors of the present generation, offers some striking
differences to the procedure in the olden days, particularly as regards the disposal of the skulls. The tales tell of the heads being placed
on the _sagang_ [50] at the spring, at the gate, or about the town, after the celebration. Certain of the present villages make use of
the _sagang_, but the more common type of head holder is the _saloko_,
[51] which still figures in many ceremonies. However, the heads only remain in these receptacles until the day set for the festival. They are then carried to the centre of the village and there, amid
great rejoicing, are cut open; the brains are removed and to them are added the lobes of the ears and joints of the little fingers,
and the whole is then placed in the liquor, which is served to the dancers. Before the guests depart the skulls are broken into small pieces and a fragment is presented to each male guest, who carries it home and is thus often reminded of the valor of the takers. [52]
A study of Tinguian beliefs furnishes an additional religious motive for the taking of heads, but with the people of Kadalayapan and
Kaodanan revenge and the desire for renown were the prime incentives.

Every tale emphasizes the importance of the _Sayang_ ceremony and the spirit structure known as _balaua_. [53] The ceremony is nowhere described in full, but the many details which are supplied show that
it was almost identical with that of to-day. The same is true of the
_Dawak_, [54] which we find mentioned on three different occasions, and of the ceremony made to aid in locating lost or stolen articles. The
most noticeable fact, to the person familiar with Tinguian life,
is that these are the only ceremonies mentioned among the many known and practiced at present. More than a score of different rites are
now well known to this people, and occupy a very considerable portion of their time and attention during the first four months of the year.

The failure to make mention of these very important events is explained, it seems to me, not by their absence, but by the fact that these rites vary in importance and that the privilege of celebrating them is hereditary in a family. Should one not entitled to hold
such a ceremony desire to do so, he must first give, in order, all the lesser events, a costly procedure extending over a period of
several years. The people of Kadalayapan and Kaodanan always appear as being closely related to the spirit Kaboniyan, [55] and exceedingly powerful. It seems probable that the story teller takes it for granted
that all of them are entitled to hold the most important ceremony known to the Tinguian.

A prominent figure in these rites is the medium, through whom the ancient people generally conversed with the spirits, but in exceptional cases we found the heroes talking direct with the superior beings; however, this gift is not confined to the men of old, for in such
tales as 55 and 59 people who are believed to have lived recently have conversed with the spirits and have even been joined to them in marriage.

The procedure in choosing a bride, the engagement, the _pakalon_,
[56] and the marriage proper are all those of the present day, but the rules governing the marriage of relatives differ radically. As already noted, one of the chief qualifications for marriage, among the people  of the tales, was relationship, and even cousins became husband and wife. Such a thing is unthinkable among the Tinguian of to-day; first cousins are absolutely barred from marrying, while even the union of second cousins would cause a scandal, and it is very doubtful if such a
wife would be allowed to share in her deceased husband's property. [57]

It appears that only one real [58] wife is recognized as legitimate, but that from "the first times" to the present a man might have as many concubines as he could secure.

So far as mythology and present day conditions can inform us the bride

has always gone to the home of her husband and, for a time at least, has been subject to the dictations of her mother-in-law, although the couple are generally soon established in a home of their own, in the town of the groom. There is nothing in Tinguian life or tradition to indicate that they have ever had a clan system or a matriarchal form of government.

The few references to the procedure immediately after a death indicate that, in part, the people of to-day follow the old custom; but here
again an important departure occurs. We are thrice told that the corpse was placed on a little raft called _tabalang_ and set adrift on the river; and in one case the afterbirth was treated in the same manner. Nothing of the sort is done to-day, nor does it seem at all likely that such has been the case in recent generations. The body is now buried beneath the house, and certain set rules govern the movements of all persons related to the deceased, as well as the
disposal of the corpse. This procedure is so complex and so uniform throughout the whole Tinguian belt that it seems improbable that it has grown up, except through a long period of time. At this point
it is interesting to note that at many ceremonies it is necessary to construct a small raft called _tal-talababong,_ or _talabong_, to place offerings in it, and set it adrift on the stream, in order
that any spirits who have been prevented from attending the ceremony may still secure their share. [59]

The festivals, the dances, the observances of the proprieties required by good breeding or custom of to-day, follow closely those given in the tales. The greatest divergence is in the offering of betel-nuts
and the telling of names, which occupies such an important place in the narratives. The use of betel-nut for chewing is less common among the Tinguian people than with most other Philippine tribes, a fact
which may be accounted for by their constant use of tobacco. However, betel-nuts still occupy a most important place in the various ceremonies, and many offerings intended for the spirits must be accompanied with the prepared nut. In nearly every instance when invitations were sent out, for a ceremony, the people of the tales intrusted an oiled betel-nut covered with gold with this duty. This
has its counterpart to-day in the small gifts of gold which are often carried to some friend, in another town, whose presence is
particularly desired. It seems not improbable that the golden colored husks of the ripe betel-nuts may have suggested the substitution.

Magic was practiced extensively in "the first time," but it is by
no means unknown to the people of the present day. They cannot now bring a dead person to life, or create human beings out of bits of
betel-nut; but they can and do cause sickness and death to their foes by performing certain rites or directing actions against garments or other objects recently in their possession. Even the name of an enemy

can be applied to an animal or inanimate object and action against it be transferred to the owner.

Like the Tinguian, the people of Kadalayapan and Kaodanan are warned or encouraged by omens received through the medium of birds, thunder, lightning, or the condition of the gall and liver of a slaughtered pig;
[60] and like them they suffer for failure to heed these warnings, or for the infraction of a taboo.

The myths of the first division make it plain that, to the people of those times, the sun, moon, and stars were animate--either spirits or
human beings. In some cases a similar conception was held for thunder and lightning, while in others they appear as animals. It will appear
that such ideas are not foreign to the second division of the tales, which represent present day beliefs. Thus, in the mountain village of Baay the sky is considered as a male spirit--the husband of the
earth, and father of sun and moon. Again, in Lagangilang and Abang, the thunderbolt is identified as Kadaklan--the most powerful of all spirits--who "often eats the ground and releases his wife Agemem."

This brings us to a most interesting question, namely: Are the chief actors in our tales to be considered as celestial beings and spirits,
or as human heroes? We have already made note of the fact that in the first tale Aponitolau is identified with Ini-init whom, we are told,
was "the sun," "the man who makes the sun," "a round stone which rolls." In this tale he marries Aponibolinayen, a maiden whose name may possibly be construed to mean "the woman in the moon." [61] However, we find Aponitolau abandoning his place in the sky and going to reside in Kadalayapan. This tale comes from the town of Langangilang where, as we have already seen, the celestial beings are regarded as spirits. Tale fifteen, coming from the same town, shows us this same Aponitolau going up to the sky, where he marries the spirit Kabkabaga-an, but as before he returns to his home below. A further indication of his celestial character is perhaps afforded us
in tale fourteen, which was recorded in Patok, a valley town in which the sun, moon, and stars are now regarded as "lights" belonging to the spirit Kadaklan. Here we find that Aponitolau marries the star maid Gaygayoma, who is the daughter of the big star Bagbagak, and Sinag--the moon. In this same tale Aponibolinayen appears as the first wife of Aponitolau, and it is clear that in the mind of the
story teller she is not identified with Sinag. Aponitolau appears in the other tales without any hint of celestial qualities. Aside from her name and the fact that she is once pictured as visiting the sky, there is nothing to indicate that his wife Aponibolinayen is to be
considered as the moon. A careful study of the other characters who reside in Kadalayapan and Kaodanan fails to yield any evidence that they are considered as celestial beings.

During the _Sayang_ ceremony held in San Juan, a certain man and woman, who are then called Iwaginan and Gimbagon [62], represent the good spirits and are defended by the people when evil spirits try to dispossess them of their property. This is the only instance I have observed in which the names of any of these characters of the tales appear in the ceremonies, while a list of more than one hundred and fifty spirits known to the Tinguian fails to reveal more.

While in the practice of magic, and in their communication with nature, celestial bodies, and spirits, these "people of the first times"
far excelled the present Tinguian, they had a material culture and ceremonial life much like that still found in Abra.

It seems then that these people, about whom the stories cluster, are not to be identified as celestial beings or spirits [63]. They appear rather as generalized heroes whose life and deeds represent that of an earlier period, magnified and extolled by succeeding generations.


Ritualistic and Explanatory Myths

The second division of the tales now assumes a position of importance to us, for in it we find present day ideas and beliefs of the people strongly brought out, and are thus in a position to contrast them
with the tenets of the people in "the first times".

The influence of custom is exceedingly strong among the Tinguian of to-day. The fact that the ancestors did so and so is sufficient justification for performing any act for which they have no
definite explanation. Nowhere is this influence greater than in the ceremonies. These, which accompany all the important happenings in their daily life, are conducted by mediums who are fitted for office
by long training, and each one of whom is a check on the others if they wilfully or through carelessness deviate from the old forms. The ritual of these ceremonies is very complex and the reason for doing many acts now seems to be entirely lost, yet the one explanation
_"kadauyan"_--custom--is sufficient to satisfy any Tinguian. Other acts, as well as the possession of certain things, are explained
by myths, such as we are considering. It seems certain that we are here dealing not with present day beliefs alone, but with at least relatively old customs and tales, which while enabling us to understand present day conceptions also give us a glimpse into the past.

The myths 32-40, which are known to the people as _diams_, are now inseparable parts of the various ceremonies. Thus, when a pig is to be offered in the _Sayang_ ceremony, the medium sits down beside it and strokes it with oiled fingers while she "talks to the spirits". The translation of her "talk" shows that this is in no sense a prayer

but is rather an account of how the greatest of the spirits taught the Tinguian people to perform this ceremony correctly. Likewise,
when she offers food in the _Dawak_ [64] ceremony, she relates how the spirit Kaboniyan taught the Tinguian to do this in the same manner that he performs it. In the _Pala-an [65] diam_ she relates,
in story form, the cause of the sickness, but in this case ends with
a direct invocation to the spirits in Dadaya to "make them well again if you please". The balance of the _diams_, 35-40, are in story form,
and seem intended more as an explanation to the people as to the causes of their troubles than to be directed toward the spirits. However, the medium seldom has an audience, and rarely ever a single listener, as
she recites the _diams_ she has learned verbatim from her instructors when preparing for the duties of her office.

Myths 41-54 are of quite a different type. They are generally told
by the mediums or wise old people, during the ceremonies, but always to a crowd of eager listeners. They are not learned word for word,
as are the _diams_, but their content is constant and they are thoroughly believed.

That they exert a great influence on the beliefs and conduct of
both old and young is undoubted. The evil which befalls a person who molests the guardian stones is thus made known even to the children who generally keep at a distance from the grove in which they stand. Again, these tales give sharp warning as to what befalls a person who even ignorantly breaks the taboos following a death; but at the same time advance means of thwarting the wrath of the enraged or evil spirits.

Myths 55 to 62 at first glance to not appear to be explanatory at all, but seem rather to be a series of stories dealing with the
relations between certain persons and the natural spirits or those of the dead. However, it is the intent and use rather than the form of these stories which has caused them to be included in this division, for they give the people authority for certain beliefs and conceptions which they hold. Tale 56 gives us a glimpse of the prevalent idea
of the abode of the dead, where the spirits lead much the same sort of life as they did while alive, but we secure quite a different
picture of this realm from the Baluga [66] tale, in which the home of the deceased is said to be in the ground while the "life" of the
dead woman is kept in a bamboo cup. This last account was heard in Manabo, a town near to the Igorot settlements of the Upit river,
and may be influenced by the beliefs held in that section. [67]

Certain individuals appear to have intimate dealings with the natural spirits, in some instances even being joined to them in marriage. The afterbirth child, Sayen, is believed to have lived "not very long
ago", yet we find his life and actions quite similar to those of
the heroes in "the first times", while his foster mother--the _alan_

[68]--takes the same part as did the _alan_ of old.

Relations 63 to 74 appear as pure explanatory tales, accounting
for the existence and appearance of celestial bodies and animals in their present state; they also account for the possession of fire and of many prized objects, such as jars and agate beads. Incidentally many essential traits and old customs come out, such, for instance, as those of war and mourning, which appear in connection with the origin of the _kalau_ [69].

With few exceptions the myths of this division correspond to present beliefs; the spirits are those known to-day; the towns mentioned are now existing or their former locations are well known. They have thus the appearance of being of more recent origin than those of the first division, yet it is worthy of note that there is little in them which seems foreign to or out of keeping with the older tales.


Fables

The last division may be said to be made up of fables, for the story tellers without hesitation label them as fictions. The last of these appears to be only a worked over incident of myth 56, in which the big bird Banog carries the hero to its nest, from which he escapes by holding to the wings of the young birds. It is possible that more of these fables are likewise incidents in tales prevalent among the Tinguian, but not heard by the writer. Whether or no this be true, it is certain that most of these stories are well known to the Ilocano of the coast and the other Christianized natives throughout the
archipelago. Comparison with the folk-lore from other regions shows that these stories are by no means confined to the Philippines. The chief incidents in the narrative of the turtle and the monkey have been
recorded from the Kenyah of Borneo [70] and from the northern peninsula of Celebes [71]; the race between the shell and the carabao is told in British North Borneo [72] in regard to the plandok and crab, while it
is known to European children as the race between the turtle and the hare. The threat of the mosquito in 84 is almost identical with that recorded by Evans in Borneo [73]; while many incidents in the fable of Dogidog [74] are found in the Iban story of Simpang Impang [75].

When comparing the Tinguian versions of these fables with those of the Ilocano, one is impressed with the fact that while the incidents upon which they are founded are often identical, the stories themselves
have frequently been moulded and changed by the tellers, who have introduced bits of old customs and beliefs until they reflect, in a
way, the prevalent ideas of the people. Thus in the story of the magic
_poncho_ [76], which is evidently of Spanish introduction, the owner is identified as the _banbantay_--a well-known minor spirit. Again,

the first part of tale 85 is identical with that of the Ilocano,
but ends with the parents of the groom preparing the things used in
the _pakalon_--a very necessary part of the Tinguian marriage ceremony.

The footnotes have called attention to the many incidents which have their parallels in other districts. Reference to these shows that
a large percentage are found in the islands toward the south. While recognizing that similarity of incidents does not necessarily mean identity of origin, we must still give full credit to the effects
of borrowing, even over great distances. The easy communication along the coast during the past four hundred years and the contact with Spanish and Christianized officials and traders will readily explain the likeness of the tales in Division III to those held in distant islands, or even in Europe, but, as just noted, these are
now undergoing change. Doubtless a similar inflow had been taking place, although at a slower rate, long before the Spaniards reached the Islands, and Tinguian mythology has grown up as the result of blending of native tales with those of other areas, the whole being worked over and reshaped until it fitted the social setting.

Previous writers--among them Ratzel and Graebner [77]--have sought to account for certain resemblances in culture, between Malaysia, Polynesia, and America, by historical connection. A part of our material--such as that of the blood-clot child (p. 125), [78] the
rape of the maiden by the vine which carries her to the sky (p. 33), the magic flight (p. 75), and magic growth (p. 38) [79]--may seem to lend support to such a theory. These similarities are assuredly suggestive and interesting, but it appears to the writer that the material is too scanty and the folklore of intervening lands too
little known to justify us in considering them as convincing proof of borrowing over such immense distances. [80]


General Results

Our study has brought out certain general results. We have seen that Tinguian folklore has much in common with that of other tribes and lands. While a part of this similarity is doubtless due to borrowing--a process which can still be seen at work--a considerable portion of the tales is probably of local and fairly recent origin,
while the balance appears to be very old. These older tales are so intimately interwoven with the ceremonies, beliefs, and culture of this people that they may safely be considered as having been developed by them. They are doubtless much influenced by present day conditions, for each story teller must, even unconsciously, read into them some
of his own experiences and the current beliefs of the tribe. At the same time these traditional accounts doubtless exercise a potent influence on the thoughts, beliefs, and actions of the people. In

Tinguian society, where custom still holds undisputed sway, these well-known tales of past times must tend to cast into the same mould any new facts or experiences which come to them.

We believe that we are justified when we take the viewpoint of the Tinguian and consider "the stories of the first times" as essentially very old. How old it is impossible to state definitely, but a careful analysis of our material justifies us in believing that
they reflect a time before the people possessed terraced rice fields, when domestic work animals were still unknown, and the horse had not yet been introduced into their land. That these are not recent events
is attested by the great part they all now play in the ceremonial and economic life. It is evident that outside influences of great
importance were introduced at a period later than the time when the Chinese first began to trade along the coasts of the Philippines for the prized jars, which play such an important role in the mythology, are not to be identified as those of native make but are ancient Chinese vessels dating back at least to the fourteenth and perhaps even to the tenth century [81].

It is probable that the glass, porcelain, and agate beads, which
are second only to the jars in importance, are exceedingly old. Many ancient specimens are still in use and are held for as fabulous prices as are those found among the interior tribes of Borneo. Nieuwenhuis has shown that the manufacture of beads had become a great industry
in the middle ages, and had extended even to China and Japan, whence the products may have spread contemporaneously with the pottery [82].

We have seen that, for the most part, the life, customs, and beliefs which appear in our reconstruction of "the first times" agrees closely with present conditions; certain things which seem formerly
to have been of prime importance--such as the sending of a betel-nut covered with gold to invite guests to a festival or ceremony--appear to have their echo in present conditions. The betel-nut which played such a momentous part in the old times still holds its place in the rituals of the many ceremonies, although it is not now much used in daily life. The magic of to-day is less powerful than formerly, but is
still a tremendous force. The communication of the ancient people with other members of the animate world, as well as with the inanimate and spiritual, and their metamorphosis into animals and the like, offers nothing strange or inconsistent to the people of to-day. They even now talk to jars, they converse with spirits who come to them through the
bodies of their mediums, and people only recently deceased are known to have had the power of changing themselves, at will, into other forms.

In short, there is no sharp break between the mode of thought of to-day and that exhibited in the folklore. It is true that the tales give
sanction to some things not in agreement with Tinguian usage--such,

for instance, as the marriage of relatives, or the method of disposing
of the dead--and it may be that we have here a remembrance of customs which long ago fell into disuse.

In a previous paper [83] the writer showed that there have been many migrations into Abra from the north, south, and west. A part of the emigrants have become thoroughly amalgamated with the Tinguian people and have doubtless introduced some part of their material culture
and beliefs. This helps us to understand such conflicts as we have already noted in regard to the place held by thunder and lightning in the spirit world, as to the future abode of the spirits of the departed, as well as other discrepancies which the limits of this paper have prevented us from discussing.

It is not impossible that those customs of "the first times," which
are at variance with those of to-day, may represent older ideas which have been swamped, or, on the other hand, the memory of the strange customs once practiced by the emigrants may have caused them to be attributed to the people of the tales.

Finally, we believe that a study of Tinguian mythology has shown us that we can gain a real knowledge of the past of a people through their folklore; that we can secure an insight into their mental life; and can learn something of the valuation they attach to certain of their activities and beliefs, which to us may seem at the surface
trite and trivial.


Tales of the Mythical Period


1

"We go to take greens, sister-in-law Dinay, perhaps the _siksiklat_
[84] will taste good. I have heard that the _siksiklat_ is good," said Aponibolinayen. They went to get her _siksiklat_. When they arrived at the place of small trees, which they thought was the place of the _siksiklat_, they looked. Aponibolinayen was the first
who looked. As soon as she began to break off the _siksiklat_ which she saw she did not break any more, but the _siksiklat_ encircled and carried her up. When they reached the sky (literally "the up"), the _siksiklat_ placed her below the _alosip_ [85] tree. She sat for
a long time. Soon she heard the crowing of the rooster. She stood up and went to see the rooster which crowed. She saw a spring. She saw it was pretty because its sands were _oday_ [86] and its gravel _pagapat_
[87] and the top of the betel-nut tree was gold, and the place where

the people step was a large Chinese plate which was gold. She was surprised, for she saw that the house was small. She was afraid and soon began to climb the betel-nut tree, and she hid herself.

The man who owned the house, which she saw near the well, [88] was Ini-init--the sun. But he was not in the place of his house,
because he went out and went above to make the sun, because that was his work in the daytime. And the next day Aponibolinayen saw him,
who went out of his house, because he went again to make the sun. And Aponibolinayen went after him to his house, because she saw the man, who owned the house, who left. When she arrived in the house, she quickly cooked, because she was very hungry.

When she finished cooking, she took the stick used in roasting fish and cooked it, and the fish-stick which she cooked became cut-up fish, because she used her magic power. [89] When she finished to cook the fish, she took out rice from the pot, and when she had finished
to take out the rice from the pot, she took off the meat from the fish. When she finished taking the fish from the pot, she ate. When
she finished eating, she washed. When she finished washing, she kept those things which she used to eat, the coconut shell cup and plate, and she laid down to sleep.

When afternoon came, Ini-init went home to his house after he finished fishing. He saw his house, which appeared as if it was burning,
not slowly. He went home because it appeared as if his house was burning. When he arrived at his house, it was not burning, and he was surprised because it appeared as if there was a flame at the place
of his bed. When he was in his house, he saw that which was like the flame of the fire, at the place of his bed, was a very pretty lady.

Soon he cooked, and when he had finished to cook he scaled the fish, and when he had finished scaling he cut it into many pieces, and he made a noise on the bamboo floor when he cut the fish. The
woman awoke, who was asleep on his bed. She saw that the man who cut the fish was a handsome man, and that he dragged his hair. [90] The pot she had used to cook in looked like the egg of a rooster [91] and he was surprised because it looked like the egg of a rooster; and the rice which she cooked was one grain of broken rice. [92] Because of all this Ini-init was surprised, for the pot was very small with
which she cooked. After Ini-init cooked, the woman vanished and she went to the leaves of the betel-nut, where she went to hide.

After Ini-init finished cooking the fish, he saw the bed, the place
where the woman was sleeping, was empty. He was looking continually, but he did not find her. When he could not find her, he ate alone,
and when he finished eating he washed, and when he finished washing the dishes he put away, and when he had finished putting away he went

to the yard to get a fresh breath.

Not long afterwards he went to take a walk in the place of his betel-nuts. When he had finished to take a walk in the place of his betel-nuts, he went to sleep.

When it began to be early morning, he left his house, he who went up, because it was his business to make the sun. And Aponibolinayen went again into the house.

When it became afternoon, Ini-init went to his home, and Aponibolinayen had cooked, after which she went out to the betel-nut trees. When
Ini-init arrived, he was surprised because his food was cooked, for there was no person in his house. As soon as he saw the cooked rice and cooked fish in the dish, he took the fish and the rice and began to eat. When he had finished eating, he went to his yard to take
a fresh breath and he was troubled in his mind when he thought of
what had happened. He said, "Perhaps the woman, which I saw, came to cook and has left the house. Sometime I shall try to hide and watch,
so that I may catch her." He went to sleep, and when it became early morning he went to cook his food. When he had finished eating, he
went again to make the sun, and Aponibolinayen went again to his house.

When the sun had nearly sunk, he sent the big star who was next to follow him in the sky, and he went home to spy on the woman. When he had nearly reached his home, he saw the house appeared as if it was burning. [93] He walked softly when he went up the ladder. He slammed shut the door. He reached truly the woman who was cooking in the house. He went quickly and the woman said to him, "You cut me only once, so that I only cure one time, if you are the old enemy." "If
I were the old enemy, I should have cut before," said Ini-init,
and he sat near her who cooked. He took out the betel-nut, and he arranged it so that they began to chew the betel-nut, and he said, "Ala! young lady, we are going to chew, because it is bad for us to talk who do not know each other's names." Aponibolinayen answered, "No, for if the rich man who practices magic is able to give to the
rich woman who has magical power, soon there will be a sign." Ini-init said, "No, hurry up even though we are related, for you come here if we are not related." [94]

He begged her and he cut the betel-nut, which was to be chewed, which was covered with gold, and he gave it to the woman who had magical power, and they chewed. When she laid down the quid, it looked like the agate bead, which has no hole for the thread. And the quid of
Ini-init looked like a square bead.

"My name is Ini-init, who often goes to travel over the world. I always stop in the afternoon. What can I do, it is my business,"

he said. Aponibolinayen was next to tell her name. "My name is Aponibolinayen, who lives in Kaodanan, who am the sister of Awig," she said, and when they had finished telling their names, both their quids looked like the agate bead which is _pinoglan_, which has no hole. Ini-init said, "We are relatives, and it is good for us to be married. Do not be afraid even though you did not come here of your own accord. I go to Kaodanan," he said. Then they married, and the sun went to shine on the world, because it was his business, and the big star also had business when it became night. Aponibolinayen staid alone in the house, and in the afternoon the sun again went home, but first he went to fish in the river. He went home when he had caught the big fish for them to eat--both those married. And when he arrived
in their house he found Aponibolinayen, who was cooking, and he saw that she still broke up the fish-stick, which she cooked. Ini-init
asked her, "What are you doing with that stick which you are breaking, which you put in the jar?" and Aponibolinayen replied,
"I cook for us both to eat," and the sun laughed, because she cooked the stick. "You throw away that stick which you are cooking; this
fish which I caught with the net is what you are to cook. It is not eatable that fish-stick which you cook," he said. Aponibolinayen said, "You shall see by and by, when we eat, what it will become. You hang up the fish which you caught, which we shall eat to-morrow." "Hurry up! You throw away that stick which you cook, it has no use. Even though you cook for one month, it will not become soft, and I do not think it will become good," said Ini-init. Aponibolinayen said, "No,
you hurry and hang that fish which you caught with the net, because it is nearly cooked--the rice and the fish." Not long after she took
out the rice from the jar, and she uncovered her cooked fish, which was a stick. When the sun saw that the fish came from the stick which
she cooked, he was surprised and he asked her how she made the stick, which she cooked, turn to fish. Aponibolinayen said, "You hurry come and eat, for I have finished taking out the rice and fish." [95]

Not long after that the sun went truly in front of her to the place of the rice and cooked fish, and they ate.

Not long after they finished and Aponibolinayen washed, and when she had finished washing she put away those things which they ate and Ini-init made trouble because of the stick which became
a fish. He again asked Aponibolinayen how she made the stick into fish, and Aponibolinayen said, "Do not trouble yourself, perhaps you know about the rich woman who practices magic in Kaodanan," and Ini-init said, "Yes, I know the rich woman who practices magic
in Kaodanan, who sometimes has much power, who changes, who has no equal." Aponibolinayen said, "Why do you still ask if you know?" "I
ask because I want to be sure, even though I know you have much power," said Ini-init. "If that is true, do not ask again," she said. Not long
after while they were talking, they went to sleep, and when it began

to be early morning Ini-init went to make the sun on all the world; when they had finished to eat he went to shine. Aponibolinayen staid
in the house. When it came afternoon, the sun went down and he went directly to fish in the river, for the fish which they ate--the two
who were married. Not long after he caught again a big fish, and he went home. When he arrived, Aponibolinayen had finished cooking, and he asked where she got the fish which she had cooked, and she said, "Why do you ask again? You know it is the stick which I cook, which is fish, which we ate, before you arrived again with fish. Throw away the fish which you caught, for this stick is many fish which I cook." After
that Ini-init said, "Why do you order to throw away, that which serves the purpose to which we put it, even though you cook many sticks?" "If you value it, hang it on the hanger, and you come and eat."

Not long after they ate, and when they had finished eating, they washed, and when they had finished washing those things which they used to eat on, they talked and they went to sleep.

When it became the middle of the night, Aponibolinayen woke up. "I go up with you when you go up in the early morning," she said. Ini-init said to her, "Do not come, for it is very hot up above. You cannot endure the heat, and you will repent when we are there." "No, if it
is too hot, we shall take many blankets and pillows, which I shall go under," she said again and again until it became early morning, then Ini-init agreed. They ate first and then they arranged those pillows and blankets which they took with them.

Not long after they went east, and when they arrived there the
sun shone, and Aponibolinayen became oil because it was so hot, and Ini-init put her in a bottle, and he corked it and covered it
with blankets and pillows, which sheltered her, and he dropped it down. She fell by the well in Kaodanan, and Indiapan, who was still dipping water, turned her face at the sound of the falling at her
side. She saw many good blankets and pillows, and she unwrapped that which was wrapped, and when she had finished to unwrap she saw it was a pretty lady--none equal to her--and she was frightened. She went quickly to go up to the town, where they lived, and when she arrived
there she said to the people, "We have been searching a long time for Aponibolinayen, and you killed and used many cows as food for the searchers, and you spent much for her. She is at the spring. I was frightened when she fell by me, who was dipping water from the well. I saw many pretty blankets and pillows, and I unwrapped that
which was wrapped, and it was Aponibolinayen whom we are seeking," said Indiapan. They went quickly--her father and mother--and the other men went to see her, and when they arrived at the place of the well
they saw Aponibolinayen whom they sought. "Where did you come from, Aponibolinayen, for whom we have been seeking? We have invited many and have fed many to search for you. Among the towns there is not one

we did not search for you, and now you are here," said her father and mother. She said, "I came from Pindayan. I nearly did not come, because the _alzados_ [96] closed the way, and I escaped while they slept."

Not long after they went up to the town, and not long after they went to wash their hair and bathe in the river, and when they had finished washing their hair they went home.

Ebang said, "Ala! husband Pagatipanan, let us make _balaua_ [97] and invite our relatives who are sorrowing for Aponibolinayen," and
Pagatipanan said, "We shall make _balaua_ when next month comes, but now Aponibolinayen feels ill, perhaps she is tired." Not long after
that Aponibolinayen commanded them to prick her little finger which itched; and when her mother pricked it out popped a pretty baby. [98] Her mother asked, "Where did you get this baby, Aponibolinayen?" But Aponibolinayen did not tell. "I do not know where I got it, and I did
not feel," she said. When they could not compel her to tell where she secured the baby, "Ala, we make _balaua_ to-morrow," said the father and mother.

They made _balaua_, and not long after Ebang used magic, so that many people went to pound rice for them, and when they had finished to
pound rice they built _balaua_, and they went to get the betel-nut which is covered with gold for chewing. When these arrived, Ebang oiled them when it began to get dark. "You betel-nuts go to all the people in the whole world and invite them. If any of them do not come, you grow on their knees," said Ebang. And those betel-nuts went to invite all the people in the whole world. Every time they bathed
the child they used magic, so that it grew as often as they washed it, until it walked. The betel-nuts arrived in the towns where they went to invite. The one that went to Nagbotobotan--the place where lived the old woman Alokotan--said, "Good morning, I do not tarry,
the reason of my coming is that Ebang and Pagatipanan commanded me, because Aponibolinayen is there." "Yes, you go first, I will
come, I will follow you. I go first to wash my hair and bathe," she said. The betel-nut which is covered with gold said, "I wait for you, for if you do not come, I shall grow on your knee." The old woman
Alokotan started when she finished washing her hair and bathing. The betel-nut, which was covered with gold, took her, and not long after they arrived, and they met those whom the other betel-nuts went to summon in the other towns. No one wanted the baby to go to them,
[99] and when none wished it to approach, the old woman Alokotan summoned the spirits. ("What town did they not yet invite?" This question was added by the story-teller. Not part of tale.) The old woman Alokotan said, "You invited all the people except Ini-init, who is above. You did not send the prepared betel-nut covered with
gold to summon him. Perhaps he made Aponibolinayen pregnant, because the _siksiklat_ took her up when they went to gather greens--she and

her sister-in-law, who is Dinay."

They commanded the betel-nuts, and they oiled them, and sent them. Not long after the betel-nut, whom they sent, arrived above, who went to call Ini-init. And the betel-nut said, when he arrived, "Good morning, Sun, I do not tarry. The reason of my visit is that
Ebang and Pagatipanan, who make _balaua_, send me. If you do not wish to come, I will grow on your head." The sun said, "Grow on my head,
I do not wish to go." The betel-nut jumped up and went on his head, and it grew. Not long after the betel-nut became tall and the sun was not able to carry it, because it became big, and he was in pain. "You go to my pig, that is what you grow on," he said. Not long after the betel-nut jumped on the head of his pig, and the pig began to squeal because it could not carry the betel-nut which began to grow on its head. And Ini-init said, "Ala! get off my big pig and I come." The betel-nut got off the pig.

Not long after they went and Pagatipanan carried the baby near to the gate. When Ini-init and the betel-nut approached, the baby was happy and he went to be carried by Ini-init. When they arrived at the festival place, the people saw that he who carried the baby rolled
because he was round, and they saw he was not a man but a stone, and Ebang and Pagatipanan said, "Ala! Aponibolinayen, you start and take off your arm beads and you dress in rags, you wrap your wrists with strings, in place of the arm beads, so that you can go with the stone when he takes you to his home, when our _balaua_ is finished." Not long after Aponibolinayen started. She took off her beads and her
dresses and exchanged them for rags and strings. When she changed her dresses, she went down the ladder, and she saw that he who carried
the baby was a stone, which was round. After that Pagatipanan said, "Ala! now our _balaua_ is finished, you go home to the town of the stone." Aponibolinayen said, "Yes, if that is what you say." Those people who were invited bade them good-by, and when they went away, they went home also--those whom they invited.

Not long after they arrived at their home and the sun became a man, he who had been a stone before. "When next month comes we shall build _balaua_, Aponibolinayen, so that we can invite our relatives, and I will pay the marriage price, because I marry you," [100] said Ini-init to her. Soon the month arrived in which they said they would
build _balaua_, and they summoned the old woman Alokotan, to start  the _balaua_. Not long after they sent to get _bolo_ and _lono_ [101] with which to make the _dakidak_ and _talapitap_. [102] When it became afternoon the old woman Alokotan began to sing _da-eng_ [103] and the next night they sang _da-eng_ again. Not long after they commanded
to pound rice, and Aponibolinayen used magic so that many women went to pound with them. [104] And Ini-init practiced magic so that they
had many neighbors, and many who went to pound rice with them.

Soon they commanded to get the timbers for the _balaua_, and they prepared everything which they needed. When it became morning they built _balaua_, and not long after they went to get the prepared
betel-nut, which is covered with gold, which they sent to invite their relatives. [105]

When they arrived--those prepared betel-nuts which were covered with gold--they oiled them at the beginning of the night, and sent them
to invite. Aponibolinayen said, "I will use magic, so that you, betel-nut, may reach the town of our relatives so that you invite
all of them. When there is one who will not come, you grow on their knees, as long as they do not come." Not long after they made _Libon_
[106] in the beginning of the night.

Those betel-nuts, whom they sent to invite, arrived, those which they sent to invite their relatives. They did not wish to go to
make _balaua_. The betel-nuts who went to invite them said, "If you do not wish to come, I will grow on your knee." Pagatipanan said, "You grow," and the betel-nut grew on his knee, and it became high and he was in pain. "Ala! you get off my knee, and you go on my pig," he said, and the betel-nut went truly on his pig and it squealed. "You get off my pig, and we will come," he said, and the betel-nut truly
got off the pig. "Ala! you who live in the same town, you go and wash your hair and bathe, and wash your clothes so that we can go to make
_Sayang_ [107] with the stone and Aponibolinayen. Here is a betel-nut covered with gold which they send," said Pagatipanan. And the people who lived in the same town washed their hair and bathed, and they went to wash their clothes. Not long after it became afternoon and Pagatipanan used magic so that cake and singed pig appeared which they were to take to those who make _Sayang_, which they exchanged with those who make _Sayang_. [108] Not long after they arrived at
the place of the gathering, and Aponibolinayen and Ini-init went to make _alawig_, [109] and when they had finished, they brought them up to the town. Pagatipanan said, "I did not think that the stone which rolled could change when he came to make _balaua_ with us."

"_Ala_! now all you who have arrived, rich men, you divide the prepared betel-nut which is covered with gold," said Ini-init. Not long after Pagatipanan cut the betel-nut and chewed, and the quid of Ini-init
went to the quid of Pagbokasan, and the quid of Aponibolinayen went to the quid of Pagatipanan. [110]

"Ala! now that we have finished chewing, I will give the payment
for Aponibolinayen, and now that you have found out that I am your son--father and mother--let us give the payment," [111] said Ini-init.

His father and mother said, "If that is what you say, my child,

we will give," and they gave him the name of Aponitolau. [112] And Aponitolau said, "Ala! you play the _gansa_ [113] so that we can dance." When they played the _gansa_, Iwaginan took the _alap_ and
_kinamayan_ [114] and he gave them to Aponibolinayen and Agyokan. When Aponibolinayen and Agyokan had finished dancing, they made Aponitolau and Asindamayan dance. When Aponitolau and Asindamayan finished dancing he made to dance Dinay of Kabisilan, who was the daughter
of Dalonagan, and also they made to dance Kanag, [115] who was the son of Aponibolinayen and Aponitolau. When they finished to dance,
Datalan and Dalonagan of Kabisilan danced, and when they finished
to dance, Iwaginan made Dagapan and Indiapan dance. When they had finished dancing Ginteban and Agyokan were next. And the beads of Ginteban were jars, which struck together while they danced. Next were Iwaginan and Kindi-inan who was the wife of Ilwisan of Dagapan. And when they had all danced they stopped playing the _gansa_. Aponitolau gave the payment for Aponibolinayen and it was the _balaua_ nine times filled with jars--_malayo, tadogan_, and _ginlasan_. [116] And when he had given all the payment they played again on the _gansas_ for one month and they danced.

When one month passed, they went home--their relatives whom they had invited. They said, "Ala! now Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen, since the day has arrived on which we go home, do not detain us for
we have been here for a month, we go home to our town." Not long after they all went home. And the father and mother of Aponitolau took them home with them to Kadalayapan, and they took all their possessions from up above. When they arrived in Kadalayapan those who lived in the same town were surprised, for Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen were there. They went to see them and Balokanag (i.e., Kanag--their son) was large. It is said.

(Told by Magwati, a man of Lagangilang Abra.)


2

"I am anxious to eat the mango fruit which belongs to Algaba of Dagala," said Aponibolinayen. When she said this she was almost dying and she repeated it. "Ala cousin Dalonagan, you go and take cousin Dina-ogan, and go and secure the mango fruit of Algaba of Dagala," said Aponibalagen. "Why does Aponibolinayen want the mango fruit of
Algaba of Dagala; does she not know that anyone who goes there cannot return?" asked Dalonagan. "Ala, you go and be careful and he will not hurt you," said Aponibalagen. And Dalonagan went truly, and started, and Aponibalagen gave Dalonagan a belt and earrings, which he was
to trade for the mango fruit; and Dalonagan went to get Dina-ogan, and he took an egg. Not long after they went and they held the egg

all the time as they walked. When they were in the middle of the way the egg hatched. When they had almost arrived in Dagala the chicken had become a rooster which could crow.

Not long after they arrived at the spring of Algaba of Dagala, and the people who dipped water from the spring were there. "You people who are dipping water from the spring, where is a shallow place where we can cross?" "Where is the shallow place where we can cross you say, rich men, perhaps you are enemies," said the women who were dipping water. "If we are enemies we would kill you," said Dalonagan. "You
see the shallow place where the people cross," said the people who were dipping water from the well. Not long after they spread their
belt on the water and they rode across. When they arrived on the other side of the river they took a bath. As soon as they finished bathing they went on top of a high stone and dried their bodies. The water which dropped from their bodies became agates which have no holes through them, and the women who were dipping water saw the agates
which dropped from their bodies and they touched each other and said, "Look at that." When they put their clouts on they asked the women, "Where is the road to the house of Algaba of Dagala?" "You follow
the _sagang_; [117] they lead to his house and his _balaua_," said the women who were dipping water from the well. "Will one of you guide us to the house of our cousin Algaba?" they said. "No,
because no one comes to get water unless all are together," said the women. Not long after Dalonagan and his companion went up to the town and the defensive fence, which was made of boa constrictors, did not notice them for the snakes slept. Not long after they arrived
at the _balaua_. "_Wes_," they said, and the old woman _alan_ [118] came to look at them through the window. "How are you?" she said. "Do not go to the _balaua_, because Algaba can see you," said the _alan_.

Algaba was playing with his sweetheart in the other house, when his sweetheart arrived from the well. "Your big snakes, which make the fence, did not see the enemies who came inside of the town." Then Algaba ran to his house and he was very angry when he saw the two men. He went to get his headaxe and spear and when he took them down the weapons shed tears which were of oil. "What is the matter with
my weapons that they weep oil? Perhaps these men are my relatives," said the angry man. He dropped them and when he took another set they shed bloody tears.

The two men went up into the kitchen of the house, and Algaba went there. "How do you do now?" he said, still angry. "What do you want here?" "What are you here for, you ask, and we came to buy the mango fruit for Aponibolinayen who is nearly dead." "It is good that you came here," said Algaba, but he was angry and the two men were frightened, and they did not eat much. As soon as they finished eating, "What do you want to pay?" said Algaba. They let him see the one earring of

Aponibolinayen. "I don't like that; look at the yard of my house. All the stones are gold," said Algaba. When he did not want the earring, they let him see the belt, and Algaba smiled. "How pretty it is! I
think the lady who owns this is much prettier," he said to them. "Ala, you go and get two of the fruit." So they went truly, and Dalonagan went to climb and when he secured two mangoes he went down. "We go now." "I will go with you for I wish to see Aponibolinayen,"
said Algaba. He said to his mother _alan_ "You, mother, do not feel anxious concerning me while I am gone, for I want to go and see the sick lady who so desires the mango fruit. Watch for enemies who come inside the town." "Yes, do not stay long," said his mother _alan_.

Not long after they went and when they were in the middle of the way Algaba said, "Is it far yet?" "It is near now," they answered. "I
use my power so that the sick woman, for whom they came to get fruit, will feel very ill and nearly die," said Algaba to himself. Not long
after, truly they almost arrived. When they reached the well, he asked again, "Is it still far?" but he knew that the well belonged to Aponibolinayen. "It is near now; she owns this well," they said. Not long after they entered the gate of the town. "I use my power so that Aponibolinayen will die," he said, and she truly died. "Why is
Aponibolinayen dead? The mango fruit which we went to get is worthless now," they said. "Perhaps she is the one they are wailing for," said Algaba of Dagala. When they reached the ladder, "The mango fruit which you went to get is no good at all," said Aponibalagen to them. "Yes,
it is. I came because I wish to see her," said Algaba of Dagala. "If it is possible for you to bring her to life, please do so," said
Aponibalagen to him, and took him inside of the house. Algaba looked at her, and she was a lady without an equal for beauty. Not long
after he took the body in his arms. "I use my power so that when I whip my perfume [119] _kaladakad_ she will move directly," he said, and the body moved. "I use my power so that when I whip my perfume
_banawes_ she will say '_Wes_'" and she at once said "_Wes_." "I use my power so that when I whip my perfume she will wake up," and she woke up. "_Wes_, how long my sleep was!" said Aponibolinayen, for she was alive again. "How long I sleep! you say. You have been dead," said Algaba, and Aponibolinayen looked at him and she it saw was not Aponibalagen who held her in his arms. "Why, Aponibalagen,
do you detest me? Another man is holding me," she said, and she arose from his arms, because she was ashamed. "Do not leave me, lady;
you would have been dead a long time if I had not come," said Algaba, and their rings exchanged of themselves while he was holding her and when Aponibolinayen had regained her breath, Algaba divided the mango fruit into two parts and he gave to Aponibolinayen, but she did not
want to take it for she was ashamed. "If you do not wish to eat this fruit which I give you, you cannot go to anyone but me," said Algaba, and Aponibalagen left them alone.

Not long after Aponibolinayen could sit up straight, and she wanted to leave Algaba, but he took her. When Aponibolinayen looked at her
ring she saw it was not her own. "Why have I another ring?" she asked, and she caught the hand of Algaba for he wanted to take her. "Give me my ring. It is not good for you, for it looks like copper. Take your
ring, for it is really gold," said Aponibolinayen. "No, this is good, for I did not take it from your finger. The spirits wanted it to come to my finger. Our rings are both gold, but they are different colors,"
he said. "Let us chew betel-nut for it is bad for us to talk when we do not know each other's names." "It is not my custom to chew betel-nut," said Aponibolinayen. "Then you learn," said Algaba. Not long after he made her chew and he gave to her. "Now, lady, whom I visit you tell your name first," he said. "No, because I am ashamed, as a woman to tell my name first." Not long after he said, "My name is Algaba of Dagala. I have looked in all parts of the world for a wife, but I did
not find anyone like you, and now I have found you, and I want you
to be married to me." "My name is Aponibolinayen of Kaodanan, sister of Aponibalagen who are son and daughter of Ebang and Pagbokasan," said Aponibolinayen. Not long after they laid down their quids and
they were rows of agate beads which have no holes. Algaba said, "It is good for us to be married." So they were married and they went to Dagala. As soon as they arrived in Dagala, "Mother," he said to his
mother _alan_, "now we are going to take you to Kadalayapan, because I have found a wife." "No," said the _alan_, "we must first build
_balaua_ here." "That is good if it is what you desire," said Algaba.

Not long after Aponibolinayen commanded people to pound rice, and others to get betel-nuts which were covered with gold. So they truly made _Sayang._ [120] Not long after when it became evening they made
_Libon._ "The best for us to do is to invite Aponibalagen, and all the people of Kadalayapan and some other places," said Algaba. Not long after they sent the betel-nuts which were covered with gold to invite their relatives. Some of the betel-nuts they sent to Kaodanan. "Sir, come to Dagala, because Aponibolinayen and Algaba build _balaua_," said the betel-nut to Aponibalagen. When the other betel-nuts arrived at Kadalayapan to invite the people they said to Langa-an, "Come to Dagala because Aponibolinayen and Algaba make _balaua_." Not long after Aponibalagen and Aponigawani and the other people went.

When they reached the middle of the way they met the people of Kadalayapan, so they were a large party who went. When they arrived at Dagala, at the place where the spring is, they saw that all the stones by the river were gold and they were surprised, and the people who were dipping water from the spring were there. "You people who are dipping water, where is the shallow place for us to cross?" they said. "You look for the place where the people go across?" said the people who were dipping water. Not long after they went across the river. As soon as they reached the other side of the river, they

took a bath. The women who were dipping water saw that the water which ran from their bodies were agates which had no holes. "How wonderful are the people who live in Kadalayapan and Kaodanan, for they are relatives of Kaboniyan [121] and they have power," said the women who were dipping water from the well.

"You people who are dipping water, where is the trail which leads to the house of Algaba of Dagala?" they said. "Follow the head poles; they are along the road to his house," said the women who were dipping water. So they went up truly to the town, and the boa
constrictors which made the fence around the town did not move when they passed, for they were afraid, and when they arrived at the house of Algaba the _alan_ danced. When they sat down Pagatipanan was in a hurry. "Ala! Langa-an, let us go and give the betel-nut which is covered with gold to Algaba," he said and they went truly. They told Algaba that they were going to chew betel-nut, because they wished
to learn if they were relatives; and Algaba said "That is good,"
and they called Aponigawani to the house, and they cut the betel-nut in pieces. As soon as they cut it in pieces, "The best way to do is
for you to tell your name first, because we came to visit you," said Pagatipanan to Algaba. "No, old man, you tell your name first," said Algaba. Not long after, "My name is Pagatipanan who am the _Lakay_
[122] of Kadalayapan." Not long after, "My name is Pagbokasan who is the father of Aponibalagen of Kaodanan." Not long after, "My name
is Algaba who is the son of an _alan_ who has deformed feet, [123] who has no sister; we are not like you people who have power," said
Algaba. Not long after, "My name is Aponibalagen of Kaodanan who is the son of Ebang and Pagbokasan." Not long after, "My name is Aponigawani of Kadalayapan who has no brother, so that when some enemies come into our town I dress in the bark of trees." Not long after, "My
name is Aponibolinayen who is the sister of Aponibalagen." As soon as they told their names, they laid down their betel-nut quids. The
quids of Algaba and Aponigawani both went to the quid of Pagatipanan, also the quids of Aponibalagen and Aponibolinayen went to the quid of Pagbokasan. Then Aponigawani stood up. "You are so strange, Algaba, you are my brother. I am so glad that I have a brother now. You are
bad for you let the enemies come into Kadalayapan," she said. "Excuse me for I was far from Kadalayapan and did not see; it is our custom
for some of us to go to fight," said Algaba. "The best way to do, Aponitolau, [124] is for you to go back with us to Kadalayapan," said Aponigawani. "If that is what you wish it is all right," he
said. Not long after the _balaua_ was finished and they took them to Kadalayapan. The valuable things which the _alan_ owned she gave to them, and she flew away.

When they arrived in Kadalayapan, Aponibalagen wanted to marry Aponigawani. He sent his mother to go and give the message. As soon as she arrived in Kadalayapan, "Good morning, nephew Aponitolau," said

Ebang. "Good morning, what are you here for?" said Aponitolau. "What are you coming for, you say. Aponibalagen sent me to talk to you,
for he wishes to marry Aponigawani," she said. "If you think it is good it will be all right," said Aponitolau, so she took out the engagement gift and she put one earring inside of a little jar and it was filled with gold. Aponitolau lifted his eyebrows and half
of the gold disappeared, so Ebang put another earring in the pot and it was full again. "Ala! when it becomes evening you come and
bring Aponibalagen," he said to Ebang. "Yes," she said. So she went home. As soon as she arrived in their house in Kaodanan, Aponibalagen asked the result of her trip. "They agreed all right; we will go when
it becomes evening," said Ebang. When it became night they went to Kadalayapan and he lived with Aponigawani. When it became morning he took Aponigawani to Kaodanan and the father and mother of Aponigawani and the other people followed them. They went to get the marriage payment. It was the _balaua_ filled nine times with jars. As soon
as they gave all the payment, Aponitolau was the next to make his payment. It was also the _balaua_ filled nine times. As soon as they made all the payment they went home.

(Told by Mano, a woman of Patok.)


3

"I am going to wash my hair. Give me the rice straw, which has been inherited nine times," said Aponitolau to his mother Langa-an. So Langa-an gave him some and he went to the river to wash. As soon as he arrived at the well he saw the pretty girl who was washing her
hair. He went and sat down on her skirt and the pretty girl told
him not to cut her in many places so she would not need to doctor the wounds. "If I were an old enemy I would have killed you at the first. It is bad for us to talk when we do not know each other's names. Let us chew betel-nut," said Aponitolau. "No, for it is not my custom," said the girl. But Aponitolau compelled her to chew betel-nut with him. "You tell your name first," he said to her. "No, it is not good for me to tell my name first, for I am a woman. You
are a man. You tell your name first." So Aponitolau said, "My name is Aponitolau of Kadalayapan who am the son of Langa-an and Pagatipanan, who came here to wash my hair. It is good fortune for me that I met
you here washing your hair." "My name is Gimbangonan of Natpangan, who am the daughter of It-tonagan, who is the sister of Aldasan." As soon as she told her name she disappeared and went to hide among the betel nuts on the branch of a tree. So Aponitolau was very sorry and
he went back home without washing his hair. As soon as he arrived where Langa-an was sitting he said to her "Mother, when I arrived at the well by the river I met a pretty girl whose name was Gimbangonan,

the daughter of It-tonagan of Natpangan. We chewed betel-nuts and told our names, but as soon as she told her name she disappeared and I could not see her. She said that she lived in Natpangan. I want to marry her. Will you go and arrange the _pakalon?"_ [125] So Langa-an went at once and got her hat which was as large as the _salakasak_
[126] for she saw that Aponitolau was sorrowful.

When she took her hat it clucked. [127] "Why does my hat cluck when I take it down? I think they do not like you, Aponitolau,"
said Langa-an. "No, you go and try." So Langa-an went again to get her hat and again it clucked, but nevertheless she took it and
went. When she was in the middle of the way the head of the hat which was like a bird swung and made Langa-an turn her head and it
clucked again. Langa-an sat down by the trail and wondered what would happen. Not long after she went on again and she met Asindamayan near the ford. She asked where the ford was and when Asindamayan told her, she spread her belt on the water and it ferried her across. Not long
after she reached the other side of the river, and she inquired for
the house of Gimbangonan. Asindamayan answered, "You look for the house where many people are putting props under the house. That is the house of Gimbangonan. Her porch has many holes in it."

When Langa-an arrived at the house she said, "Good afternoon." And
It-tonagan and Gimbangonan answered, "Good afternoon." They invited her to go up into the house and she went. "Why do you come here, Aunt?" said Gimbangonan. "I came to arrange for you to marry Aponitolau, for he wants to marry you and has sent me to talk about
the _pakalon_." Gimbangonan was very happy and said to her mother, "You tell him yes, for I wish to marry Aponitolau." So It-tonagan
agreed to the marriage and Langa-an asked how much the marriage price would be. "The regular custom of the people with magical power which
is the _balaua_ nine times full," said Aldasan, because It-tonagan was always restless and was walking outside the house. So Langa-an left a little jar and agate bead, as a sign of the engagement, for
Gimbangonan. Not long after she went back home to Kadalayapan. When she arrived where Aponitolau was lying down she said, "_Wes_" for she was tired and Aponitolau heard her and he went and inquired what was the matter. His mother answered that they had agreed on the marriage and the next day he could go and marry Gimbangonan.

As soon as the next day came they prepared jars of _basi_, [128] and pigs to be carried to Natpangan, and Aponitolau carried one large empty jar. [129] So they went. As soon as they arrived Aponitolau asked where Gimbangonan was, and the people said, "Look at the big
woman." He looked and saw that she was a very big woman and Aponitolau cried, for she was not the girl he had seen before, and he bent his
head. While the old men were talking to each other Gimbangonan said to Aponitolau, "Come here, Aponitolau. Be very happy. Why do you bend

your head?" Aponitolau did not listen, and he did not go. Not long after Langa-an and the others went back home and left Aponitolau to
be joined to Gimbangonan. Aponitolau was afraid to go to Gimbangonan, for she was a very big woman. She called to him all the time, but he
did not go to her. It-tonagan was restless and did not stay in the house even in the night, and they could not sleep.

After ten days Aponitolau said, "I am going to Kadalayapan for a little while. I will return soon." "If you go to Kadalayapan I will
go with you," she said. "Do not go this time and I will take you next time," he said, and he went. When he was near the gate of the town of Kadalayapan he hung his head until he reached his house. His mother asked why he hung his head. "I do not wish to marry Gimbangonan for she is not the woman I met by the river." "Do not be angry with me for I did what you wished. I would not have engaged you to Gimbangonan if you had not sent me." They sent their _liblibayan_ [130] to go
and get betel-nuts which were covered with gold, for they intended
to make _Sayang_, so that they could find out who the woman was who had been by the river. Soon the _liblibayan_ returned and they said, "We did not get the betel-nuts which you desired for we found a pretty toy among the branches of the tree." Aponitolau took the branch of the tree which shone as if covered with fire and he put a blanket on it
and many pillows around it. As soon as they had again commanded the
_liblibayan_ to get the betel-nuts they went and soon they arrived with the fruit. They oiled the betel-nuts and sent them to every place in the world and if anyone refused to come they were to grow on their knees. Not long after the betel-nuts went to the different towns and invited all the people.

When they arrived they danced and Aponitolau looked at them to see if the woman he met at the river was there, but she was not among them, and he wondered what had become of the woman, for the betel-nuts had gone to all parts of the world. Aponitolau went into the house for
he was sorrowful, and he laid down near the blankets and he noticed that the blankets appeared as if on fire and he was frightened. [131] He got up and unwrapped the blankets and he saw a pretty girl. "I did not think you were here. I have been engaged. You said your
name was Gimbangonan, and I sent my mother to engage me to you, but when I saw Gimbangonan she was a big woman so I left her and came here to make _balaua_ so I might find you. You cannot escape from
me now for I shall hold your hand. Let us chew betel-nut." So they chewed and Aponitolau said, "My name is Aponitolau of Kadalayapan who is the son of Langa-an and Pagbokasan to whom you told a lie
for you said you were Gimbangonan, and now I want to know your real name." "My name is Aponibolinayen of Natpangan who is the daughter of Ebang and Pagatipanan." When they had told their names they saw that they were related and that they both possessed magical power,  so they were married.

After three days, Aponitolau said to Aponibolinayen, "Wait for me in the house. Do not be lonesome, for our mother is here. I am going to see my pasture." "Do not stay long," said Aponibolinayen. "If anyone comes you hide in the house," said Aponitolau. Not long after he went and when he arrived in the pasture all the jars went around him and all the jars stuck out their tongues for they were very hungry
for they had not been fed for a long time. The jars were _somadag, ginlasan, malayo_, and _tadogan_, and other kinds also. [132] When Aponitolau thought that all the jars had arrived where he was he fed them with betel-nut, first covered with _lawed_ [133] leaves. As
soon as he had fed them he gave them some salt. Not long after he went back home and he rode on a carabao.

When he arrived at their house he called to Aponibolinayen, but no one answered him and he was surprised. So he hurried to the house and he saw that Aponibolinayen was dead and he was grieved. He took her in his lap and while her body was in his lap it began to sweat. He used his power so that when he whipped [134] his perfume _banawes_ she said,
"_Wes_." When he whipped his perfume _dagimonau_ she awoke. When he whipped his perfume _alikadakad_ she stood up and said, "I told you not
to go, Aponitolau, but you went anyway. A big woman came here and stole all my things and killed me. I don't know who she was." Aponitolau
called his mother and asked who it was and his mother replied that
it was Gimbangonan. So Aponitolau went to Natpangan. "Why did you go to kill Aponibolinayen?" "I went to kill her for you do not care for
me any more." "I do not like you, for you are a very big woman. Every time you step the floor is broken. If you come again to Kadalayapan I will cut your head off. Do not come again to harm Aponibolinayen." He went home to Kadalayapan and he divorced Gimbangonan.

Not long after they went to the pasture and they rode on the back of a carabao. As soon as they arrived, all the jars rolled around them and stuck out their tongues and Aponibolinayen was afraid, for she feared the jars would eat them. The wide field was full of jars. Aponitolau
gave them betel-nut and _lawed_ vine and salt. As soon as they fed them they went back home. Not long after Aponibolinayen said to Aponitolau, "We are going to Natpangan to visit my father and mother," so they
went. As soon as they arrived there Aponibolinayen told her father and mother that Aponitolau had a pasture filled with many different kinds
of jars, in the place of Kabinalan. When they had been in Natpangan ten days they returned home and Aponibolinayen's father and mother went with them and saw the jars. When they reached the field where the jars were they were afraid that the jars would eat them, but Aponitolau fed them. The father and mother of Aponibolinayen were surprised for there were many valuable jars which filled the wide
field of Kabinalan. Not long after they went back home to Natpangan.

(Told by Angtan, a woman of Lagangilang.)




4

"Sinogyaman, come and oil my hair so that I can go to war," said Aponitolau. "And you, Sinagayan, put some rice in the pot and cook it, and also some fish for us to eat." Not long after she cooked,
and Sinogyaman oiled his hair. When Sinagayan finished cooking they ate and started to go to Gegenawan where Asibowan lived. Sinogyaman and Sinagayan did not want him to go, but Aponitolau went anyway.

When he arrived at the edge of the town he stood still a long time,
for he did not know the way to Gegenawan. A bird went to him and said, "Why do you stand here for a long time, Aponitolau?" "Why do you stand a long time, you say, and I am going to the town of Asibowan, whom every one says is a pretty girl," said Aponitolau to the bird. "Ala,
Aponitolau, it is best for you to follow me and I will show you the way to the place where Asibowan lives." Not long after they went and they soon arrived at the town of Gegenawan. "Ala, Aponitolau, I leave you now for I have showed you the way," said the bird. So
Aponitolau went alone to the house of Asibowan. When he reached the ladder of her house Asibowan was looking out of the window and she said, "Oh, there is a rich gentleman. How are you? Where are you going?" Aponitolau said, "I am going to Nagsingkawan, but I have
lost my way and I thought that this was Nagsingkawan. I saw this house so I came to get a drink." "This is not Nagsingkawan. Come up and I will cook and we will eat." Aponitolau went up into the house and the girl gave him water to drink. She cooked and then she called him. "I do not want to eat yet. I will rest for awhile and eat when
your husband comes," said Aponitolau.

Not long after, while they were talking he saw Asibowan break the fish stick and put it in the pot and he watched to see what would become of the stick. He saw that it became a fish. [135] She called often for Aponitolau to come and eat and he went and he said, "I want to wait until your husband comes, for it is not good for us to eat first,
and it is not good for us to be eating when he arrives." "Come, it
will be all right. We will eat now, and he can eat when he comes" said Asibowan. So he went to eat with her, for he was very hungry. He saw that she took all the rice and fish out of the pots, and there were
only dishes for them. "What is the matter with this woman that she does not leave any fish for her husband?" he said to himself. While
they were eating Asibowan told him that she did not have a husband and Aponitolau smiled. When they finished eating, they cut betel-nut for

them to chew. "Now be patient for we must chew betel-nut, for it is not good for us to talk until we know each other's names." Asibowan said, "How can we chew betel-nut, for I do not chew for I am related to Kaboniyan?" [136] "You must chew anyway for we cannot tell our names unless we chew," said Aponitolau. When Aponitolau urged her a long time she took the betel-nut and they chewed. "Since you are the lady who lives here, it is best that you tell your name first,"
said Aponitolau. "No it is not good for a woman to tell her name first, so you must tell your name," said Asibowan. Not long after,
"My name is Aponitolau of Kadalayapan who is the son of Langa-an and Pagatipanan, who goes to find a pretty girl who has power like me,"
said Aponitolau. "My name is Asibowan of Gegenawan, who lives alone in the field, who has no neighbors for this is my fortune," said Asibowan. So Aponitolau staid with her nine months and his father
and mother were searching for him. They had many people searching for him and they killed many animals to feed the people until all their animals were gone. The bones which they threw away made a pile nine times as large as the _balaua_.

Asibowan became pregnant and not long after she gave birth. "What shall we call our girl?" said Aponitolau. "We will call her Binaklingan." When Asibowan bathed the baby it grew one span for
she used magical power. So the baby grew one span every time. [137] Not long after she could walk, Aponitolau saw the pile of bones which the searchers had thrown away when they ate, and it was nine times larger than the _balaua_. "The best thing for us to do, Asibowan,
is for us to go to Kadalayapan, for my father and mother are still searching for me and the people who are searching are eating all their animals." "The best thing for you to do is to go home and find a woman
whom you should marry and then when you are married you make _Sayang_
[138] and I will come to Kadalayapan," said Asibowan, for it was
not good for them to be married because she had less magical power than Aponitolau. "If you do not wish to go, I will take our daughter Binaklingan." "Wait awhile until we have commanded that a house be built for her to live in." Not long after they commanded that a house be made for Binaklingan, and it was all of gold. It was finished in
the middle of the night and she used magic so that the golden house went to Kadalayapan.

When Aponitolau woke up early in the early morning he heard many roosters crowing and many people talking. "My daughter Binaklingan, how bad your mother is, for she sent us here to Kadalayapan without telling us," said Aponitolau. His daughter was very sorry but she
played on the pan pipe. When it was morning Langa-an saw the golden house by their house. "Why there is a different house here. I think Aponitolau has arrived and maybe he is in that house," said Langa-an to Pagbokasan, [139] and Pagbokasan went outdoors. "Are you here Aponitolau? We had sought you for a long time, but did not find

you. None of our animals are left alive," said Pagbokasan. "Why did you search for me? I told Sinogyaman and Sinagayan that I was going to fight. Did they not tell you?" said Aponitolau. "We thought that
you encountered our old, dangerous enemies, for you have been away many months. Why do you have a daughter who is a young girl?" "Yes, Binaklingan who is here is my daughter, and her mother Asibowan with whom I lived for a long time did not want to come here to Kadalyapan, for she said I must find a girl suitable for me to marry and then we  must make _balaua_ so that she will come to our town."

When they had been in Kadalayapan five days, they went to take a walk in the evening of the sixth day, and they went to the spring
of Lisnayan. As soon as he arrived at the spring he used magic so that all the pretty girls who never go outdoors felt hot and went
to the spring to bathe. [140] Not long after Aponibolinayen felt very hot and she went to take a bath at the spring. Aponitolau saw her taking a bath and she looked like the half of a rainbow, and
Aponitolau went to her, and Aponibolinayen saw him while she was bathing. "Do not wound me in more than one place so I will not have so much to cure." "If I was an enemy I would have killed you at once," said Aponitolau. Soon he cut a betel-nut into two pieces. "It is best
for us to chew betel-nut for it is bad for us to talk when we do not know each other's names." Aponibolinayen did not wish to chew, but
when Aponitolau urged her she chewed and they told their names. "My name is Aponitolau of Kadalayapan who is the son of Pagbokasan and Langa-an." "My name is Aponibolinayen of Kaodanan who is the sister of Aponibalagen who put me at the place close to the spring of Lisnayan, for he does not wish anyone to see me, but you have found me." Not long after, while they were talking, Aponibolinayen used magic so that she vanished and she went among the betel-nuts on the branch of the tree. "Where did the girl go? I did not see her when she vanished,"
said Aponitolau to himself. Not long after he went home with his head bent for he was very sorrowful. When he arrived at their house,
"Why are you bending your head Aponitolau?" said his mother. "What are you bending your head for? you say, and I went to the well of Lisnayan and talked with Aponibolinayen, but after a while she vanished and I could not see her anymore." "Did you not give her any betel-nut?" asked his mother. "Yes, I did." "What are you so sorry for if you gave her
betel-nut? you will find her bye and bye," said his mother.

On the second night he went again to Lisnayan and he used his power so that all the young girls, were hot again so that they went to
the spring. When he looked up where there were many betel-nuts he saw Aponibolinayen taking a bath. "I did not see you when you left me Aponibolinayen," said Aponitolau. "Now I am going to take you home." "No, do not take me for my brother will hate me. I do not want to go to your house." He took her to his town of Kadalayapan and he
sent his mother to Natpangan to tell Aponibalagen that Aponibolinayen

was in Kadalayapan. Not long after his mother Langa-an took her skirt and her hat which was like a bird and when she arrived at the
gate of Kaodanan Sinogyaman was dipping water from the spring. "Niece Sinogyaman, where is the ford?" "Look there at the shallow place, for
it is the ford." She took off her belt and she spread it on the water, and she rode on it to the other side, and then she took a bath. When she finished bathing she stood on a high stone and the drops of water from her body were agate beads with no holes. "How strange, the people of Kadalayapan are. They are very different from us,"
said the women who were dipping water from the spring. Not long after Langa-an put on her skirt, and when she finished she said, "Are you not finished dipping water, Sinogyaman? I want you to guide me to
the house of my nephew Aponibalagen, for I have forgotten the way, for I have not been here for a long time." "No, I am not through, but
I will show you the way, Aunt," said Sinogyaman, and she guided her.

When they reached the yard of Aponibalagen, "Good morning, Nephew." "Good morning, Aunt," he said to her. "Come up." Not long after she went up the stairs. "What are you coming here for,
Aunt?" "What are you coming here for? you say. I come because I wish to see you." Not long after he went to get _basi_, and he had made her drink. When they had drunk, she said, "The other reason I came here, Nephew Aponibalagen, is that Aponitolau sent me, for he wishes to marry your sister." "I have no sister. I do not know what my mother
did with her," he replied. "We have no daughter. Aponibalagen is our only child," said Ebang. While they were still talking they kept on drinking the _basi_. When the old woman Langa-an became drunk she told them that Aponibolinayen was in Kadalayapan, and Aponibalagen was surprised and his heart jumped. "I went to hide Aponibolinayen
in Lisnayan so that no one would see her, but now someone has found her." So Langa-an gave them the engagement present [141] and she asked how much they must pay as the marriage price. "You must fill the
_balaua_ nine times," they answered. So Langa-an filled the _balaua_ nine times with different kinds of valuable things. As soon as she
had paid the marriage price she went back home. When she arrived in Kadalayapan and reached the top of the ladder of the house she laid down and slept, for she was drunk. "How strange you act, mother. Why don't you tell us the news before you sleep?" said Aponitolau, and
she said, "The engagement and marriage gifts were accepted."

In the afternoon they began to make _Sayang_. [142] Not long after the old woman Alokotan, who conducted the _Sayang_ and made them dance
_Da-eng_, [143] arrived and she began to perform the ceremony. When it became morning, "You people who live with us, come and pound rice," said Aponibolinayen. So the people gathered and pounded rice for them. As soon as they finished pounding rice she commanded her
_liblibayan_ [144] to go and get betel-nuts. When they arrived with the betel-nuts, "You betel-nuts come and oil yourselves and go to

invite all our relatives, for we are making _Sayang_. Invite all the people except the old enemies," she said and when it became evening they made _Libon_ [145]

Asibowan was anxious to chew betel-nut and she went to search for one in the corner of her house and she found an oiled nut which was covered with gold. When she tried to cut it in two it said to her. "Do not cut me, for I came to invite people to attend the _Sayang_ of Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen." And Asibowan said, "I cannot go." "If you do not come I will grow on your knee," said the betel-nut. "No,
go on my big pig." So the betel-nut jumped on the head of her pig and it grew very high, and the pig squealed. "Get off from my pig and I
will come," said Asibowan. Late in the afternoon they saw her below the _talagan_. [146] "Asibowan is here now, Aponibolinayen, come and see her," said Aponitolau. So Aponibolinayen came and she took her to their house, and Iwaginan took two skirts and he made them dance. He danced first with Asibowan before he made the others dance and his wife Gimbagonan was jealous. When they finished dancing he gave the skirts to Aponibalagen and Sinagayan. As soon as Aponibalagen had
finished Iwaginan made Aponitolau dance with Gimbagonan. While they were dancing Gimbagonan danced to the sound of the jars which she had about her neck and in her hair, i.e., she had necklaces of big
jars and they stuck together so she could not hear the _gansas_. Not long after Asibowan wished to go back home. "Now I am going home, Aponibolinayen, for no one is watching my house," "No, do not go yet, for someone wants to marry your daughter Binaklingan." "I must go now, you take care of her." So she went back home and they did not see her. As soon as the _Sayang_ was over Dina-ogan was engaged to Binaklingan. Soon he paid the marriage price, and it was the _balaua_ filled nine times with valuable things.

Not long after all the people went back to their homes, and
Aponibalagen was left alone and he acted as if he was drunk, but he was not drunk. He laid down in the _balaua_, and Aponibolinayen covered him with blankets. Not long after Aponigawani went outdoors for she felt
hot, and Aponibalagen peeped at her. Not long after she went inside of the house and went into the ninth room, and Aponibalagen watched her. When it became night Aponibalagen went to the place where she was and Aponitolau did not see him. So he looked for her in the ninth
room, and she was playing the pan pipe. While she was playing she saw a firefly, and she tried to hit it with her pan pipe, and Aponibalagen
said "Do not strike me or you will hit my headaxe," and he became a man again. "How did you get in here?" said Aponigawani. "I came, because I saw you when I was lying in the _balaua_." He sat down beside her and tried to cut a betel-nut for her to chew. "We will
chew betel-nut so we can tell our names," said Aponibalagen. She took the betel-nut and they chewed. "You tell your name first, for you live here." "No it is not good for me to tell my name first,

for I am a woman. You are the first." "My name is Aponibalagen who is the brother of Aponibolinayen who is the son of Pagbokasan of Kaodanan." "My name is Aponigawani who is the sister of Aponitolau who is the daughter of Pagatipanan and Langa-an."

When they had been in the room nine nights Aponitolau went to see Aponigawani, and when he got to the room Aponibalagen was there. "Why are you here, brother-in-law?" said Aponitolau. "I am here, because
I wish to marry your sister," said Aponibalagen. "If you want
to marry her you must engage her and you come another day to make
_pakalon_." [147] Not long after Aponibalagen went home and told his father and mother that they would go next day to make the _pakalon_ so he could marry Aponigawani. Aponitolau and his father and mother went to Kaodanan and took the marriage price before Aponibalagen and
his people made the _pakalon_. Aponibalagen paid the same as Aponitolau did for Aponibolinayen. Not long after they returned to Kadalayapan
and the next day Aponibalagen went and got Aponigawani. They danced for one month and then they took Aponigawani to Kaodanan, and all
the people went home. This is all. (Told by Lagmani, a woman of Patok.)


5

"Mother Dinawagan go and engage me to someone, for I want to be married. I like the sister of Aponibalagen of Natpangan" said
Gawigawen of Adasin. "Yes," said his mother. So she took her hat which looked like the moonbeam and she started to go and when she arrived in Natpangan she said, "Good morning, nephew Aponibalagen." "What do you want here, Aunt?" he replied. "What do you want, you say, and I want
to talk with you." "Come up, Aunt, and we will hear what you have to say." So he asked his mother Ebang to prepare food. As soon as Ebang had prepared the food and called them to eat, Aponibalagen went to get the _basi_ and they drank before they ate. And Ebang broke up the fish stick and put it in the pot and it became fish. [148] Not long after
they ate, and when they had finished Aponibalagen said to Dinawagan, "Come and see this." "No, I better stay here." When Aponibalagen urged her she came in and he opened the _basi_ jar which was nine times inherited and as soon as they had drank Dinawagan said that she could not tarry for it was afternoon, "I have something to tell you, Aponibalagen." "What is it?" said Aponibalagen. "My son Gawigawen of Adasin wants to marry your sister." Aponibalagen agreed, so she gave a golden cup which looked like the moon as an engagement present, and they agreed on a day for _pakalon_. [149] Aponibalagen said, "Tomorrow will be the day for _pakalon_."

Dinawagan went home. "Did they accept our golden cup which looks like the moon, mother?" asked Gawigawen. "Yes. Tomorrow will be the
_pakalon_," said the mother. Not long after she said, "All you people who live in the same town with us, prepare to go to the _pakalon_ of
Gawigawen in Natpangan tomorrow afternoon." The people agreed and in the morning they truly started and they went. "You, my jar _bilibili_
which always salutes the visitors, go first; and you my jar _ginlasan_ follow, and you _malayo_ and _tadogan_ and you _gumtan_." [150] So they went first to Natpangan, and Gawigawen and the people followed them, and also eighteen young girls who were Gawigawen's concubines went also.

Not long after they arrived in Natpangan and Iwaginan and the other people went to attend the _pakalon_, and also many people from the other towns. When all whom they had invited arrived they agreed how much Gawigawen should pay for his wife. Aponibalagen told them to fill the _balaua_ [151] eighteen times with valuable things. So the _balaua_ was filled. Not long after they ate and when they had finished they
went to the yard and they played on _gansas_ and danced. Iwaginan took the skirts and gave one to Nagten-ngaeyan of Kapanikiyan and they danced. [152] When she danced she looked like the spindle. She did not go around, but always moving and the water from the river went up into the town and the striped fishes bit her heels. Not long after they stopped dancing and Gimbagonan was jealous and she said "Ala, give me the skirt and I will dance next." "Do not say that Gimbagonan, for it is shameful for us," he answered her. Not long
after he gave the cloth to Dakandokan of Pakapsowan. She danced with Algaba of Dagala. Not long after they finished dancing and Iwaginan made Aponibolinayen and Balogaygayan dance. He often went to fight in the enemies towns. Not long after Aponibolinayen went down from the house and the sunshine vanished when she appeared. She danced with Balogaygayan and when she moved her feet the water from the river went up again into the town and the fish bit at her heels as they did
before. After they stopped Iwaginan made his wife Gimbagonan dance and she was happy when she danced with Aponibalagen. When they danced the big jars around Gimbagonan's neck made more noise than the _gansas_ and the jars said "Kitol, kitol, kanitol, inka, inka, inkantol."

As soon as they finished dancing the people said, "The best thing to do is to go home, for we have been here three months now." "We will take Aponibolinayen" said Dinawagan to the people who lived in the same town with her and she spoke to Aponibalagen. So they prepared rice and coconut soaked together and wrapped in leaves, and a cake made of rice flour and coconut shaped like a tongue, a rice cake, which was fried for Aponibolinayen's provision on the road. "You who live in the other towns who were invited, do not go home yet for we are going to take Aponibolinayen to Adasin," said Aponibalagen. Soon
it became morning and they all went to Adasin and Gimbagonan carried

two big baskets of cakes, and while they were walking she ate all the time and she ate half of them. When they arrived at the spring of Gawigawen of Adasin, they were surprised, for it was very beautiful
and its sands were of beads, and the grass they used to clean pots with was also beads and the place where the jars sat was a big dish. [153]

"Go and tell Gawigawen that he must come here and bring an old man, for I am going to take his head and make a spring for Aponibolinayen," said Aponibalagen. So someone went and told Gawigawen to bring the old man Taodan with him to the spring. So Aponibalagen cut off his head and he made a spring and the water from it bubbled up and the body became a big tree called Alangigan [154] which used to shade Aponibolinayen when she went to the spring to dip water, and the blood of the old man was changed to valuable beads. Not long after they went up to the town and the place where they walked--from the spring to
the ladder of the house--was all big plates. Gimbagonan sat below the house ladder, because they were afraid the house could not hold her, for she was a big woman, and she hated them and she said to Iwaginan,
"Why do you put me here?" "We put you there because we are afraid that you will break the house and give a bad sign to the boy and girl who
are to be married." [155]

Aponibolinayen covered her face all of the time and she sat down in the middle of the house, for Indiapan said that she must not uncover her face for her husband Gawigawen had three noses, and
she was afraid to look at him. [156] But Gawigawen was a handsome man. Aponibolinayen believed what Indiapan had told her. Not long after Dinawagan spread the string of agate beads along the floor where Aponibolinayen sat. [157] After a month they were still there and
the people from the other towns wished to go home, and Aponibalagen said to Aponibolinayen, "Ala, be good to your husband and uncover your face. We are going back home now." But Aponibolinayen would not uncover her face. Not long after all the people went back to their
towns and Aponibolinayen's mother-in-law commanded her to go and cook. She did not uncover her face, but always felt when she went about, and when she had cooked, she refused to eat, but Gawigawen
and his father and mother ate. When Gawigawen went to Aponibolinayen at night she changed to oil, and she did that every night, and they
put the carabao hides under her mat so the oil would not drop to the ground. On the fifth night she used magic so that they could not see her go out and she dropped her beads under the house and then she
became oil and dropped her body. So she went away and always walked and Gawigawen looked for her, for a long time. He went to Natpangan for he could not find her in any of the towns.

When Aponibolinayen was in the middle of the jungle she met a wild rooster which was crowing. "Where are you going Aponibolinayen?" it said to her. "Why are you walking in the middle of the jungle?" and

Aponibolinayen said, "I came here for I am running away from my husband for I do not want to be married to him for he has three noses." "No, Gawigawen is a handsome man. I often see him, for this is where he comes often to snare chickens. Do not believe what Indiapan said to
you, for she is crazy," said the rooster. Not long after she walked
on and she reached the place of many big trees and the big monkey met her and said, "Where are you going, Aponibolinayen?" And she answered, "Where are you going, you say. I am running away because I do not want
to marry Gawigawen." "Why don't you wish to marry Gawigawen?" "Because Indiapan told me he has three noses." The monkey laughed and said,
"Do not believe that. Indiapan wants to marry Gawigawen herself. He is a handsome man." Aponibolinayen walked on and soon she reached a wide field and she did not know where she was. She stopped in the middle of the field and she thought she would go on to the other side.

Not long after she reached the ocean and she sat down on a log and a carabao came along. It passed often where she sat. Aponibolinayen thought she would ride on the carabao, and she got on its back and
it took her to the other side of the ocean. When they reached the other side Aponibolinayen saw a big orange tree with much fruit on it. The carabao said, "Wait here while I eat grass and I will return soon." Aponibolinayen said, "Yes," but the carabao went to the place
of the man who owned him and said, "Come over here, for there is a good toy for you." And Kadayadawan of Pintagayan said, "What is it?" "Come, hurry," said the carabao. So he combed his hair and oiled it and put
on his striped coat and his clout and belt, and he took his spear
and he rode on the carabao's back. Not long after Kadayadawan saw the pretty girl in the orange tree and he said, "How pretty she is!" And
the carabao said, "That is the toy I told you about."

When they reached the orange tree Aponibolinayen heard him when he stuck his spear in the ground and she looked down and saw
a handsome man. "Good morning, lady," he said. "Good morning," answered Aponibolinayen. Not long after they chewed betel-nut and they told their names. "My name is Kadayadawan of Pintagayan who is the son of an _alan_." [158] "My name is Aponibolinayen of Natpangan, who is the daughter of Pagbokasan and Ebang, who is the sister of
Aponibalagen." Their betel-nut quids became agate beads and Kadayadawan said to her, "Ala, it is good for us to marry. I am going to take
you home." So he took her to his home and he was good to his carabao, because it had found him a pretty woman. When they reached the house he put her in a room, and the _Ati_ [159] commanded the soldiers to
call Kadayadawan. When they reached the yard of Kadayadawan's house they called "Good morning." And he looked out of the window and said, "What do you want?" "We came, because the king wants you and we came to get you." So they started and went. When they arrived where the
king was, "Why Kadayadawan have you a pretty girl in your house? Every night I notice that your house appears as if it were burning." "No,

I have not," answered Kadayadawan. "I think you have, for I notice the flames every night." "No, I have not. Where would I find a pretty woman?" [160]

Not long after he went back home. When he reached home Aponibolinayen said to him, "It is best for us to make _Sayang_." [161] And
Kadayadawan asked, "How do we make _Sayang_ by ourselves? Our neighbors are all soldiers." "Do not worry about that, I will see,"
said Aponibolinayen. Not long after Kadayadawan took the betel-nuts and they oiled them and they sent them to the towns of their relatives to
invite them to their _balaua_. The betel-nuts went. Aponibolinayen told Kadayadawan to go and get _molave_ sticks. When he arrived with them Aponibolinayen used magic and she said, "I use magic so that when I thrust the _molave_ stick in the ground it will become
a _balaua_." Not long after the stick became a _balaua_.

The betel-nuts arrived in Natpangan and said to Aponibalagen, "We came to call you, for Kadayadawan of Pintagayan is making
_balaua_." Aponibalagen said, "How can we attend the _balaua_ when we are searching for my sister?" "If you do not wish to come I will
grow on your knee." "Go on my pig." So the betel-nut grew on the pig, and it was so high the pig could not carry it and it squealed very much. "Ala, get off from the pig and we will come." So the betel-nut got off and they started. "All you people who live in the same town
come with me to attend the _balaua_ of Kadayadawan of Pintagayan." So they went. They arrived at the same time as Gawigawen of Adasin and they met near to the river. Not long after Kadayadawan saw them by
the river and he sent the betel-nuts to carry the people across the river. When they were in the middle of the river Kadayadawan used his power so that their old clothes, which they wore in mourning for Aponibolinayen were taken off from them, and they were surprised, for they did not know when their old clothes had been taken off.

When they reached the other side Aponibalagen said to the people who lived with Kadayadawan. "We are ashamed to come up into the town, for we have no clothes." Then the betel-nuts told Kadayadawan and he said, "Ala, go and tell them that I will come and bring some clothes
for them." Not long after he arrived where they were and he gave them some clothes to use. "Ala, take these clothes and use them,
and come up to the town." But Aponibalagen and his companions were ashamed. Kadayadawan urged them until they accepted the clothes.

Soon they reached the town and they danced and Iwaginan and Nagten-ngeyan danced again and the water from the river went up into the town and the fish bit her feet. Not long after that they stopped
dancing and Iwaginan made Gawigawen and Aponibolinayen dance. While they were dancing Gawigawen watched Aponibolinayen, and when they had danced around nine times Gawigawen seized her and put her in his

belt. [162] "Why do you do that Gawigawen?" said Kadayadawan to him, and he threw his spear and Gawigawen fell down and Aponibolinayen escaped and Kadayadawan put her in a room. As soon as he put her in the room he went to bring Gawigawen back to life. Not long after he revived him, "Why did you do that, Gawigawen? I did not steal Aponibolinayen from you." And Gawigawen said, "Even if you did steal Aponibolinayen from me, she was my wife and I could not find her until now. That
is why I put her in my belt, and Aponibalagen knows that she is my wife." And Kadayadawan said, "She is my wife now."

Not long after the _alan_ who took care of Kadayadawan told Langa-an "Kadayadawan is your son. I picked him up when he was only blood which fell from you." [163] "Why do you say that you are not my mother?" said Kadayadawan to the _alan_. Langa-an said to the _alan_, "It is good
if he is my son." They were very happy and they said to Aponibalagen, "Now we will pay the marriage price and also the price which Gawigawen paid before, we will repay to him." Aponibalagen agreed, "You fill
my _balaua_ nine times with valuable things." Not long after they filled the _balaua_ nine times with valuable things and they repaid
Gawigawen what he had paid when he married Aponibolinayen. When they had paid they danced again. "Ala, now we must go home, for we have staid here a month," said the people from the other towns. So they
went home and they took Aponibolinayen's marriage price.

"Ala, now my cousin _alan_, we are going to take Aponitolau [164] home for you have said he is our son," and the _alan_ said, "Yes, take all of my things. I took him for I had no children to inherit
my possessions." So they took them to Kadalayapan. The _alan_ went to the other part of the world, and Langa-an used magic so that the golden house which the _alan_ gave to Aponitolau went to their town
of Kadalayapan. Not long after the golden house arrived and the people were surprised when they woke up in the morning and saw the big golden house. Not long after Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen and their father arrived there.

(Told by Magwati of Lagangilang.)


6

There was a woman whose name was Ginambo of Gonigonan, who went to fight Aponibolinayen of Kaodanan. When she reached the place where
the spring was she said, "You people who are dipping water from the spring, whose place is this where the spring is?" "It belongs to Aponibolinayen of Kaodanan," they said and when they went up to the town they raised a clamor. "What are you so noisy about, you women who are like me?" said Aponibolinayen. "You ask why we are noisy? Because

there are many women, who have come to fight against you, at the place where the spring is," they said, and Aponibolinayen hurried to take her spear. "What are you so noisy for, women like Aponibolinayen?" asked her father Pagatipanan. "What are we noisy about, you ask? Because there are many of my enemies at the spring." "Do not go Aponibolinayen, for I will go." "No for you are weak. What can you do now? Once you did kill people in the place where the spring is, and now perhaps it is my fortune," she said, and she went to the spring. She looked down and truly the enemies looked like many locusts about the spring. "Ala,"
said Ginambo of Gonigonan, "You people who live with me, you are anxious to carry away this woman whom we do not like." "Yes," they answered, "but only our names will go back to the towns we came from,"
i.e. they expected to be killed. Ginambo answered, "No, we are anxious to capture her without fail."

Aponibolinayen said, "You old enemy take this betel-nut," and she cut it in two and gave it to them. "How are we sure Ginambo of Gonigonan that only our names will not go back, we are afraid." Ginambo said, "Do not be afraid, but hurry to be brave." "Ala, now do what you can," shouted Aponibolinayen who stood on a high rock. When they started toward Aponibolinayen their spears looked like rain they were so many. She glanced off the spears with both elbows. "Now I am the next to throw my spears," said Aponibolinayen. "Yes, because all our weapons are gone," they said.

Aponibolinayen was next, she said, "I will use my magic, and you, my spear, shall kill six and seven at one time, and you, my headaxe, cut off their heads from the left side and from the right side, and in back and in front." "Ala, you spare me so that I may tell the people
in Gonigonan where I live," said Ginambo. "Yes, but next month I will come to your town Gonigonan to fight," said Aponibolinayen.

Ginambo went home alone to her town. "Why are you alone?" asked the people who lived in the same town when she arrived. "What can we do, all my companions who went to fight are lost, because they did not throw their spears at Aponibolinayen." "That is what we told you
Ginambo of Gonigonan when you started, but you did not heed, you know that the people of Kaodanan are powerful like Kaboniyan." [165]

Soon after that Ginawan of Nagtinawan said, "You people who live in the same town in which I live, let us go to fight Aponigawani of
Kadalayapan." "No, we do not wish to go, because the people who live in Kadalayapan are powerful like Kaboniyan. We do not know whether she has a brother or not though someone has said that Aponigawani has no brother." "No we go," said Ginawan. "If that is what you
say, we will go," said the people. So they went and they walked and walked until they reached the spring at Kadalayapan. Ginawan said, "You women who are dipping water from the spring, to whom does it

belong?" "To Aponigawani," they said. Ginawan said, "Ala, you go and tell your bravest that we fight with steel weapons." The women who dipped water from the well said, "We do not know who is the bravest, whom we should tell, for Aponigawani has no brother." They went up to the town, and said, "Uncle Pagbokasan the place about the spring is filled with enemies." Then Aponigawani was in a hurry to go. "Do not go you will kill somebody," said her father. "No, father, the spring
will be lost and then what can we do? Father, I am a woman and since I have no brother, perhaps it is my fortune to fight, for you are weak."

She took her skirt, headaxe, and spear and she went to the edge of the hill above the spring. She looked and looked at the place where the spring was for truly the enemies were thick like locusts about the well. "What did you come for?" she asked. "We come to fight the
people who live in Kadalayapan, because we have heard that the woman who is always in the house [166] has no brother, so we have come to carry her away," they said. "Ala, if you wish to prove her bravery
you take this betel-nut." She cut it in two pieces and gave it to
them. "We asked you to excuse us from going Ginawan," they said. "Ala, you begin and see what you can do," said Aponigawani who stood on
a high stone and she stood with her hands on her hips while they threw their weapons. "Now, I am next," she said. "You, my spear, when I throw you, kill at once seven and six; and you, my headaxe, cut off their heads from the left and right sides, from in back and in
front." When Aponigawani had killed all of them except Ginawan and she had all their weapons, Ginawan said, "Please, my friend, let me live
so that someone may go back to the town we came from." "Ala, yes, if that is what you ask, my friend, but I will come next to your town,"
she said, and Ginawan went home alone. Not long after that the month which they had agreed on came.

"Now, mother, go and make cakes and after that I will go to fight,"
said Aponibolinayen. "Do not go," said her mother Ebang of Kaodanan, but she could not detain her, so she made the cake, and when she finished, Aponibolinayen went.

"Mother, make preparations for me to go to war, for this is the month we agreed upon with Ginawan of Nagtinawan," said Aponigawani to her mother Langa-an of Kadalayapan.

Bye and bye Aponibolinayen who was walking in the middle of the road, stopped because she was tired. Aponigawani was also walking and
when she looked up she saw a woman to whom none compared, and she was startled, and she said, "Here is a woman who looks like me. I
do not like to approach her who looks like me, yet I am ashamed not to do so, for she has seen me," she said. "Good morning,"
said Aponigawani to Aponibolinayen who sat on a high stone by the road. They leaned their spears together between them and then they

talked. "Now, my friend, where are you going," said Aponibolinayen. "I am going to war," said Aponigawani. "And where are you going?" said Aponigawani to Aponibolinayen. "I am going to Gonigonan, because the month which I agreed upon with Ginambo of Gonigonan has come," said Aponibolinayen. "Ala, let us chew betel-nut." "Yes, if that is what
you say, we will chew betel-nut," said Aponigawani. After that they exchanged quids. And the quid which had been chewed by Aponigawani was covered with agate beads which are called _pinogalan_, and the quid
of Aponibolinayen was covered with gold. Aponigawani said, "You are more beautiful and have more power than I, because your betel-nut is covered with gold." After that they spat in front of them. The place looked like the place where a child had been born. "Now, my friend, we are going to tell our names." "Yes," said each one, and they told their names. "I am Aponibolinayen of Kaodanan who has no brother, and Ginambo of Gonigonan came to fight against me and the month in which we agreed to fight has come, so I go meet her." "I go also
to the town of Ginawan of Nagtinawan, because the month which we agreed on has arrived, my name is Aponigawani of Kadalayapan who also has no brother." "If that is what you are going to do, we will
go first to Gonigonan, then we will go to the town of Nagtinawan," said Aponibolinayen to her. "If that is what you say we will both go." So they went.

Not long after they arrived at Gonigonan. "Now, Ginambo of Gonigonan I am here because the month which we agreed has come." "You people who live in the same town with me prepare, because the woman who always stays in the house in Kaodanan has come to fight against us," said Ginambo. "Yes, Ginambo, we will fight against her. We told you not to
go against her before, because the people of her town are related to Kaboniyan. We do not know what magic they may use," they said. "Now, what can we do, we are lost." After that they began to fight. "Ala,
you my spears and headaxes kill the people from the left and the right sides, from in back and in front," said Aponibolinayen and Aponigawani.

As soon as they commanded their spears and headaxes their invisible helpers flew and they went to Dangdangayan of Naglitnan. "Oh, sir, you are so happy, who are in bed in the house. The people who live in Gonigonan have nearly killed your sister, because she went to fight against them," said the helpers. After that he went to bathe and wash his hair. "Ala, you three girls take the rice straw and wash my hair,"
he said, and the three girls washed his hair. After that he finished to wash and he went up to the town. As soon as they arrived in the town the three girls combed his hair. When they finished to comb his hair, "Now, you put little golden beads on each of my hairs,"
he said. As soon as they put all the gold in his hair he took his spear and headaxe and he went.

Lingiwan of Nagtangpan was in bed in his house. "Sir, you are so happy

in your bed in your house, your sister went to fight and the enemies have nearly killed her," said the invisible spirit helpers. "Mother
_alan_ I ask you if I have a sister? I never have seen her." "What can you do? I picked you up where you had fallen when your father was jealous of your mother," [167] she said. After that he hurried
to start and he went.

When Dangdangayan of Naglitnan was in the road, he sat down on a high stone where the two women had set before. How terrible it is
that those women who never go out of the house have gone to war, for here is where they exchanged their weapons. While he was sitting,
"Good morning, my friend," said Lingiwan of Nagtangpan. "Where are you going?" said the man who sat on the high stone. "I am going anywhere," he answered, and they talked. "We are going to tell our names, because it is bad for us when we do not know each others names." They cut
and chewed the betel-nut. As soon as they chewed they found that they were relatives. "My name is Lingiwan of Nagtangpan." "My name is Dangdangayan of Naglitnan. Let us go together when we go to fight." After that they went. When they truly arrived they looked
into the town, they saw the two women who looked like flames of fire, because of their beauty. "How terrible that those ladies who always stay in the house have gone to war," they said. After that they went to
them, and the people whom they killed were so many that the pig troughs floated in their blood. So they went to them. When the women saw them they said, "How terrible are those two rich men who have power." After that, "Oh, ladies how were you born," they said. "Why are you here
you ask? Ginambo came to fight against us, that is why we are here in the town of Gonigonan." So Dangdangayan went in front of them, and he scooped them up with his headaxe and put them inside of his belt. [168] After that the two men fought against the enemies. "Please leave someone to bear children," said Ginambo of Gonigonan. "If that is what you ask we will kill you last," they said and she begged mercy.

"Now we will go to Nagtinawan which is the town of Ginawan, with whom Aponigawani agreed to fight this month." After that, "You plunder
and heads go before us to Kadalayapan, when you arrive at the gate you divide equally and part of you go to Kaodanan." So they went to
Nagtinawan. When they arrived in Nagtinawan, "You Ginawan of this town now the agreed month is here." "How are you Ginawan? We told you not to go before and you went; now we will all be killed," said the people
who lived in the same town. "Now we seek vengeance." They looked as if they cut down banana trees when they cut down their enemies. "Please spare me, and if you wish marry me," said Ginawan. "If that is what
you say we will kill you last," but they did not kill her.

After that they went home and sent all the heads before them and also the plunder. After that they arrived in Kaodanan. "Good afternoon,
Uncle," said Dangdangayan to old man Pagbokasan. "Come up the ladder,"

he said. "You go and cook so that these boys may eat," he said. After that, "You go and get one jar of _basi_ which you used to like when you were young," said his wife Ebang. As soon as she said this they went and they drank, and Pagbokasan said to them. "This is reserved for Aponibolinayen to drink when she returns from fighting."

When the old woman had finished cooking, she took the rice from the jar and put it on the woven basket, and she took the meat from the jar and put it in the coconut shells, and so they ate. As soon as they finished to eat, "Now we are not going to stay long,
because we must go home," they said. So Dangdangayan dropped down the women who never go out of the house. "Why Aponibolinayen is here and Lingiwan also," they said. Dingowan of Nagtangpan took Aponibolinayen and put her inside of a big jar; then they went to Kadalayapan,
because they went to take Aponigawani. When they arrived they said, "Good afternoon Uncle," to the old man Pagatipanan. "Good morning," he answered, and he was glad. "Come up," he said. When they went up the stairs they were given _basi_. While they were drinking they let Aponigawani fall in front of them, and they were all glad, because Aponigawani was there. "How fine that Aponigawani is here; we feared that she was lost," said the old man and woman. "Ala, boys if you go home now, return soon for we are going to chew betel nut."

As soon as they went _Lakay_ [169] Pagatipanan and his wife built
_balaua_, and they called one woman medium [170] to begin their
_balaua_. As soon as they built their _balaua_ they sent someone to go and secure betel-nuts which were covered with gold. Not long after the betel-nuts which were covered with gold arrived and
the old woman Langa-an oiled them, and she used magic so that the betel-nuts went to invite all their relatives, who lived in other
towns, to attend _balaua_ with them. She told the betel-nuts that if any did not wish to attend _balaua_ with them, to grow on their
knees. As soon as she commanded them they went, and the betel-nut which went to Kaodanan arrived, "Good morning," it said to the old
man, Pagbokasan who was lying in the _balaua_. He looked up and said, "Who was that," and he saw it was a betel-nut, covered with gold and oiled, and the betel-nut said, "I come to bid you attend the _balaua_
of Pagatipanan of Kadalayapan, because Aponigawani has returned from fighting. So they celebrate." Pagbokasan sat up. After that he went
down out of the _balaua_ and the told people to wash their hair and clothes and to bathe so as to attend the _balaua_ of Pagatipanan of Kadalayapan. So the people who lived with them all went to the river and washed their clothes and hair, and took a bath. As soon as they finished they went home, and they started to go to Kadalayapan. Old man Pagbokasan took Aponibolinayen from the jar, and put her inside of his belt, so they went.

As soon as they arrived there the families who made the _balaua_

went to meet them at the gate of the town and made _alawig_ [171] for them. After that they stopped dancing, and they talked to each
other, and the two young men who met Aponibolinayen and Aponigawani were with them, because they arrived at the same time. So the old man Pagatipanan said, "Ala, cousin Pagbokasan now we are going to chew betel-nut to see if those two young men who took home Aponigawani
are our relatives," and old man Pagbokasan agreed. So they cut the betel-nut which was covered with gold for them to chew and as soon as they cut the nut they all chewed, and they all spat. The spittle
of Lingiwan went to the spittle of Pagatipanan, and the spittle of Aponigawani, went there also. The spittle of Dangdangayan went to the spittle of Pagbokasan and that of Aponibolinayen also, and thus they found out that they were relatives. Pagbokasan was surprised,
for he did not know that he had a son, and Ebang took her son, and she carried him as if he was a baby. And Lingiwan was glad, because he had met his sister during the fight and Langa-an carried him as if a baby.

When they had learned that the boys who had carried the girls home were their sons they all went back to town, and their people who had been
invited were there. As soon as they sat down Iwaginan commanded someone to play the _gansas_ and he took the two skirts and made everyone
dance. His wife Gintoban who was a big woman, who used the big jars like agate beads on her head and about her neck, said to Iwaginan, "Why don't you, my husband, bid me dance? I have been waiting for a very long time." Iwaginan said, "Gintoban do not say that or I shall
be ashamed before the people. Wait until I am ready for you." As soon as Aponibolinayen and Lingiwan finished dancing Iwaginan took the skirts from them and he gave one to Gintoban and the other to Ilwisan, and so they danced. And the big jars which she had hung around her neck made a noise and the earth shook when she moved her body. As soon as they finished dancing the people who went to attend _Balaua_ with them said, "Now we going to put the heads around the town and then go for it is nearly one month now and our families are lonesome for us." So they went to put the heads on the sticks around the town.

At that time the two _alan_ who had picked up Lingiwan and Dangdangayan arrived. They did not wish to attend _Balaua_, but the betel-nut
had grown on their heads and they had arrived very late. As soon as Lingiwan and Dangdangayan saw them they took them back to the town. As soon as Pagatipanan knew that they were the _alan_ who took care of
the boys he summoned the people around the town. They danced for one month. After that Langa-an and Ebang went to talk with the two _alan_, and said to them, "We are surprised for we did not feel our sons come out." The _alan_ said, "Lingiwan I picked up by the side of the road
while you were walking, that is why you did not feel him; he was a little bloody when I picked him up, and I made him a man because I have no child to inherit all my things. Now that you found out that he is your son you come and take all my things in Kabinbinlan, as soon

as the _Balaua_ is finished. As soon as you will get all of them I
will fly somewhere." So when the people went home, after the _Balaua_ was finished, Lingiwan and Dangdangayan went to follow their _alan_ mothers. As soon as they arrived in the different places where the
_alan_ lived they gave them all the things which they had and they used their power so that all the things went to their town. When
all the things arrived in Kadalayapan the people in the town were frightened, for there was a golden house. When the things arrived in Kaodanan the people were frightened for there were the valuable things which Dangdangayan took with him.

After one month passed Lingiwan said to his father Pagatipanan, "You go and make _pakalon_ for Aponibolinayen for I want to marry her." So his father sent his wife Langa-an to Kaodanan to tell to
the father and mother of Aponibolinayen that Lingiwan wished to marry her. So Langa-an took her hat which looked like the Salaksak [172] and her new skirt. As soon as she dressed she started and went. When she arrived in Kaodanan Pagbokasan was lying down in his _balaua_. "Good morning," she said to him. Pagbokasan was a in hurry to sit up and
he said to her, "I am glad to see you, what are you coming here for in the middle of the day." "What am I coming for you say? I am
coming to see if you want Lingiwan for a son for he wishes to marry Aponibolinayen." Pagbokasan took her to his house and said to his wife, "Here is cousin Langa-an who came to see us." So Ebang told him that he should get some old _basi_ for them to drink.

As soon as they drank Ebang went to cook. As soon as she finished cooking they ate. After they finished eating they took the big coconut shell and filled it with _basi_ and each of them drank, and they
were all drunk, and Langa-an said, "I like to hear from you if you
wish Lingiwan to be a son." Soon Pagbokasan and Ebang agreed. They decided on the day for _pakalon_. So Langa-an went home and when she arrived she laid down on the porch of the house for she was drunk,
and Lingiwan saw her and waked her. "What is the matter with you?" he said. "I am drunk for Pagbokasan and Ebang urged me to drink much
_basi_, so I was scarcely able to get home, that is why I slept
on the porch." "Mother, you go into the house, do not sleep on the porch." So she went in and Lingiwan asked her the result of her visit
to Kaodanan. "They accepted you and we agreed to make _pakalon_ the day after tomorrow." So Lingiwan was glad, and went to tell the people about his marriage, and all the people prepared so that they might go.

As soon as the agreed day came they went to Kaodanan and they took many pigs and _basi_ jars. When they arrived there Pagbokasan, who was the father of Aponibolinayen, and the other people were already there and
had cooked many caldrons of rice and meat. Pagbokasan took the _gansa_
[173] and he commanded someone to play and they danced. After that they ate. As soon as they finished to eat they played the _gansa_

again and they danced. Iwaginan of Pindayan said, "Stop playing the _gansas_ we are going to settle on how much they must pay for
Aponibolinayen. As soon as we agree we will dance." And the people were quiet and they agreed how much Lingiwan was to pay. The father and mother of Lingiwan offered the _balaua_ three times full of jars which are _malayo_ and _tadogan_ and _ginlasan._ [174] The people did not agree and they said, "Five times full, if you do not have
that many Lingiwan may not marry Aponibolinayen." He was so anxious to marry her that he told his parents to agree to what the people
said. As soon as they agreed Langa-an used magic so that all the jars which the people wanted were already in the _balaua_--five times
full. As soon as they gave all the jars which they paid, Iwaginan ordered them to play the gansas and they danced. After they danced, all their relatives who went to attend _pakalon_ were anxious to go home for they had been there one month. "Do not detain us, for we are
one month here." So Pagbokasan let them go. Everyone carried home some jars and they all went home. [175] So Pagatipanan said to Pagbokasan, "Now that the _pakalon_ is over we will take Aponibolinayen, because Lingiwan wants her now." Pagbokasan said, "Do not take her now. You come and bring Lingiwan day after tomorrow." "If that is what you
say we will bring him, if you will not let us take Aponibolinayen now."

When they started to go home Pagbokasan said to them, "Dangdangayan wants to marry Aponigawani who is your daughter." "You will wait
until next month," said Langa-an. "After Aponibolinayen and Lingiwan are married, we will think first." Not long after the day on which
they agreed to take Lingiwan to Aponibolinayen came, and he carried one jar. [176] As soon as they arrived there they made the rice
ceremony. [177] When the ceremony was over Pagatipanan and Langa-an and the others went home and left Lingiwan.

As soon as they arrived in Kadalayapan Langa-an asked Aponigawani if she wanted Dangdangayan to be her husband. Aponigawani said, "If you think it is good for me to be married now, and you think he is a good
man for my husband it is all right, for he has magical power like
us." As soon as the agreed month passed the parents of Dangdangayan came to ask if they wished the marriage. They prepared a number of
_basi_ jars for them to drink from when they should arrive. When
they arrived there Pagatipanan was prepared and he met them with the
_basi_ and they all drank. After that they told all the people who lived in their town that they were going to celebrate the arrival
of Pagbokasan and his companions. "Ala, we do not stay long now,
_Abalayan_, [178] we want to know if you wish Dangdangayan to be married to Aponigawani. We will have a good time during _pakalon_," they said. After that Langa-an and Pagatipanan said, "Now the meal is ready. We are going to eat first and after that you will hear what
we say." And Pagbokasan and Ebang did not wish to eat for they were in a hurry and only went to hear if they wished Dangdangayan to be

the husband of Aponigawani. "If you do not wish to come and eat with us, we do not want Dangdangayan to be married to Aponigawani," they said. Then they all went to eat. After they ate, "Ala now that we
have finished eating you excuse us, for we want to know if you wish Dangdangayan to be married to Aponigawani." Langa-an and Pagatipanan said, "You will come next month, we will make _pakalon_." So they went home and Dangdangayan went to meet them at the gate of the town, and he asked at once, "Father and mother did they accept me?" He said,
"Yes, if we can agree on what they want us to pay, and we have to
go there next month." So Dangdangayan was glad and told the people about it, and he invited them to go the next month to make _pakalon_.

As soon as the agreed month to go to Kadalayanpan came, they went. As soon as they arrived there they danced for one month. Lingiwan and Aponibolinayen had their golden house, which the _alan_ had given
them. The people agreed on how much they should pay for the _pakalon_, and Pagatipanan and Langa-an said, "Pay just the same as we paid for Aponibolinayen when Lingiwan married her." "If that is what you say, it
is all right," they said. And Ebang used magic so that the _balaua_ was five times full of jars which are _malayo, tadogan_, and _ginlasan._
So the _balaua_ was filled five times, and each of the relatives who went to attend the _pakalon_ took some jars. As soon as the _pakalon_
was finished the people all went home, and Pagbokasan and Ebang said, "Ala, now that the _pakalon_ is over let us take Aponigawani," Langa-an answered, "If you make extra payment you can take Aponigawani now," and Dangdangayan said to his mother, "If they want the extra payment, ask them how much." Langa-an replied, "Another five times the _balaua_ full," and Ebang said to her son, "We have to pay again the _balaua_
five times full." "That is all right mother I have many jars which
my _alan_ mother gave me," so they gave the extra jars which they asked. As soon as they gave all the jars they took Aponigawani of Kaodanan with them. As soon as they arrived they made a big party, and they invited the _alan_. As soon as the _alan_ arrived at the party
they danced and gave more presents to them. After that the _alan_
and the other people went home and Aponigawani and Dangdangayan had their own house which the _alan_ gave them. This is all.

(Told by Lagmani of Patok.)


7

Aponitolau told Aponibolinayen that they would go to the river to wash their hair. Not long after Aponibolinayen went with him. When they arrived at the spring they washed their hair. As soon as they washed their hair they went to get the _lawed_ [179] vine and they went back home. As soon as they reached home Aponitolau said to Aponibolinayen,

"Will you comb my hair? I am anxious to go to fight." So Aponibolinayen combed his hair. As soon as she combed it he said, "Ala, you go and get my clout, my belt which is sewed with gold, and my striped coat,
and also get my _ambosau_." [180] Aponibolinayen got them and Aponitolau dressed up. As soon as he was dressed he took his shield, his headaxe,
and spear, and went. He struck the side of his shield, and it sounded like one hundred people. While he was walking and striking his shield in the middle of the way, Gimbagonan, the wife of Iwaginan, heard him,
when he was near to Pindayan. When he passed by the town he continued toward the town of Giambolan. In a short time he arrived at the well
of Giambolan. He met the young girls who were dipping water from the well. He killed all of them with his headaxe and spear. Not
long after he cut off their heads and he went up to the town and directly to the house of Giambolan. When he arrived at the house, he said, "Good morning, Giambolan. Go and get your shield, headaxe and spear, and boar's tusk armlet for we are going to fight here in your
yard." Giambolan got his headaxe and spears for he wanted to fight. As soon as he arrived where Aponitolau was he threw his spears at him and Aponitolau soon got all the spears which he threw. Then he tried to cut off Aponitolau's head, but Aponitolau got his headaxe and said to him, "Now I am next, for you did not injure me at all," and Giambolan said,
"Yes." Aponitolau commanded his headaxe and spear to go to Giambolan's side as soon as he threw them; so Giambolan laid down and the headaxe went and cut off Giambolan's ten heads.

As soon as Aponitolau had killed Giambolan he again commanded his spear and headaxe to cut off the heads of all the people in the houses and the headaxe and spear went and Aponitolau sat by the town waiting for them. As soon as the spear and headaxe had killed all the people who lived in the town they went back to him and Aponitolau said, "You heads of the people gather in one place, but you heads of Giambolan and you heads of the women be separate from the others. You gather by the house of Giambolan." Not long after all the heads gathered
and he said again, "You heads of Giambolango first, and you heads
of the men precede the women. As soon as you arrive in Kadalayapan stop by the gate of the town. You house of Giambolango go directly
to my house in Kadalayapan. Go with the big storm." So the house went. "You oranges of Giambolan come and follow us." So the oranges followed them. He told them to go in front of his house. They went
and Aponitolau followed them, and the oranges followed him.

Not long after Aponitolau looked back and he saw the _alzados_ following him, for they wished to kill him. As soon as he saw them he commanded his strike-a-light to become a high bank so the _alzados_ could not follow him. [181] So the strike-a-light became a high bank, and the _alzados_ were on the other side and could not follow him. Not long after he was near to Kadalayapan. As soon as he arrived there
he found all the heads near the gate of the town and he said to them,

"You heads of Giambolan stay by the well, and you heads of the people who lived with him gather here by the gate." He went to the town and told the people to gather by the gate and play the _gansas_ and dance, and he commanded someone to invite their friends in other towns. Not long after the people from the other towns arrived in Kadalayapan,
and the people who lived there were still dancing. Aponitolau danced
with Danay of Kabisilan. The next was his son Kanag Kabagbagowan who danced with five young girls who never go outdoors. As soon as they
had all danced they went to their towns. Then they put the heads around the town of Kadalayapan.

(Told by Magwati of Lagangilang.)


8

Aponibolinayen and Aponitolau were anxious to make _Sayang_, [182] so Aponitolau asked Aponibolinayen about his clout and his striped belt. "Well, you go and get them, for I am going to get the head
of the old man To-odan of Kalaskigan before we make _Sayang_." So Aponibolinayen went to get his clout and belt. After that he oiled
his hair and Aponibolinayen put a golden bead on each hair. Not long after he went to get his headaxe and spear. As soon as Aponibolinayen gave him his provisions for the journey, he started.

When he was in the middle of the way he became very tired, for it was far. So he used magic and he said, "I use my power so that I will arrive at once at the town of To-odan of Kalaskigan." Soon after
he arrived in Kalaskigan. When he arrived at the yard beside the
_balaua_ the old man was lying down. The old man saw him and said, "Eb, I have a man to eat." And Aponitolau said, "You will never eat me. Go and get your headaxe and spear, for you must fight with me. I will take your head before I make _Sayang_." The old man was angry and he stood up and went to get his headaxe and spear. "You are the only person who ever came in my town. Go on, and throw your spear, if you are brave," said To-odan. "If I am the first to throw my spear
you will never have a chance to throw yours, for I will kill you at
once. You better throw yours first," said Aponitolau. The old man was angry, and he threw his spear. But his spear glanced off from the body of Aponitolau, for he used his power so that everything glanced away from his body. The old man To-odan ran toward him and tried to cut off his head, but the headaxe could not cut Aponitolau, and the old man To-odan said to him, "You, truly, are a brave man, that was why you came to my town. Try and throw your spear at me, for if you can hit me it is all right, for I have killed many people." Aponitolau
threw his spear at his side, and it went clear through his body and To-odan laid down. Aponitolau cut off his head.

Not long after Aponitolau went back home and Don Carlos of Kabaiganan (Vigan) [183] was anxious to go and see Aponibolinayen. So he commanded his spirit companions to be ready to go with him to Kadalayapan. As
soon as they were ready he said to them, "You go first, my companions, we are going to the town of Aponibolinayen, for I have heard that she
is a pretty woman, and I wish to see her." Not long after they arrived at the river, and they got on to the raft. Soon they arrived at the
well of Kadalayapan and Indiapan was dipping water from the well, and Don Carlos spoke to her. "Is this the well of Aponibolinayen?" Indiapan said, "Yes." "Will you go and tell her to come here and see what I
have to sell?" Indiapan went up to the town and said "Aponibolinayen,
Don Carlos wants you to see what he has to sell." "I don't wish to go and see what he has to sell." So Indiapan went back to the well
and said to Don Carlos "Aponibolinayen does not wish to come, and she does not wish to buy what you have to sell." So he pondered what he should do. "The best thing for me to do is to go to their house
to get a drink." So he went up to the town and said, "Good morning, Aponibolinayen, will you give me some water to drink? For a long time I have wished to drink your water." Aponibolinayen answered, "Why did you come from the well? Why did you not drink while you were there?" "I did not drink there, for I wished to drink of your water." Aponibolinayen
did not give him any for she was afraid; then Don Carlos used magic so that she dropped her needle. The needle dropped and she said to him, "Will you hand the needle which I dropped to me, Don Carlos." So Don Carlos picked up the needle and he put a love charm on it, and he gave it to her. [184] Not long after Don Carlos wanted to go back home,
but Aponibolinayen would not let him go, and she said, "Come up in the house." So he went up into the house.

Not long after Aponitolau shouted near to the town and he did not hear Aponibolinayen answer. As soon as he reached the gate of the town he shouted again, and she did not answer, for Don Carlos was with her. Not long after Don Carlos went home and Aponibolinayen saw his belt which he had left, for he was in a hurry. So she ran and got the ladder to the rice granary, and she hid the belt. Aponitolau met Don Carlos at the gate of the town and he asked him why he had gone into the town, and he answered, "I want to sell something." Not long after Aponitolau went to their house and asked Aponibolinayen why she did not reply to him when he shouted two times. "I did not answer, for I have a headache." "Why is the fastening on the door different from before?" "I don't know. No one came in." Not long after Aponitolau went up into the house. "Now, Aponibolinayen, I have taken the head
of the old man To-odan of Kalaskigan. You command the people to begin to pound rice, for we will make _Sayang_"

Not long after Aponitolau saw a flame of fire in the rice granary and he said, "Why is there a fire in the rice granary?" So he ran to

see. Not long after he went inside of the granary and he saw what it was. As soon as he saw that it was a golden belt he said, "I think this is the belt of the man who came here while I was gone." So he took it and hid it and did not let Aponibolinayen see it. Not long
after they commanded the people to go and get betel-nuts. When they arrived with the fruit they oiled them and Aponitolau said, "Tell me whom we shall invite beside our relatives in the other towns." And Aponibolinayen told him to invite Don Carlos of Kabaiganan, for she wished always to see him. So they sent a betel-nut to go and get Don Carlos, and they sent one to the old woman Alokotan of Nagbotobotan and Awig of Natpangan and other towns.

Not long after the betel-nut reached the place where Don Carlos lived and it met his spirit helpers. As soon as the betel-nut reached Don
Carlos, "Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen are making _Sayang_, and I came to invite you." "All right, you go first. I will dress and go after
you," he said. Not long after he dressed up and went to follow the betel-nuts. Not long after all the other people from the other towns arrived where they were making _Sayang_ and Aponitolau tried to put the belt on each person to see if it fitted and no one was the right size. As soon as Don Carlos arrived Aponitolau tried the belt on him and it was all right. So Aponitolau gave him the belt and he got a golden chair and he put it in the middle of the party and made Don Carlos sit on it. All of the people were dancing and Aponitolau went and sharpened his headaxe. Not long after, "Ala, you Aponibolinayen take Kanag and Alama-an with you and dance with Don Carlos." Not long after they danced. While they were dancing Aponitolau cut off
the head of Don Carlos. The head sprang up and went to the breast of Aponibolinayen, and Aponibolinayen and Kanag and Alama-an ran away, and their clothes were torn, for they ran through many thorns.

Not long after the people who went to attend the _Sayang_ went home, and Aponibolinayen and Kanag and Alama-an arrived in a level plain. They went to the shade of an _alosip_ [185] tree and they sat there many days, for they were very tired. "I am anxious to drink water," said Aponibolinayen, and not long after they heard a rooster crowing. "I think we are near a town, for I hear a rooster crowing." So they went where they had heard the rooster. "We go and drink," said Aponibolinayen. Not long after they reached the place where _Silit_ (one kind of lightning) and the dog _Kimat_ [186] guarded. _Silit_ and
the dog were sleeping and did not see them go inside of the town. Soon they arrived in the yard of the golden house of Balbalaoga of Dona and they were ashamed to ask for water to drink, for they were naked. So they went to the _balaua_ and slept, for they were tired.

While they were sleeping, Balbalaoga saw them in his _balaua_, and he was surprised, because no one was permitted to enter the town, for _Silit_ and the dog prevented. He said, "What is the matter of the

guards that they did not see those people enter the town? Perhaps they are my relatives." So he took some clothes to the _balaua_ for them. He covered them with blankets while they slept. As soon as he covered them he sat down in the _balaua_ and waited until they got up. As soon as Aponibolinayen awoke she saw him and said, "Do not wound us in many places, so we will not need to cure so much." Balbalaoga said,
"If I were an enemy I would have killed you while you slept. We are going to chew betel-nut and see who you are." So he cut a betel-nut and gave to them, and their spittle was like agate beads. So he took them up into his golden house and told his mother _alan_ to give them some clothes. Not long after they drank _basi_, after they had finished eating. All the _alan_ were drunk and the mother of Balbalaoga of Dona said to them, "Aponibolinayen, Balbalaoga is your brother, for he was the after-birth of Awig, which they put in the _tabalang_ which they
sent down the stream. [187] So I picked him up, for I had no child to inherit all my things." Not long after they knew that they were
brother and sister Balbalaoga asked his sister why they came to Dona without clothes. She said, "Aponitolau is jealous of Don Carlos and
he cut off his head, and the head jumped to my breasts, so we were frightened and ran away. That is why we came here. I did not know I had a brother who lived here." The head still hung to the breasts of Aponibolinayen, but they had not seen it before, for she had covered it. As soon as she showed it to Balbalaoga he took the head from her
breasts and they sent some betel-nuts to go and summon their mother.

As soon as the betel-nut arrived in Kaodanan it said to Pagbokasan and Ebang, "Good morning. I came here for Balbalaoga, and his sister
sent me to come and get you." So Ebang and Pagbokasan were surprised, because Aponibolinayen had another brother. So they called Awig and said to him, "Here is a betel-nut from Dona which Aponibolinayen
and Balbalaoga sent, for they want to see us." Awig said to them, "I don't believe that Aponibolinayen is still alive, for we have searched for her a very long time, and I never heard of a place called Dona, and I have been all over the world."

They started and the betel-nut led them. "Where is Dona?" they said
to the betel-nut. "Dona is somewhere. Follow me. You must step on the big dishes where I step." Not long after they arrived in the place
where Balbalaoga lived and were surprised at the big golden house,
and Balbalaoga and Aponibolinayen were watching them from the window, and they went to the yard of the house. Ebang and Pagbokasan did not believe that Balbalaoga was their son, so they chewed betel-nut. As
soon as they chewed they found out that he was the after-birth of Awig. So Balbalaoga took them into his house.

Not long after Balbalaoga said to them, "Wait for me for awhile, for I am going to hunt deer." So he called his dogs who talked with the thunder, they were so big and also powerful. Not long after he

went to the wood and the dogs caught three deer. He cut up the deer and took them back home.

Not long after Aponitolau heard that Aponibolinayen was with her brother in Dona. He went to follow her, for he intended to live with
her again. Ebang and Pagbokasan took Balbalaoga and Aponibolinayen to Kaodanan, and they used their power so that all the things which
the _alan_ had given to Balbalaoga went to Kaodanan. Not long after the house and the other things which the _alan_ had given went to Kaodanan, all the _alan_ flew away. Not long after they made _balaua_ in Kaodanan, and they called all their relatives in the other towns
and all of the _alan_ who cared for Balbalaoga of Dona. After that all the people went to attend their _balaua_. In that time Balbalaoga was married and Aponitolau was very sorry, because he could not remarry Aponibolinayen, and he went to the _balaua_ even though he was not invited. As soon as the _balaua_ was over, all the people went back home, but Balbalaoga did not go back to Dona. The _alan_ flew away after he was married.

(Told by Magwati of Lagangilang).




9

Ayo went to the spring. When she went she met Dagdagalisit, who was fishing in the river. When she reached him she became pregnant. Not long after she went home. When she arrived in her house the space between the little finger and the next itched. "Bolinayen, you stick
the needle in my finger where it itches. I do not know what makes it itch so," she said. As soon as Bolinayen stuck the needle the little
baby popped out. [188] "What shall we name the baby?" "Dagolayan will
be his name." The baby shook his head, so they gave him the name Kanag.

Awig went to wash his hair in the spring. When he finished washing
his hair he went home. When he reached his house he made Ayo louse him. While Ayo was lousing him the milk from her breasts dropped
on Awig's legs. "Why, Ayo, does the milk from your breasts drop on my legs?" he asked. He sat up and asked them many times until they
brought the baby. When they brought the baby, "We are going home to Natpangan now, because it does not do me any good to try and hide you." He took them home and soon he made a bamboo bench by the gate of the town where the people passed when they went to the well, and
he placed the baby on it. Then they built _balaua_, for he wanted to
see the father of the baby. Not long after he commanded some one to go and get betel-nuts and he oiled them. He sent them to go and invite

all the people in the world. When they arrived none of them wanted the baby to recognize them. When the baby did not go to any of them, he sent someone to get a betel-nut to send to Dagdagalisit whom they had not invited. As soon as the betel-nut arrived at the place where Dagdagalisit lived "Dagdagalisit came to Natpangan for Awig makes
_balaua_," it said. "I cannot go, for I am ashamed, because I have no good clothes," he said, for his clout was the dried bark of a banana tree. "If you do not come I will grow on your big pig," it said,
and the betel-nut jumped on the back of the big pig, and it began
to squeal. When his big pig began squealing loudly, because the tree grew on his back, Dagdagalisit said, "I come now." Not long after he went. When he came walking up the trail from the spring the baby saw him, and went to him, and Awig saw him carrying the baby. "I did not think it would happen this way to Aponibolinayen," he said. Then he sent Aponibolinayen away, and he made her carry the poor house box that they used to put the fish in which Dagdagalisit caught in the
river. "You carry the female pig so that you have something to eat by the river," said Awig to Dagdagalisit. So they went; Aponibolinayen carried the poor box and Awig took her beads and clothes off from her, and he gave her old clothes to use, and so they went.

When they were near the spring they threw away the things they carried, the female pig and poor box. While they were walking near the town of
Dagdagalisit, which was Kabenbenlan, Ayo saw the golden house. "We must not walk by the side of the golden house, for I am ashamed before the
man who owns it," said Ayo to Dagdagalisit. They were still walking and Ayo followed him. As soon as they arrived at the ladder Dagdagalisit went upstairs and Ayo did not because she thought that Dagdagalisit did not own that house, and Dagdagalisit made her go up, and she did. As soon as she arrived above Dagdagalisit went to get rice to give Ayo
to cook. "Cook this, Ayo, while I go to catch fish for us to eat,"
he said, and he went. As soon as he caught two fish he went home, and he left the dry bark of the banana, which he used as a clout,
by the river, and he became Ligi, [189] so he went home. As soon as he arrived he made Ayo wake up, when he finished cooking the fish, and the baby went to him to be carried. He called Ayo and she did not go. "I wait for my husband, we will both eat at one time, bye
and bye," she said, and she took the baby which he carried, for
she was ashamed. "No, I was Dagdagalisit, but used the bark of the banana tree for a clout, because I changed my form. Let us eat." So they ate. As soon as they finished eating, "We shall make _balaua_ so that we invite all our relatives in the different towns, and we
also shall invite Awig and Aponigonay," he said. Not long after he went and took the betel-nuts which he cut. When he had cut them all he oiled them and sent them to the different towns.

When the people from the different towns arrived by the spring in Kabenbenlan they were surprised because all the stones of the spring

were of gold. Not long after they went up to the town. Next day Awig and Aponigonay started to go. "Ala, Aponigonay, take rice so that we may cook it in Kabenbenlan, because Aponibolinayen and Dagdagalisit have no rice to cook. What will Dagdagalisit use for his _balaua?_ He ties a banana bark clout on his body. I do not think he has rice, so
we will take some for us to eat. You people who live in the same town we go to attend _balaua_. You take food with you for Aponibolinayen and Dagdagalisit make _balaua_." Not long after they went, and when they arrived in the place where the spring is in Kabenbenlan they
saw the beautiful spring whose stones were all gold. The gravel which they used to wash the pottery with was all agates which have no holes through them. "I do not think that Dagdagalisit has a spring like this, for his clout is only the dry bark of the banana, but it is best for
us to go and see in the town." They went, and when they had almost reached the town the golden house twinkled. "We must not walk by the golden house," said Awig. "We must not walk by that golden house, you say, but that is where the people are dancing," said Aponibolnay. As
they walked they saw that the men and women who were making _alawig_
[190] were the companions of Aponibolinayen. Awig said, "That is the man who used to put the clout of banana leaves on him." As soon as Aponitolau [191] and Aponibolinayen finished dancing they went to take
the hands of Awig and Aponibolay, and Aponitolau commanded the people who lived with them to bring golden seats. After that Aponitolau went
to make Awig sit down. "You sit down, brother-in-law, and we will forget the things which have passed." Then he made him sit down and soon Awig and Asigtanan danced. While they were dancing Aponitolau went to cut off Awig's head. Not long after the women who never go outdoors [192] went to bring Awig to life. As soon as they made him alive again, Aponitolau gave the marriage price. It was nine times
full, the _balaua_, and when Aponibolnay raised up her elbow half of it vanished, which was in the _balaua_. And Aponibolinayen used her power and the _balaua_ was full again.

Not long after they chewed betel-nut and the quid of Langa-an and Pagatipanan and the quids of Dagdagalisit went together, and the
quid of Pagbokasan and Ebang went to the quid of Aponibolinayen and Awig, and Langa-an and Pagatipanan changed the name of Dagdagalisit to Ligi. "Ala, now mother old _alan_ do not feel sorry, for we take Aponitolau to Kadalayapan," said Langa-an. "Ala, yes, you take them, take all my valuable things. If it were not for me, Aponitolau would
not be alive, for you Langa-an had a miscarriage and lost him, when you went to wash your hair, so I picked him up, because I had no one to inherit my possessions. Take all my things, so that Aponitolau and his wife may own them." Not long after they went home and Awig took all the payment for Aponibolinayen and all the _alan_ flew away. So Awig and Aponitolau went to their towns.

10

Aponibalagen went to put Aponibolinayen in Kabwa-an, where no one could see her. As soon as they arrived at the ocean they rode on
the crocodiles to Kabwa-an. When they arrived there Aponibalagen used magic so that a big golden house stood in the middle of a wide plain. In the yard were many betel-nut trees and a spring below the trees. The gravel where the stream flowed was beads called _pagatpat_ and _kodla_, and the leaves and grass used to rub the inside of the
jars was a necklace of golden wire.

When the golden house, and betel-nuts, and spring had appeared, Aponibalagen left an old woman with Aponibolinayen and Alama-an, and Sinogyaman and Indiapan, and he went back home, and he said to them, "Do not be afraid to stay, for no one can see you here, where I have
put you, and if anyone tries to come here the crocodiles will eat them. You have everything you need." So he went home.

Ingiwan who lived in Kabilabilan went to take a walk. As soon as he arrived at the ocean he wondered how he could get across. Not long after he put his headaxe on the water and he rode on it, for he used magic, and his headaxe floated and went to the other side of the ocean. As soon as he reached the other side he took a walk
and he saw the big golden house in the middle of the wide plain. He was surprised, and he went to see it, and the crocodiles all slept while he crossed the ocean. When he reached the spring he said, "How pretty the well is. I think the girl who owns this well has magical power, and that she is pretty also." So he went to the house
and said, "Good afternoon." Alama-an was cooking, and she said, "Good afternoon." She looked at him from the window, and she saw that he was a fine looking man. She did not tell Aponibolinayen, but she had
him go up the ladder. The old woman who took care of them asked why she did not tell her and Aponibolinayen. Alama-an said she did not
know what she was doing when she had him go up. So the old woman went to ask him what he came for. He said, "I just took a walk and I did
not know how to get home, for there was a very high bank in the way, so I came across the ocean to learn the other way back home. While I was still on the ocean I saw this big golden house. I came here,
for I was very tired, for it is more than one month since I left Kabilabilan." "Ala, you Alama-an go and cook some food for this young man," said the old woman, and Alama-an went truly, and when she finished cooking, the old woman called him to eat. The young man said he did not wish to eat unless one of the ladies who never went outdoors [193] ate with him. "Alama-an is the girl who never goes outdoors," said the old woman, but he did not believe her, and so he did not go. When he would not eat she called Sinogyaman to go

and eat, but the young man said, "I do not wish to eat with anyone except the pretty girl who never goes outdoors." So the old woman called Indiapan. As soon as she went outdoors to the place where the young man was, "No, that is not the girl I want. There is one prettier still. I will not go to eat." The old woman became angry and said,
"If you are not hungry and do not wish to eat that is all right. I have offered three young girls to eat with you, but if you do not wish to
eat with them I do not care." When the old woman and the three girls had eaten they gave him a place to sleep, and they slept also.

While the others were talking to the young man, Aponibolinayen was looking through a crack of the house, and she liked him very much. She wished to go outdoors and talk to him, but she was afraid because
the old woman had said there were only the three young girls whom she called. As soon as they had finished talking, they went to bed.

In the middle of the night Ingiwan said to himself, "I believe there
are other young girls here prettier than the last one she showed me. I will use my power and will become a firefly, and I will fly to all
parts of the house, and see if there is a prettier one there." So he
used his power and he became a firefly and he flew. [194] When he was in the room where the old woman was, he left, and went where Alama-an was, and he went on to Sinogyaman. When he did not like her he went to Indiapan. "This is the last girl she showed me and I like her, but I
believe that there is another prettier." So he went to the next room, but no one slept there, and so he went on to the ninth room. He heard the sound of the pan pipe in the ninth room, and he was very glad. He flew over the head of the woman who was playing, and she stopped playing and struck at him. "How did the firefly get in here? I do not think there are any cracks in here." The firefly said, "Do not strike
at me, for I fear you will hit my headaxe and be cut." So he became a
man and sat down beside her, and Aponibolinayen saw that it was the man who had talked with the old woman and the girls, and she loved him,
but she said, "Go outdoors, do not come here. I am afraid that the old woman who cares for us will see us. If you want something wait until morning and we will talk with her." Ingiwan did not get up and he would not go outdoors, and he said, "The best thing for us to do is to chew betel-nut, so we will know each other. Do not be afraid for I would not have come here if it was not my fortune to marry you, for I
was taking a walk and intended to go back home, but I met a high bank in the way, and there was no place to go except the ocean, so I came across the ocean. As soon as I reached the field I saw your house and I was surprised to see the golden house in the middle of the field. I
spoke to the young girl who was cooking and she asked me to come up, and the old woman hated her. They asked me to eat, but I would not unless a pretty girl ate with me. So the old woman called two other pretty girls, but I did not want them, for they are not so pretty
as you. I thought there were others prettier than the last one she

showed me, so I became a firefly. It is my fortune to marry you." So he cut the betel-nut, but Aponibolinayen did not want to chew. When he talked to her so she could not sleep she took the betel-nut, and
when they chewed they saw that they both had magical power and that it was good for them to marry. Ingiwan said, "You are the woman who lives here and you must tell your name first." "No, it is not good for
a woman to tell her name first. You tell your name." Not long after, "My name is Ingiwan, the son of _alan_, of Kabilabilan, who did not
find a way to go home, but who found you." "My name is Aponibolinayen, who is the sister of Aponibalagen of Natpangan, who put me here so
no one might see me. It is bad that you have come."

When the daylight came Alama-an went to cook and when she finished the old woman said to her, "Go and call the man and see if he wishes to
eat with the girls. You call them, but do not call Aponibolinayen, for that is why we are here, so no one can see her. I do not know
why the alligators did not see him." Aponibolinayen and Ingiwan heard what she said and they laughed. So Alama-an went to call him, but he was not in the room. She went to tell the old woman that he was not there, and they were surprised, for they thought he had gone home, for all the other rooms were locked. "If he is not there you go and
call Aponibolinayen and we will eat." The three girls went to the room of Aponibolinayen, but Ingiwan disappeared and they only saw Aponibolinayen. So they all went to eat and Ingiwan was not hungry, for Aponibolinayen used magic, so that rice and meat went to where he was hiding.

When they had lived together a long time Aponibolinayen said to him, "You better go home now, for it is time for my brother to visit us. If you wish to marry me you must arrange with him and my father." So
Ingiwan went back home and the crocodiles only watched him, but did not try to eat him. He rode on his headaxe, and when he reached the other side of the ocean he saw that the high bank had disappeared and he found the way home.

Not long after Aponibalagen went to wash his hair, and he went to the place where Aponibolinayen and the other girls were living. The three girls and the old woman agreed not to tell that a man had been
there. As soon as Aponibalagen arrived in Kabwa-an he asked the old woman if anyone had been there, and she replied, "No." He called Alama-an and the other girls to the place where Aponibolinayen
was, so all of them might louse him. While Aponibolinayen was lousing her brother the milk from her breasts dropped on his legs, and Aponibalagen was surprised, and he said, "What have you done,
Aponibolinayen." She tried to rub it off from his leg. "No, do not rub it off; what is that?" "I do not know, brother. I guess I am sweating, for I am hot." "No, I do not believe you, I think someone has been here." He called the old woman and asked her. "You, grandmother,

did you see a man who came here? Do not tell a lie." "Why?" asked the old woman. But she knew that Aponibolinayen had a little baby, for she had pricked her little finger and the baby had come out. [195]
"When the girls were lousing me the milk from Aponibolinayen's breast dropped on my legs. I think you know the man who has been here." "I do not believe anyone came here, for we are on this side of the ocean, and the crocodiles protect us."

Aponibalagen called all the crocodiles to the side of the house,
and he whipped all the crocodiles, and he asked them why they did not eat the man who went to Kabwa-an. As soon as he whipped them one of them said, "We did not see any man come here, but we were all very sleepy one day a long time ago. We would have eaten the man if we had seen him." Aponibalagen whipped all of them again. "I put you here to prevent anyone from coming here, and you did not watch. Go away." The crocodiles were afraid and they said, "If that is what you say we will
go." So they went. Aponibalagen went back to the house and whipped the girls. "We will go back now to Kaodanan. I thought it was good
for you to be here, but you have done wrong." So he took them back to Kaodanan and they made _balaua_ in order to find out who was the father of the boy. The boy grew one span every time they bathed him, [196]
for they used their power. In a few days they built their _balaua_ and the _liblibayan_ [197] got betel-nuts which were covered with gold, and they oiled them and sent them to invite the people in all parts of the world. So the betel-nuts went.

As soon as the betel-nuts arrived in Kabilabilan, they said,
"Good morning, Kagkagakag," [198] to the man who was lying in his
_balaua_ covered with mud. "We came to invite you to the _balaua_ of Aponibalagen." "I do not wish to go, for I have no clothes and am
ashamed. I do not know the man who is going to make _balaua_." "If you do not go I will grow on your knee," said one of the betel-nuts. "Do
as you wish." So the betel-nut grew on his knee. When it grew big he became tired and he said, "Get off from me now and I will
go." So they went. All the people from the other towns had arrived
and Aponibalagen carried the baby, to see whom the baby would want to go to, but the baby did not want any of them. When the betel-nut and Kagkagakag appeared the baby was happy and wanted to go to him. So Aponibalagen gave the boy to him and all the people were surprised
that Aponibolinayen had wanted him. Not long after they danced, and when they had finished Aponibalagen said to Aponibolinayen, "Take off all your things and go to Kagkagakag." Aponibolinayen did not wish to go, for he was not the same man she was with before, but her brother made her go, and he said, "Kagkagakag, take her to
your town." So he took her to his town, and when they reached the gate Aponibolinayen was crying, but he said to her, "Do not feel bad, I am
the man who came to Kabwa-an. That is why the boy wants me, for I am his father." Aponibolinayen did not believe him, but when they arrived

at the spring of Kabilabilan she was surprised to see that the stones were of gold, and the fruits of the trees were of gold and were beads, and she said to Kagkagakag, "Why do we come here? It is shameful for us to be seen by the man who owns this." Kagkagakag laughed at her. "If you do not believe that I am your husband, you watch." And he went to take a bath, and the mud all washed off, and she saw that
he was the man who was with her before in Kabwa-an. So they went up to the town, and the _alan_ who cared for Ingiwan was glad to see them.

Not long after they made _balaua_, for they wished to call Aponibalagen so that he would not always feel badly about them. Not long after they sent the betel-nuts to summon their relatives. As soon as the betel-nut arrived in Kaodanan, "Good afternoon, Aponibolinayen and Kagkagakag want you to attend their _Sayang_." Aponibalagen laughed and said, "Yes," and he called all the people and told them to prepare to go
to the _balaua_.

When they arrived at the spring everyone was astonished, for all the fruit of the trees was of gold, and all the places they walked were covered with plates. And Aponibalagen said, "I do not think this is the spring of Kagkagakag. I think someone else owns it. We will go up to the house where he lives." When they reached the gate of the town they asked the young girl who was going to the spring where
Aponibolinayen and Kagkagakag slept, and the woman said, "You follow these plates, for they go to the ladder of Kagkagakag's house." So
they went and they always walked on the plates. When they arrived
they saw many people dancing in the yard and Aponibalagen shook their hands. "Kagkagakag, if you had come as you are now to my _balaua_
I would not have been bad to my sister." Kagkagakag laughed at them and they all chewed betel-nut.

While they were chewing Langa-an and Pagatipanan went to them and they said, "We came to chew betel-nut also to see if we are related to you." Kagkagakag gave them betel-nut, and when they chewed they found out that they were relatives and they called Kagkagakag, Aponitolau,
and he paid the marriage price for Aponibolinayen. Aponigawani said to him, "I thought I had no brother. I do not know what my father
and mother did with you." The _alan_ who cared for Aponitolau said, "He was by the road where Langa-an had dropped him on her way to Nagbotobotan, so I picked him up, for I have no children." As soon as Aponitolau paid the marriage price they danced again, and the _alan_ gave all her things to Aponitolau, for Langa-an and Pagatipanan took them home. Not long after Aponibalagen married Aponigawani, and he paid the same as Aponitolau had paid for Aponibolinayen.

(Told by Madomar, a woman of Riang barrio Patok.)

11

"I go to visit my cousin Gawigawen of Adasin," said Aponitolau. He pushed his raft until he reached Pangasinan. At the spring he asked
the women if his cousin Aponibolinayen was there. "She is not, because she went to celebrate _Sayang._ [199] Did you not get the invitation
of Gawigawen of Adasin?" "No," said Aponitolau.

Aponibolinayen went to have Lisnaya fix her upper arm beads and they sat in the shade of the _pamlo-ongen_ tree, and Aponibolinayen dropped her switch.

"I wish to visit my relatives, but am ashamed because the invitation did not reach me," said Aponitolau. So he went to rest in the shade of
the _pamlo-ongen_ tree, and he saw there the switch which was spread out, and there was none like it.

The women who had been at the spring said, "Why did you not invite Aponitolau? Whenever we have trouble, it is he and his cousin that we call."

"Ala, we go down to the river to see." They went to get Aponitolau and when they arrived at the spring he was there in the shade of the tree. "Ala, forgive us because the invitation did not reach you and come up to the _Sayang_" "Yes, but if the old enemy is there, when I go, the dance circle will be disturbed, if we fight." They still
requested him, and he went up to the place where they danced during the two months.

Dalinmanok of Dalinapoyan said, "Long ago, when my grandfather was young, the town of Kadalayapan became wooded." (He meant that his grandfather had destroyed the town in which Aponitolau's ancestors lived.) "My grandfather Dagolayen long ago said, 'Dalinapoyan, Dagala,
and also Dagopan became wooded.'" Then Dalinmanok became angry; he looked like a courting cock and seized Aponitolau by the hair. "It
is as I predicted, Cousin Gawigawen; the circle is now broken." They parted the fighters, but the hawk hastened to the town of Kadalayapan to tell Aponigawani.

"Cousin Dumalagan, Cousin Agyokan; the enemy--the old one--has killed my brother Aponitolau at the _Sayang_ of Gawigawen of Adasin, so says the hawk." After that they started and soon arrived in Adasin. They began at the south end of the town and killed so many it looked as though they were cutting down banana trees. "Look down, Aponitolau, and see if you know the men who are destroying the town." Aponitolau truly looked. "Why, Cousin Dumalagan and Cousin Agyokan, do you destroy the town?" "Because the hawk reported to Aponigawani that

you had been killed by the old enemy in the town of Adasin, and she
has thrown away her upper arm beads [200] by the gate of Kadalayapan."

"Ala! you stop. Ala! You who live, join their heads and their bodies; you join all," he said. "I will spit once and they will appear as if
they were not cut at all. I will whip my perfume which is _banowes_, they quickly breathe. I whip my perfume which is _alikadakad_ (clatter), and they quickly stand up. I whip my perfume which is
_dagimonau (monau_--just awakened) and they quickly recover." [201] "Oh, how long we have slept," they said. "How long we have slept,
you say, and you have been dead." "Oh, how powerful are the people of Kadalayapan! Even if we die, we may hope to live again at once," they said, and all went up to the house of Gawigawen.

"Now Dalinmanok of Dalinapoyan, Dumpoga of Dagala, Ligi of Madagitan and Ligi of Dagopan, expect me in two months' time, for I shall come to fight you." After that they agreed and everybody went home. When they arrived at Kadalayapan there were no upper arm beads on Aponigawani, for she believed the hawk when it told her Aponitolau was dead. "No,
I am not dead, but when two months have passed I shall go to fight Dalinmanok and his companions."

"When you went to sail, did you not find the switch which belongs to Aponibolinayen? They are now making a ceremony to find it." "It is here, that which I picked up in the shade of the _pamlo-ongen_ tree, and I will take it back when I go to fight."

Not long after that, according to the custom of the story, the second
month came. "Old men who know the signs and very old women, come and see the liver and gall sack, because I go to fight." After that they
all gathered, they caught the pig and cut it in large pieces. "Ala,
old men who know the signs and very old women, come and see the gall, for I go to fight." [202] "This is better than your grandfather had
when he consulted the gall. How fearful you will be to the town which you go to fight!" "Cousin Agyokan, go and tell all our cousins that
we start when morning comes." When early morning came--as goes in a story--they arrived. Aponitolau played his Jew's harp at the spring of
the town, and it sounded like the song of a bird and the people smelt the odor of _alangigan (Ilangilang)_ which is only possessed by the people of Kadalayapan. "Ala, it is Aponitolau," said Dalinmanok. "Go and tell our companions that we go to fight him at the river, for
we do not wish them to come on shore in our town." When it was day, they met at the river and they fought until afternoon; and when Aponitolau was thirsty his headaxe turned slantwise and water blue as indigo flowed off it freely.

"Dumpoga of Dagala, Ligi of Madagitan, Ligi of Dagopan, Masilnag of Kaskasilnagan, I come to teach you because you do not know how to

kill. When one tries to kill your left side, receive the blow with your right, and when they try to kill the right side, receive it with the left. Ala! you that are left alive, it is better that I spare you
and that you marry the wives of your companions. I will spare you if you will all agree to give me one hundred jars which are _ginlasan, summadag_, and _tadogan_." They agreed. They rolled the jars which they took down to the river and there were among them _doldoli_
and _ginaang_, [203] and the jars were glad, for they had formerly belonged to Dagolayen, the grandfather of Aponitolau, but had been stolen. After that Aponitolau said, "Give me your betel-nut with
magic power. You jars and all you heads of dead persons which are cut off, go first to Kadalayapan." After that they went and Aponitolau followed. After they arrived they danced with the heads and in a
short time put them on the _sagang._ [204]

"Now, Aponigawani, bring me the switch of Aponibolinayen, for I go to take it to her." He took the switch and used the power of the betel-nut, so that he went as quickly as a person can point to the place of many betel-nuts. In a short time, as the story goes, they
arrived. "Good evening," said Aponitolau, but Aponibolinayen thought him to be an enemy. "Does the old enemy bring greetings?" asked Aponitolau. Then they went up into the house and he leaned against the corner pole. Aponibolinayen looked at Aponitolau and his good looks seemed to climb the corner pole. "It is better for us to tell
our names," said Aponitolau, "for it is difficult to talk when we
do not know each other's names." After that he took out, from his little sack, nuts whose husks were of gold. He cut a nut and when he gave the half to Aponibolinayen their golden finger rings exchanged themselves. "Give back my ring," she said. "Our relationship is the reason they change," said Aponitolau. Then they chewed and laid the
quids on the headaxe and they became agate beads which looked like honey, and laid in parallel lines. "We are relatives," they said,
and in a short time they told their names. When it became time to eat, Aponibolinayen said, "What do we eat?" He took the boiling stick and broke it into pieces, and it became a fish which they ate, [205]
and Aponitolau took the bone out of the fish which Aponibolinayen ate. When they finished eating she spread the mat and the blanket which they kept in the box. "I do not like a blanket which is kept
in a box, for it smells like _kimi_," [206] said Aponitolau. "Why do you not like it? It is what we keep for company and is easy to use," said Aponibolinayen. "The end of my clout is enough for my blanket,"
said Aponitolau. Then Aponibolinayen used the power of the betel-nut and vanished. "Why is there no one here?" said Aponitolau. "I use your power betel-nut, so that I may become the insect which belongs to Kaodanan (i.e., the firefly)."

After that he flew and arrived in the ninth room and sailed back and forth near Aponibolinayen who was playing a pan-pipe. He touched her

body and she struck him away. "You must not strike me away, for you hit my headaxe." After that Aponitolau sat down. "How did you pass in here?" she asked. "I passed through the crack in the wall," said Aponitolau; and after that they laid together. When it was early morning Aponibolinayen sent him away, for she feared her brother might come.

As Aponitolau went quickly to his raft, he was seen by Balau of Baboyan, a great bird. "How fine is Aponitolau, Ala! I shall take him
to marry Ginteban." [207] Then he was seized by Balau and was carried to Baboyan. "Now Aponitolau, you must marry Ginteban who lived in Baygan, for this place is surrounded with water blue as indigo and many crocodiles lie in that water."

In a little while, as the story goes, Aponibolinayen gave birth to a child.

"Ala! grandmother, prick my little finger, for it itches." She truly opened it and the baby popped out like popped rice. [208] After that they bathed it and called him Balokanag, for that is a name of the
people of Kadalayapan. Soon the child was large and asked for a clout, then he asked the name of his father, but they told him falsely that it was Dumanagan. "Ala! get me a top so that I can play with the others," he said. Then his mother gave him the top which was his father's when he was a little boy. After that he went to play with it. When it was
late afternoon, the old woman Alokotan went to feed the pigs, but Kanag threw his top and it broke her jar. "Pa-ya," said the old woman, "the
son is brave; when you go to rescue your father who Balau captured, it will not be my pot toward which you act brave." Kanag cried, "You said, mother, that Dumanagan is my father, but there is another who is my father--Aponitolau whom Balau stole." Then Aponibolinayen cried,
"How bad you are, old woman! We should have exchanged for your jar if you had not told him of his father."

"You must make me sweets, for I go to get my father," he said. "If he was seized, you who are little will be also," said his mother, but he insisted. Then she used magic and secured for him the
headaxe used by his father when he was a little boy, and she made him sweets. He started and went, and his mother planted a _lawed_ vine by their hearth. [209] "Your power betel-nut, so that I go as quickly as pointing to Baboyan," said Kanag. Soon he arrived there, and he saw the crocodiles lying in the water. "You power betel-nut that I may walk on the crocodiles. Make them all sleep so that they do
not feel me." He reached the home of Balau, where he saw great snakes hanging in the trees. He climbed the trees, he cut them so that they
fell down, he cast them down--those big snakes--then he cut off the head of Balau, and the earth trembled. After that he went to find  his father who was in the place of many betel-nuts.

"I am Balokanag whom Aponibolinayen desired, whom you left," he said. "Now I take you home to Kadalayapan." After that he truly
took home Aponitolau, and Ginteban, who lived in Baygan. In a short time they arrived in Kadalayapan and Kanag's mother was there, because Aponigawani had taken her home. "Now we are married forever, Aponitolau," said Ginteban who lived in Baygan. "No, for Aponibolinayen is his wife," replied Aponigawani. "Ala! you chance it and the one who loses is not the one who is married. Put clay dishes in line, which
you are to step on. The one who breaks them loses." Aponibolinayen stepped first and there was nothing broken. Ginteban followed and all those clay dishes which she stepped on were broken. Then she went home to Baygan and after that Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen were married.


12

"I am anxious to eat the fruit of the _bolnay_ tree [210] of Matawitawen," said Aponibolinayen. "What is that?" said Ligi. "I am anxious to eat fish roe, I said." "Bring me a fish net and I will go and get some," said Ligi. So she went to get the fish net and gave it
to him. Not long after he went to the river and he used magic so that all the fish in the river were caught, so truly all the fish were
in the net. He caught one of them and cut it open and took out the roe. As soon as he secured the roe he let the fish all go out of the
net and he went back home. Not long after he reached the yard of their house. "Aponibolinayen, come and get the fish roe which you desire," he said. She went to get it from him. She did not cook it, but put it
on the bamboo hanger above the fire. Ligi went to the _balaua_ and when Aponibolinayen thought he was in the _balaua_ she threw away the roe and the dogs went to eat it, and they snarled and barked beneath the kitchen. "What are the dogs fighting about, Aponibolinayen? I think
you threw away the fish roe," he said to her. "I dropped one of them."

Aponibolinayen went again to the room and she said again that she wished to eat the fruit of Matawitawen, and Ligi asked what she said. "I am anxious for the liver of a deer, I said." So Ligi went
to the woods to hunt deer. As soon as he reached the woods he sent his dogs and he said to them, "You, my black dog, do not catch deer except in the low grass, and you, my striped dog, do not touch any deer unless they have large horns." Not long after his dogs caught some deer, and he took their livers and he let them go again. Not long after he arrived at his house and he called Aponibolinayen, "Come and get the liver, which you wish to eat." Aponibolinayen said to him,
"Put it in the rattan hanger." Ligi went back to the _balaua_, and Aponibolinayen used magic so that Ligi slept. While he was asleep she went to the kitchen to throw away the livers of the deer, and the dogs

went to eat and made such a great disturbance that Ligi awoke and asked Aponibolinayen what was the matter. "One small piece of liver which
I did not eat." She went again to the room and laid down, and Ligi used magic and became an ant, and he went to the crack of the floor,
for he wanted to know what Aponibolinayen was saying, for he suspected that she was not telling him the truth. As soon as he arrived in the
crack Aponibolinayen repeated her wish to eat the _bolnay_ fruit of Matawitawen, and Ligi became a man again and appeared to her. "Why did you not tell the truth, Aponibolinayen?" he said and she answered, "I did not, because Matawitawen is very far and I am afraid that you
will be lost." "No, give me a sack," he said to her. So he went and he used magic so that he arrived at the tree at once.

Not long after he arrived truly at the place and he secured the fruit and put it in the sack. As soon as the sack was filled he took some of the fruit to hold in his other hand and he went. Not long after
he reached the spring in Kadalayapan and his sweethearts were at the spring. "Ligi, how many and how pretty the _bolnay_ fruit are. Your sack is filled and you have some in your hands. Will you give us
some of it to eat?" So Ligi gave them all the fruit in the sack and all he held in his hand. "Do not give everything to Aponibolinayen,
but give to us also." So he gave them all he had. "The baby inside of Aponibolinayen, which desires the _bolnay_, is not your child, but is
the child of Maobagan," said his sweethearts, and when they had eaten all of the fruit Ligi went home with nothing but the sack. He gave
the sack to Aponibolinayen. As soon as she received it she looked to see what was inside and she found one little piece of the fruit which the women had overlooked, and she ate it. As soon as she ate it: "I
am anxious to eat more if there are more. My headache is gone." "What is that?" said Ligi, angrily. "You get ready for I will put you in
the place where the tree is if you want more." Aponibolinayen said
to him, "Because I said that I wanted more you want to put me by the tree." Ligi was angry and he seized her by the arm and dragged her to the tree. As soon as they arrived at the _bolnay_ tree, he dug a hole about neck deep and he put her in it. As soon as he put her in the hole he went back home.

Soon Aponibolinayen was ready to give birth. "What can I do?" she said to the spirit Ayo. Ayo said, "The best thing for us to do is
to prick your little finger." Not long after the little baby popped out of her finger. [211] "What shall we call him?" they said. "We will call him Kanag, for it is the name of the people who live in
Kadalayapan." Every time they gave him a bath the baby always grew, for they used magic. [212] Not long after the baby became a boy,
and he wanted them to get out of the hole. "No, we do not get out, for I am afraid your father is watching us." The little boy got out even though his mother was afraid.

As soon as the boy got out of the hole he listened to hear where many children were playing. So he walked to where the sounds came
from. As soon as he arrived at the place where the boys were swimming Dagolayan saw him. "Who is that boy?" he said to his companions,
and the little boy went near to them. "Why, this boy looks like
my uncle in Kadalayapan," said Dagolayan to his companions, and he asked him who his father was, and the boy said he was the son of an _alan_ of Matawitawen. Not long after they agreed that they would go to fight. So Kanag agreed with them and they decided on a day and Dagolayan told him that he would go to his home. "If that
is what you say, it is all right," said Kanag, and they all went
home. As soon as he arrived at the hole by the _bolnay_ tree: "Why, we are cousins," said the other boy to me. And Aponibolinayen said, "Perhaps it is the boy from Kaodanan." "We agreed to go to fight, day after tomorrow. Make cakes for me to take with me." "No, do not go, for I fear that your father will meet you." "No, I am going. I
will plant the _lawed_ vine by the stove, and if it wilts I am dead,"
[213] he said.

Not long after Aponibolinayen went to make cakes for his provisions, and Dagolayan started early in the morning to go to see Kanag, and it seemed as if a thousand men struck their shields. Kanag heard the
sound of the shield. "Who are the boys with Dagolayan who go with us to fight?" As soon as Kanag met Dagolayan they went, and they both struck their shields, and Ligi heard them and he was surprised for it sounded like two thousand people. So Ligi thought that Dagolayan had many companions. As soon as they arrived where Ligi was waiting for them, "Where did you get the other boy who is with you?" he said to
Dagolayan. He answered that he met him where they were swimming, and that they agreed to go to fight together. Ligi wanted to kill him, and
he said, "I want to kill." "No, do not kill him," said Dagolayan. Not long after they went. As soon as they arrived where there were no houses, Kanag used his power so that it rained very hard and they had nothing to cook. Not long after it rained and Ligi and Dagolayan did not cook anything, for everything was damp. The spirit helpers
of Aponibolinayen always fed Kanag, and Ligi and Dagolayan ate with him. "What is the matter of this boy who is the son of _alan_? He
has something to eat. I do not believe that his mother _alan_ knows how to prepare good food," said Ligi, angrily.

After they had finished eating they went, and after a while they wished to fight. "The best for us to do is to stand in different
places and ambush the people," said Ligi. "The best for you, son of
_alan_, is to stay at the place where the carabao pass by." And Ligi went to hide where the people passed by on the way to the spring, and Dagolayan staid on the other side. A young pretty girl passed by the place where Kanag was hiding, so he cut off her head and he shouted, for he was very happy. "Why did the son of _alan_ kill someone before

us?" said Ligi. Not long after an old woman and an old man passed by where Ligi and Dagolayan were hiding, and they killed them. Not
long after they saw the head which Kanag had taken, and Kanag saw the heads which Ligi and Dagolayan had taken were those of an old man and old woman. Dagolayan said to him, "What did you say when you killed that pretty girl? I think I heard you say, 'Your father does not like
you.' I did not hear very well so I ask for sure." "'The son of _alan_ of Matawitawen kills the pretty girl is what I said.'" "No, that is
not what you said. You said you were the son of a man who lives in Kadalayapan." Not long after, when Dagolayan could not make Kanag repeat what he had said, they all went back to Kadalayapan where Ligi lived.

When they arrived in Kadalayapan they played the _gansa_ and danced, and Aponibolinayen heard the sound of the _gansa_, and she was anxious to go, but her spirit companion would not let her go. They saw that
the _lawed_ vine was green. Not long after they made Kanag dance, and when his body trembled, while he danced, the whole town of Kadalayapan trembled also; and when he moved his feet the fish were around his
feet and they went to lap his feet, because the water came up into the town. When he stamped his feet the coconuts fell from the trees,
and Ligi was very angry, and he went to sharpen his headaxe. As soon as he had sharpened his headaxe he went to where Kanag was dancing and he cut off his head. When Aponibolinayen looked at the _lawed_ vine each leaf was wilted. "Grandmother, the _lawed_ vine which
Kanag planted is wilted," said Aponibolinayen. "I am going to get him." So she went and as she approached the place where Ligi used to live he saw her. "How angry you were, Ligi; you killed your son,"
said Aponibolinayen, and Ligi bent his head, for he did not know it was his son. "I will use magic so that when I whip my perfume _alikadakad_ he will stand up." [214] So the little boy stood up at once. Not long
after she used her power again, and whipped her perfume _dagimonau_ so that her son awoke. He woke up and said, "How long my sleep is!" "No,
do not say that; your father killed you." She wanted to take him back
to Matawitawen, but Ligi prevented them and he begged them to forgive him, and Aponibolinayen said, "No, we will go back, for you did not want us and you put us there." So they went to Matawitawen and Ligi followed them. As soon as they arrived at the spring of Matawitawen Aponibolinayen used her power. "I use my power so that Ligi cannot see us, and the trail will become filled with thorns." [215] Not long
after Ligi could not walk in the trail and he could not see them,
and he was very sorry. He laid down, because he could not follow them and his hair grew like vines along the ground; and he did not eat,
for he was always sorry about the things he had done to his wife and son. Not long after they forgave him and went to get him, and they all went back to Kadalayapan. Ligi commanded his spirit attendants to take his sweethearts and kill them, for they told falsehoods about Aponibolinayen, so that he did not want her any more. This is all.

(Told by Magwati of Lagangilang.)


13

There was a husband and wife who were Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen. Aponitolau laid down in their _balaua_ and Aponibolinayen was in the house and she had a headache. "I am anxious to eat the fruit of the orange tree which belongs
to Gawigawen of Adasen," said Aponibolinayen. Aponitolau heard her. "What is that?" he said to her. "I am anxious to eat the _biw_
[216] of Matawitawen." "Give me a sack and I will go to get it,"
said Aponitolau, and he went. As soon as Aponitolau filled the sack with _biw_ he went back home. As soon as he arrived in their house, "Here is the fruit you wished, Aponibolinayen. Come and get." "Put
it on the bamboo hanger above the fire, and I will go and get some to eat when my head does not feel so badly, for I cannot get up yet." So Aponitolau went to put the fruit on the hanger above the fire and he laid down again in the _balaua_.

As soon as Aponitolau laid down in the _balaua_, Aponibolinayen went to the kitchen and peeled one of the _biw_ fruit and she ate it truly. As soon as she ate she vomited and so she threw them away. "What is the matter, Aponibolinayen; I think you threw away the fruit." "One of them I dropped." She went into the room and she said again, "I am anxious to eat the oranges of Gawigawen of Adasen." "What is that?" said Aponitolau. "I am anxious to eat fish roe," said Aponibolinayen. So Aponitolau went to get his fish net and he fished in the river. As soon as he arrived at the river he threw his net and secured a fish with fish roe. He cut open the fish
and took out the roe. When he had taken out the roe he spat on the place where he had cut the fish and it became alive again and swam in the river. After that he went back home. As soon as he arrived at their house he gave the fish to Aponibolinayen, and he laid down in the _balaua_ again, and Aponibolinayen went to the kitchen and she toasted the roe. When she finished she tasted it, and she vomited, so she threw it away also. "What is the matter, Aponibolinayen? Why are the dogs barking?" "I dropped some of the roe." She went again to the room of the house. "I am anxious to eat the oranges which belong to Gawigawen of Adasen." "What is that, Aponibolinayen," said Aponitolau. "I am anxious to eat a deer's liver, I said." So Aponitolau called his dogs and he went to hunt deer. As soon as he arrived on the mountain, "Ala, my black dog, do not catch a deer unless it is in the low grass. Ala, my dog Boko, do not catch deer unless it is in a level field." Not long after his dogs caught deer,
and he took out their livers. As soon as he took out the liver he spat

on the places he had cut, and the deer ran away again. Not long after he went back home. As soon as he arrived, "Here is the liver which you wanted. Come and take it." "Put it in the kitchen. I will go and fix
it when my head does not hurt." Aponitolau put it in the kitchen and
he went to the _balaua_ again. When Aponitolau was in the _balaua_, Aponibolinayen went to the kitchen and cooked the liver and she tried to eat, but she vomited again, so she threw it away, and the dogs
all barked. "What is the matter? Why do the dogs bark? I think you threw away the livers." Aponibolinayen said, "I threw away what I did not eat, for I did not eat all of it." "Do not throw them away,
for bye and bye I will eat, for it is hard to go and get them."

Not long after she went again to the room, and Aponitolau thought that Aponibolinayen did not tell the truth, so he used his power. "I use my power so that I will become a centipede." So he became a centipede and he went in the crack of the floor where Aponibolinayen was lying. Not long after Aponibolinayen said again, "I am anxious to eat the oranges which belong to Gawigawen of Adasen." "I know now what you want; why did you not tell the truth at first? That is why you threw away all
the things I went to get for you," said Aponitolau, and he became a man and appeared to her. "I did not tell the truth for I feared
you would not return, for no one who has gone there has returned, so I am patient about my headache."

"Ala, go and get rice straw, and I will wash my hair." Not long after
he went to wash his hair. When he finished washing his hair he went to get one _lawed_ vine, and he went back home. He planted the vine by the hearth. "Make some cakes for my provision on the journey." "No, do not go, Aponitolau," said Aponibolinayen. "Make some, for if you
do not I will go without provisions." Not long after Aponibolinayen went to cook cakes. As soon as she finished, "Ala, you come and oil my hair." As soon as she oiled his hair, "Go and get my dark clout and
my belt and my headband." So Aponibolinayen went to get them. As soon as he dressed he took his spear and headaxe and he told Aponibolinayen that if the _lawed_ leaves wilted he was dead. [217] So he went.

As soon as he arrived at the well of Gimbangonan all the betel-nut
trees bowed, and Gimbangonan shouted and all the world trembled. "How strange that all the world trembles when that lady shouts." So
Aponitolau took a walk. Not long after the old woman Alokotan saw him and she sent her little dog to bite his leg, and it took out part
of his leg. "Do not proceed, for you have a bad sign. If you go,
you cannot return to your town," said the old woman Alokotan. "No,
I can go back." So he went. As soon as he arrived at the home of the lightning, "Where are you going?" said the lightning. "I am going to
get the oranges from Gawigawen of Adasen. Go and stand on the high stone and I will see what your sign is." So he went and stood on the high stone and the lightning made a light and Aponitolau dodged. "Do

not go, for you have a bad sign, and Gawigawen will secure you." "No, I am going." So he went. As soon as he arrived at the place of _Silit_
[218] it said to him, "Where are you going, Aponitolau?" "I am going to get the oranges of Gawigawen of Adasen." "Stand on top of that high stone so I can see if you have a good sign." So he went and
_Silit_ made a great noise. As soon as he made the great noise he jumped. "Go back, Aponitolau, and start another time, for you have a bad sign." [219] "No, I go."

He arrived at the ocean and he used magic. "I use my power so that you, my headaxe, sail as fast as you can when I stand on you." As soon as he stood on it it sailed very fast. Not long after he was across
the ocean and he was at the other edge of the ocean and he walked again. Not long after he arrived at the spring where the women went
to get water. "Good morning, you women who are dipping water from the spring." "Good morning. If you are an enemy cut us in only one place
so we will not need to cure so much." "If I was an enemy I would have killed all of you when I arrived here." After that he asked them,
"Is this the spring of Gawigawen of Adasen?" "Yes, it is," said the women. So he sent the women to the town to tell Gawigawen, and the women did not tell him for he was asleep. So he went up to the town, but did not go inside, because the bank reached almost up to the sky, and he could not get in. He was sorrowful and bent his head.

Soon the chief of the spiders went to him: "What are you feeling sorry about, Aponitolau?" "I feel sorry because I cannot climb up the bank and go into the town." "Do not feel sorry. You wait for
me while I go up and put some thread which you can hold," said the chief of the spiders. [220] So Aponitolau waited for him. Not long after the spider said, "Now you can climb;" so Aponitolau climbed on the thread. After he got inside of the town of Gawigawen he went
directly to the house of Gawigawen. When he arrived there Gawigawen was still asleep in his _balaua_. As soon as he woke up and saw Aponitolau sitting by his _balaua_ he stood and ran to his house and got his headaxe and spear. Aponitolau said to him, "Good morning, Cousin Gawigawen. Do not be angry with me. I came here to buy your oranges for my wife. Aponibolinayen wishes to eat one, for she always
has a headache, because she has nothing she can eat." Gawigawen took him to his house, and he fed him one carabao. "If you cannot eat all
of the carabao which I give you, you cannot have the oranges which your wife wishes to eat." Aponitolau was sorrowful, for he thought he could not eat all of the carabao and he bent his head. Not long after the chiefs of the ants and flies went to him. "What makes you feel so badly, Aponitolau?" they said to him. "I am sorrowful, for
I cannot get the oranges which Aponibolinayen wishes to eat until I
eat this carabao which Gawigawen feeds to me." "Do not be sorrowful," said the chiefs of the ants and flies. So they called all the ants
and flies to go and eat all the meat and rice. Not long after the

flies and ants finished eating the meat and rice, and Aponitolau was very glad and he went to Gawigawen and said to him, "I have finished eating the food which you gave me." Gawigawen was surprised. "What did you do?" "I ate all of it."

Gawigawen took him where the oranges were and Aponitolau saw that the branches of the tree were sharp knives. Gawigawen said to him, "Go and climb the tree and get all you want." He went to climb. When he got two of the oranges he stepped on one of the knives and he
was cut. So he fastened the fruit to his spear and it flew back to Kadalayapan. Not long after the fruit dropped on the floor in the kitchen and Aponibolinayen heard it, and she went into the kitchen. As soon as she got there she saw the fruit and she ate it at once, and
the spear said to her, "Aponitolau is in Adasen. He sent me first
to bring you the oranges which you wished." As soon as she ate the oranges she went to look at the _lawed_ vine by the stove and it was wilted, and she knew that Aponitolau was dead.

Not long after Aponibolinayen gave birth and every time they bathed the baby it grew one span and soon it was large. [221] He often went to play with the other children and his mother gave him a golden top which had belonged to his father when he was a little boy. When he struck the tops of the other children they were broken at once. Not long after he struck the garbage pot of the old woman, and she was angry and said, "If you are a brave boy, you go and
get your father whom Gawigawen of Adasen has inherited." And Kanag went back to their house crying. "I did not have a father, you said,
mother, but the old woman said he was inherited by Gawigawen, when he went to get the orange fruit. Now prepare provisions for me to take,
for I am going to get my father." Aponibolinayen said to him, "Do not go or Gawigawen will get you as he did your father." But Kanag said, "If you do not let me go and do not give me food, I will go without
anything." Not long after Aponibolinayen cooked food for him and Kanag was ready to go, and he took his headaxe which was one span long and his spear. Not long after he went.

As soon as he got to the gate of the town he struck his shield and it sounded like one thousand people, and everyone was surprised. "How brave that boy is! We think he is braver than his father. He can
strike his shield and it sounds like one thousand." When he arrived at the spring of Gimbangonan he was still striking his shield, and when Gimbangonan heard she said, "Someone is going to fight." He shouted, for he was very happy and the world trembled and Kanag looked like
a flitting bird, for he was always moving.

As soon as he arrived at the place where Alokotan lived she sent her dog against him, and the dog ran at him, and Kanag cut off its
head. "How brave you are, little boy! Where are you going?" "Where are

you going, you say, I am going to Adasen to follow my father." "Your father is dead. I hope you secure him, for you have a good sign," said Alokotan. So Kanag went on in a hurry. Not long after he arrived
at the place where the thunder was and it said, "Where are you going, little boy?" "I am going to follow my father in Adasen." "Go and stand on the high stone and see what your sign is." So he went. As soon
as he stood on the high stone the thunder rolled, but Kanag did not move and the thunder was surprised. "Go at once; I think you can get your father whom Gawigawen inherits." So Kanag went. Not long after he arrived at the place of the lightning, and he made him stand on
the high stone. As soon as he stood on it the lightning made a big noise and flash, but he did not move. So the boy went at once, for he had a good sign.

Kanag struck his shield until it sounded like a thousand people, and
all the women who were dipping water at the spring of Gawigawen were surprised, for they saw only a little boy, who struck his shield, approaching them, and it sounded like a thousand. As soon as he arrived at the spring, "Good morning, women who are dipping water. Go and tell Gawigawen of Adasen that he must prepare for I am going to fight with him." So all the women ran to the town and told Gawigawen that a strange boy was at the spring. Gawigawen said to the women, "Go and tell him that if it is true that he is brave he will come into
the town if he can." So one of the women went to tell him and he went.

When he arrived at the bank which reached to the sky Kanag used his power and he jumped like the flitting bird, and he entered the town and went directly to the _balaua_ and house of Gawigawen of Adasen. Not long after he had arrived he saw that the roof of his house and
_balaua_ was of hair and around his town were heads, and Kanag said, "This is why my father did not return. It is true that Gawigawen is
a brave man, but I think I can kill him."

As soon as Gawigawen saw Kanag in the yard of his house he said, "How brave you are, little boy! Why did you come here?" "I came to get my father, for you secured him when he came to get the oranges which my mother wanted. If you do not wish to give my father to me I will kill
you." And Gawigawen laughed at him and said, "One of my fingers will fight you. You will not go back to your town. You will be like your father." Kanag said, "We shall see. Go and get your arms and we will fight here in the yard of your house." Gawigawen became angry and he went to get his headaxe, which was as big as half of the sky, and his
spear. As soon as he returned to the place where Kanag was waiting he said, "Can you see my headaxe, little boy? If I put this on you you cannot get it off. So you throw first so you can show how brave you are." Kanag said to him, "No, you must be first, so you will know that
I am a brave boy." Gawigawen tried to put his headaxe on him and the boy used his power and he became a small ant and Gawigawen laughed

at him and said, "Now, the little boy is gone." Not long after the little boy stood on his headaxe and he was surprised. "Little boy, you are the first who has done this. Your father did not do this. It
is true that you are brave; if you can dodge my spear I am sure you will get your father." So he threw his spear at him and Kanag used his
power and he disappeared and Gawigawen was surprised. "You are the next." Then Kanag used magic so that when he threw his spear against him it would go directly to the body of Gawigawen. As soon as he threw Gawigawen laid down. Kanag ran to him and cut off his five heads and there was one left, and Gawigawen said to him, "Do not cut off my last head and I will go and show you where your father is." So Kanag did not cut off the last head, and they went to see his father. The skin
of his father had been used to cover a drum, and his hair was used to decorate the house, and his head was placed by the gate of the town, and the body was put below the house.

As soon as Kanag had gathered together the body of his father he used his power and he said, "I whip my perfume _banawes_ and directly
he will say _Wes_." [222] His father said, "_Wes_." Not long after he said, "I whip my perfume _alakadakad_ and directly he will stand
up." So his father stood beside him. After that he whipped his perfume
_dagimonau_ and his father woke up and he was surprised to see the little boy by him and he said, "Who are you? How long I slept." "I am your son. 'How long I slept,' you said. You were dead and Gawigawen inherited you. Take my headaxe and cut off the remaining head of
Gawigawen." So he took the headaxe of Kanag and went to the place where Gawigawen stood. When he struck the headaxe against Gawigawen it did not hurt him and Aponitolau slipped, and his son laughed at him. "What
is the matter with you, father? Gawigawen looks as if he were dead, for he has only one head left." He took the headaxe from his father
and he went to Gawigawen and he cut off the remaining head. Not long after they used magic so that the headaxes and spears went to kill
all the people in the town. So the spears and headaxes went among the people and killed all of them, and Aponitolau swam in the blood and
his son stood on the blood. "What is the matter with you, father, that you swim in the blood? Can't you use your power so you don't have to swim?" Then he took hold of him and lifted him up. As soon as all the people were killed they used their power so that all the heads and valuable things went to Kadalayapan.

Aponibolinayen went to look at the _lawed_ vine behind the stove and it looked like a jungle it was so green, so she believed that her
son was alive. Not long after all the heads arrived in Kadalayapan
and Aponibolinayen was surprised. Not long after she saw her husband and her son and she shouted and the world smiled. Not long after they went up into their house and summoned all the people and told them
to invite all the people in other towns for Kanag had returned from fighting, and had his father. So the people went to invite their

relatives. Not long after the people from other towns arrived and they danced. They were all glad that Aponitolau was alive again,
and they went to see the heads of Gawigawen who killed Aponitolau.

As soon as the people returned to their towns, when the party was over, Aponitolau went to take a walk. When he reached the brook he sat down on a stone and the big frog went to lap up his spittle. Not long after the big frog had a little baby. [223] Not long after she
gave birth, and the _anitos_ [224] went to get the little baby and flew away with it. They used their power so that the baby grew fast and it was a girl, and they taught her how to make _dawak_. [225]
Not long after the girl knew how to make _dawak_, and every time she rang the dish to summon the spirits.

Kanag went to follow his father, but he did not find him where he had been sitting by the brook, and Kanag heard the sound of the ringing which sounded like the _bananayo_. [226] As soon as he heard it he stood still and listened. Not long after he used his power so that he became a bird and he flew. As soon as he arrived at the place where the girl was making _dawak_ she said to him, "You are the only person who has come here. If you are an enemy cut me in only one place so I will not have so much to heal." "I am not an enemy; I came here for I heard what you were doing; so I became a bird and flew." Kanag gave betel-nut to her and they chewed. Their quids looked like the beads
_pinogalan,_ so they knew that they were brother and sister. The girl said to him, "Go inside of the big iron caldron so that the _anitos_ who care for me will not eat you." So Kanag went inside of the big iron caldron. When the _anitos_ did not arrive at the accustomed time Kanag went out of the caldron and said to his sister, "Now, my sister, I will take you to Kadalayapan. Our father and mother do not know that I have a sister. Do not stay always with the _anitos_" His sister replied, "I cannot go to Sudipan [227] when no one is making
_balaua_, for I always make _dawak_ as the _anitos_ taught me. If I come in Sudipan when no one is making _balaua_ it would make all of the people very ill." So Kanag went home.

As soon as he arrived he told his father and mother to make _balaua_ for he wanted his sister to see them. "We just made _balaua_. How can we make _balaua_ again?" said his father and mother. "I want you to see my sister whom I found up in the air, where the _anitos_ took her." "You are crazy, Kanag; you have no sisters or brothers; you are the only child we have." Kanag said to them, "It is sure that I have
a sister. I don't know why you did not know about her. The _anitos_ took her when she was a little baby and they taught her how to make
_dawak_, and she always makes _dawak_. I wanted to bring her when I came back, but she said she could not come to Sudipan when no one makes
_balaua_, for she is always making _dawak_. She said if she came to Sudipan and did not make _dawak_ everyone would be ill, so I did not

bring her. If you wish to see your daughter, father, make _balaua_
at once." So they made _balaua_, for they wished to see their daughter.

They sent messengers to go and get betel-nuts which were covered with gold, and when they had secured the betel-nuts they oiled them and sent them to the different towns where their relatives lived, and they sent
one into the air to go and get their daughter Agten-ngaeyan. So all
the betel-nuts went and invited the people to the _balaua_. As soon as the betel-nut went up into the air it arrived where Agten-ngaeyan was
making _dawak_. When she saw the betel-nut beside her she was startled, for it was covered with gold. She tried to cut it up, for she wished
to chew it, and the betel-nut said, "Do not cut me, for your brother and father in Kadalayapan sent me to summon you to their _balaua_, for they are anxious to see you." So Agten-ngaeyan told the _anitos_ that a betel-nut which was covered with gold had come to take her to
Aponitolau who was making _Sayang_, and they wished to see her. The
_anitos_ let her go, but they advised her to return. So she went.

When they arrived in Kadalayapan the people from the other towns were dancing and she went below the _talagan_, [228] and Kanag went to see what it was that looked like a flame beneath the _talagan_. When he reached her he saw it was his sister and he tried to take her away
from the _talagan_, and she said to him, "I cannot get off from here, for the _anitos_ who care for me told me to stay here until someone
comes to make _dawak_ with me." So they sent the old woman Alokotan to make _dawak_ with her. All the people were surprised, for she made a pleasanter sound when she rang and they thought she was a _bananayo_ [229]. The young men who went to attend the _balaua_ loved her, for
she was pretty and knew very well how to sing the _dawak_. As soon as they finished the _dawak_ she was free to leave the _talagan_,
so her brother Kanag took her and put her in his belt [230] and he
put her in the high house [231] so the young men could not reach her.

As soon as the _balaua_ was over the people went home, but the young men still remained below the house watching her, and the ground below became muddy, for they always remained there.

When Kanag saw the young men below the house fighting about her, he took her again into the air so that the young men could not
see her. As soon as they arrived in the air they met the _anitos_, and Kanag said to them, "I intended to keep my sister in Sudipan, for I had made a little golden house for her to live in, but I have brought her back, for all the young men are fighting about her." The
_anitos_ were glad that she was back with them and they gave Kanag more power, so that when he should go to war he would always destroy his opponents. Agten-ngaeyan used to go and teach the women how to
make _dawak_ when anyone made _balaua_, so that she taught them very well how to make _dawak_. This is all.

(Told by a medium named Magwati of Lagangilang.)


14

"Ala, Aponibolinayen prepare our things, for we are going to plant sugar cane," said Aponitolau. Not long after they went to see the
cuttings and they were big. They took them and planted them when they arrived at the place where they wished to plant them. Aponitolau planted them and Aponibolinayen watered them. Not long after Aponibolinayen used magic and she said, "I use my power so that all the cuttings will be planted." Soon they truly were all planted,
so they went back home. After seven days Aponitolau went to look at them and their leaves were long and pointed so he used magic and said, "I used my power so that after five days all the sugar cane which we planted will be ready to chew." Then he went back home. In five days
he went again to see them and as soon as he arrived at the planting he saw they were all tall and about ready to chew.

Not long after Gaygayoma looked down on the sugar cane and she was anxious to chew it. "Ala, my father Bagbagak, [232] send the stars
to go and get some of the sugar cane which I saw, for I am anxious to chew it," she said, for she was pregnant and desired to chew the sugar cane. Not long after, "Ala, you Salibobo [233] and Bitbitowen
[234] let us go and get the sugar cane, for Gaygayoma is anxious to chew it," said Bagbagak. Not long after they went. As soon as they arrived where the sugar cane was, they went inside of the bamboo fence and some of them secured the beans which Aponibolinayen had planted. The stems of the bean pods were gold, and they got five
of them. Most of them got one stalk of sugar cane. As soon as they secured them they went back up. When they arrived Gaygayoma chewed one of the sugar cane stalks and she felt happy and well, and she
saw the beans with the golden stems and she cooked and ate them.

When she had chewed all the sugar cane which the stars had secured, she said, "Ala, my father Bagbagak, come and follow me to the place where the sugar cane grows, for I am anxious to see it." Not long
after, "Ala, Salibobo and Bitbitowen we are going to follow Gaygayoma, for she wishes to go and see the place of the sugar cane. Some of you stay outside of the fence to watch and see if anyone comes, and some of you get sugar cane," said Bagbagak to them, and the moon shone on them. Soon they all arrived at the place of the sugar cane and they made a noise while they were getting the sugar cane, which they used to chew. Gaygayoma went to the middle of the field and chewed sugar cane. As soon as they had chewed all they wished they flew up again.

The next day Aponitolau said to Aponibolinayen, "I am going to see our sugar cane, to see if any carabao have gone there to spoil it, for it is the best to chew." So he went. As soon as he arrived he saw that the sugar cane was spoiled, and he looked. He saw that
there were many places near the fence where someone had chewed, for each one of the stars had gone by the fence to chew the cane which they wished. When he reached the middle of the field he saw the cane there which had been chewed, and there was some gold on the refuse and he was surprised and he said, "How strange this is! I think some beautiful girl must have chewed this cane. I will try to watch and
see who it is. Perhaps they will return tonight." Then he went back home. As soon as he reached home he said, "Ala, Aponibolinayen cook our food early, for I want to go and watch our sugar cane; someone
has gone and spoiled it. They have also spoiled our beans which we planted." So Aponibolinayen cooked even though it was not time. As soon as she finished cooking she called Aponitolau and they ate. When they had eaten he went and he hid a little distance from the sugar cane.

In the middle of the night there were many stars falling down into
the sugar cane field and Aponitolau heard the cane being broken. Soon he saw the biggest of them which looked like a big flame of fire fall
into the field. Not long after he saw one of the other stars at the edge of the fence take off her dress, which was like a star, and he saw that she looked like the half of the rainbow, and the stars which
followed her got the sugar cane which they wished. They chewed it by the fence and they watched to see if anyone was coming. Aponitolau said, "What shall I do, because of those companions of the beautiful woman? If I do not frighten them they will eat me. The best thing
for me to do is to frighten them. I will go and sit on the star's dress." [235] He frightened them. The stars flew up and Aponitolau went and sat on the star dress.

Not long after the pretty girl came from the middle of the field to get her star dress; she saw Aponitolau sitting on it. "You, Ipogau,
[236] you must pardon us, for we came to steal your sugar cane, for we were anxious to chew it." "If you came to get some of my sugar cane it is all right. The best thing for you to do is to sit down,
for I wish to know your name, for we Ipogau have the custom to tell our names. It is bad for us if we do not know each others' names when we talk." Not long after he gave her betel-nut and the woman chewed
it. As soon as they chewed, "Now that we have chewed according to our custom we will tell our names." "Yes, if that is what you say, but you must tell your name first," said the woman. "My name is Aponitolau
who am the husband of Aponibolinayen of Kadalayapan." "My name is Gaygayoma who am the daughter of Bagbagak and Sinag, [237] up in the air," said the woman. "Ala, now you, Aponitolau, even though you have
a wife I am going to take you up, for I wish to marry you. If you do  not wish to come I will call my companion stars, and give you to them

to eat." Aponitolau was frightened, for he knew that the woman who was talking was a spirit. "If that is what you say, and you do not wish me
to go and see Aponibolinayen and you wish to be married to me, it is all right," said Aponitolau to her. Not long after the stars dropped
the _galong-galong_ [238] of gold which Gaygayoma had ordered to be made. As soon as they dropped it Aponitolau and Gaygayoma got in it, and were drawn up, and soon they were there.

As soon as they arrived he saw one of the stars come to the place where they were, and it was a very big star, for it was Bagbagak. "Someone
is coming where we are," said Aponitolau to Gaygayoma. "Do not be afraid; he is my father," said Gaygayoma. "Those stars eat people
if you do anything wrong to them." Not long after Bagbagak reached the place where they were. "It is good for you Aponitolau that you wished to follow my daughter here. If you had not we would have eaten you," he said. Aponitolau was frightened. "Yes, I followed her here,
but I am ashamed before you who live here, for you are powerful," he said. While they were talking Bagbagak went back home.

After he had lived with Gaygayoma five months she had him prick between her last fingers and a little baby popped out, and it was a beautiful baby boy. "What shall we call our son?" said Aponitolau. "We are going to call him Tabyayen, because it is the name of the people who used to live above," said Gaygayoma. So they called him Tabyayen, and they used their power so that the baby grew all the time. Soon
he was big. After three months, "Now Gaygayoma, let me go back down and see Aponibolinayen of Kadalayapan. I think she is searching for me. I will return soon, for you two are my wives," said Aponitolau,
but Gaygayoma would not let him go. "Ala, let me go and I will return soon," he said again. "Ala, you go, but you come back here soon. I will send the stars to eat you if you do not wish to return," said Gaygayoma to him. "Yes," he said. Not long after he rode again in the
_galong-galong_, and the stars followed, and they went down. Aponitolau wanted all of them to go to Kadalayapan, but he went alone and the
stars and Gaygayoma and the boy went up.

Not long after Aponitolau said, "_Wes_" at the entrance to the yard of their house in Kadalayapan. Aponibolinayen got up from her mat
and she had not eaten for a long time. When she looked at him she was very happy. Aponitolau saw that she was thin. "Why are you so thin, Aponibolinayen?" said Aponitolau. "I have not eaten since you went away. Where have you been so long? I thought that you were dead." "No,
I did not die, but Gaygayoma took me up into the sky because they were the ones who spoilt our sugar cane. She would not let me come back any more, and she took me up. I did not want to go with her,
but she threatened to feed me to the stars who were her companions. So I was afraid, and I went with her, for she is a spirit."

When the day came on which Aponitolau and Gaygayoma had agreed for his return up, Aponitolau failed to go, because Aponibolinayen would not
let him go. In the evening many stars came to the yard of their house
and some of them went to the windows and some of them went beside the wall of the house, and they were very bright and the house looked as though it was burning. The stars said, "We smell the odor of the Ipogau and we are anxious to eat." Aponitolau said, "Hide me, Aponibolinayen, for those stars have come to eat me, because you would not let me go back to Gaygayoma. I told you that if I did not go back to her she
would send the stars to eat me, and now truly they have come. I told you I would come back, but you would not let me go." Not long after the stars went inside of the house where they were, and they said
to Aponitolau, "Do not hide from us, Aponitolau. We know where you are. You are in the corner of the house." "Come out of there or we will
eat you," said Bagbagak. Soon he appeared to them and they said to him, "Do you not wish to come back up with us?" "I will go with you," he answered, for he was afraid. So they did not eat him, for Gaygayoma
had told them not to eat him if he was willing to follow them. Not long after they flew away with him and Aponibolinayen cried. When
they arrived up Gaygayoma said, "Why, Aponitolau, did you lie to me and not return? You were fortunate when you followed the stars, for if you had not they would have eaten you." "I did not return because Aponibolinayen would not let me. You and she are my wives. Do not blame me," said Aponitolau.

After he had lived with her eight months he said, "Now, I am going to leave you, for our son Tabyayen is large. If you will not let me
take our son Tabyayen down, he can stay up here with you." "You may go now, but you cannot take our son. You will return here," said Gaygayoma. "Yes," said Aponitolau. So they went down again in the
_galong-galong._ Aponitolau wanted to take them to Kadalayapan, but they would not go with him. "No, do not take us, for it is not our custom to stay down here; we are always above," they said. So they went up and Aponitolau went to Kadalayapan. Not long after he said,
"_Wes_" at the yard of the house, and Aponibolinayen went to see who it was. She saw that it was Aponitolau, and she was very glad.

After one year with Aponibolinayen he said, "Command someone to pound rice, for we are going to make _balaua_, and I am going to call our
son Tabyayen from above." Aponibolinayen had also given birth five days after Gaygayoma had given birth, and they called the boy Kanag.

Not long after Aponitolau went to take Tabyayen from above and Gaygayoma was very glad to see him. When they were talking he said, "Now I am going to take Tabyayen down, for I want him to attend our
_Sayang_." "Yes, you may take him, but you must bring him back when the _Sayang_ is finished." So Aponitolau took the boy to attend the
_balaua_ in Kadalayapan. As soon as they arrived there he began to

play with Kanag and they were the same size and looked alike, because they were half brothers. While they were playing, during the _Sayang,_ Kanag said, "Mother, it is showering," and Aponitolau heard what the boy said to Aponibolinayen. He said, "It is the tears of Tabyayen's mother, for I think she is thinking of him. I told them not to go over
there, but they went anyway. I think Gaygayoma saw them playing and she cried." Then Aponibolinayen went to take them away from the yard where they were playing. She took them upstairs. It was at the time when they were building the _balaua_. Not long after that they made
_Libon_, [239] and they invited Gaygayoma and all their relatives
from the other towns and they danced for one month. Then the people from the other towns went home. As soon as all the people had gone home Aponitolau went to take back the boy to his mother Gaygayoma.

When they arrived where Gaygayoma lived he gave the boy to her and he staid there three days. After three days he went back home, and he said, "I am going now, but I will come back in a few days, for I cannot live here all the time, for we, Ipogau, are accustomed to live below,
and I also have another wife there. I cannot leave Aponibolinayen alone most of the time." So Gaygayoma let him go down and she said, "Yes, you may go, but you come back sometimes." "It is good that Tabyayen
came down and made _Sayang_ with us." Then he went down again. When he arrived down Aponibolinayen was glad to see him, for she feared
he would not return to Kadalayapan. Not long after they arranged for Kanag to be married, and as soon as Kanag was married they arranged for
Tabyayen also and he lived down below and Gaygayoma always staid above. (Told by Lagmani, a man of Domayko.)


15

"I am going to wash my hair," said Aponitolau. Not long after he went to the river and washed his hair. As soon as he finished he took
a bath and went back home. When he arrived in his house he said, "Aponibolinayen, please comb my hair." "Take the comb and go to Indiapan, for I have no time," answered Aponibolinayen. "If you have no time, give it to me then," said Aponitolau. Aponibolinayen was angry and went to get it for him. "What is the matter that you cannot go
and get it yourself?" As soon as he got it Aponitolau went to Indiapan.

Kabkabaga-an, who lived up in the air, was looking down, and said, "Indiapan, you have good fortune, for Aponitolau will come and ask you to comb his hair." Not long after Aponitolau arrived. "Will you comb my hair, Indiapan, because Aponibolinayen is impatient and does not want to comb my hair?" "I am sleepy," said Indiapan. She sat down. "Ala, you come and comb my hair," said Aponitolau. Not long after Indiapan

went to comb his hair and Aponitolau sat by the door. Kabkabaga-an looked down on them and said, "Indiapan has a good fortune, for she is combing the hair of Aponitolau." When she had combed his hair she went to lie down again and Aponitolau said to her, "Will you please
cut this betel-nut into pieces, Indiapan." "You cut it. I am sleepy," answered Indiapan. "Hand me the headaxe then." So Indiapan handed the headaxe to him. As soon as she gave the headaxe to him she went to
lie down again. When Aponitolau had cut the betel-nut he cut his first finger of his left hand. The blood went up in the air. "Ala, Indiapan, take your belt, for I cannot stop my finger from bleeding. Come and wrap it," said Aponitolau to her. So Indiapan got up and she went
to get her belt and she wrapped his finger, but the blood did not stop, so she called Aponibolinayen, for she was frightened when she saw the blood go up. Aponibolinayen said, "What is the matter
with you?" She took her hat which looked like a woodpecker and she went, and the sunshine stopped when she went down out of her house, and Kabkabaga-an saw Aponibolinayen going to Aponitolau. "What good fortune Aponibolinayen has, for she is going to see Aponitolau." As
soon as she arrived where Indiapan lived she wrapped her belt around the finger of Aponitolau, but the blood did not stop and they were frightened. Aponibolinayen commanded their spirit helpers to get Ginalingan of Pindayan, who was a sister of Iwaginan, to make _dawak_
[240] and stop the blood of Aponitolau. Not long after Indiapan and the spirit helpers arrived where Ginalingan lived they said,
"Good afternoon, you must excuse us, for we cannot stay here long, for Aponibolinayen is in a hurry to have you come to Kaldalayapan to see Aponitolau. He cut his finger and his blood will not stop running,
and we do not know what to do. You come and make _dawak_" Ginalingan said, "Even though I should go to make _dawak_ we could do nothing, for Kabkabaga-an, who lives in the air, loves him." "We must try and see if Kabkabaga-an will stop," said Indiapan, and Ginalingan went with them.

As soon as they arrived in Kadalayapan Aponibolinayen said to Ginalingan, "What is best for us to do for Aponitolau's
finger?" Ginalingan said, "We cannot do anything. I told Indiapan that Kabkabaga-an loves Aponitolau and even if I make _dawak_ we can do nothing, for Kabkabaga-an is one of the greatest spirits." Not long
after Aponitolau had become a very little man and Ginalingan stopped making _dawak_, and she went home to Pindayan. Aponitolau became like a hair. Not long after he disappeared. "You are good, Indiapan,
for Aponitolau disappeared in your house." So they cried together.

Not long after Aponibolinayen went back home and Aponitolau was up in the air. He sat below a tree in a wide field, and he looked around the field. Not long after he saw some smoke, so he went. As soon as he came near to the smoke he saw that there was a house there. "I am going to get a drink," he said. As soon as he arrived
in the yard he said, "_Wes_," for he was tired, and Kabkabaga-an saw,

from the window of her house, that it was Aponitolau. "Come up," she said. "No, I am ashamed to go up. Will you give me water to drink,
for I am thirsty." Kabkabaga-an gave him a drink of water. As soon as he had drunk he sat down in the yard, for Kabkabaga-an could not make him go up. Not long after she went to cook. As soon as she cooked she called Aponitolau and he said to her, "You eat first. I
will eat with your husband when he arrives." "No, come up. I think he will arrive very late." Not long after he went up, for he was hungry,
and they ate. While they were eating Kabkabaga-an said to him, "I have no husband and I live alone; that is why I brought you up here, for I
love you." Not long after she became pregnant and she gave birth. "What shall we call the baby?" said Ligi [241] "Tabyayen." Not long after
the baby began to grow, for Kabkabaga-an used magic, so that he grew all the time, and every time she bathed him he grew.

When the baby had become a young boy Kabkabaga-an said, "You can go home now, Aponitolau, for our son Tabyayen is a companion for me." "If you say that I must go home, I will take Tabyayen with me," said Aponitolau. She said, "We will tell my brother Daldalipato, [242] who lives above, if you wish to take him." So they went truly. As
soon as they arrived where Daldalipato lived, he said, "How are you, Kabkabaga-an? What do you want?" "What do you want, you say. We came to tell you that Aponitolau wants to take Tabyayen." "Do you want
to give him up to Aponitolau? If you let him go, it is all right,"
said Daldalipato, and Kabkabaga-an said, "All right." So they went
home. As soon as they arrived where Kabkabaga-an lived she commanded some one to make something of gold to hold milk for the boy to drink
and she filled it with the milk from her breasts. In the early morning she lowered her golden house by cords to the earth.

When it became morning Aponitolau awoke and he was surprised to see that they were in Kadalayapan. "Why, here is Kadalayapan." He went outdoors and Aponibolinayen also went outdoors. "Why,
there is Aponitolau. I think he has returned from the home of Kabkabaga-an." Aponibolinayen went to him and was glad to see him,
and she took her son Kanag who looked the same as Tabyayen, and they went to play in the yard. Aponibolinayen and Aponitolau did not know
that they had gone to play. Not long after Tabyayen cried, for the tears of Kabkabaga-an fell on him and hurt him, so Aponibolinayen went down to the yard and took them up into the house.

Not long after Aponitolau said to Aponibolinayen, "We will make
_balaua_ and we will invite Kabkabaga-an. I think that is why the boy cried." Aponibolinayen said, "Yes," and they truly made _Sayang_. Not long after they made _Libon_ [243] in the evening, and they commanded the spirit helpers to go and get betel-nuts. As soon as they arrived
with the betel-nuts Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen commanded, "You betel-nuts go and invite all our relatives and Kabkabaga-an." So

one of the betel-nuts went to the place where Kabkabaga-an lived. As soon as it arrived up above it said, "Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen
of Kadalayapan want you to attend their _balaua_. That is why I came here." Kabkabaga-an said, "Yes, I will follow you. You go first." When it became afternoon all the people from the other towns had arrived
in Kadalayapan. When they looked under the _talagan_ [244] they saw Kabkabaga-an, and Aponibolinayen went to take her hand, and they made her dance. As soon as she finished dancing she told Aponibolinayen and Aponitolau that she would go back home. "No, do not go yet, for we will make _pakalon_ for Tabyayen first," said Aponibolinayen. "No, you care for him. I must go home now, for no one watches my house." Not long after she went, for they could not detain her, and they did not see her when she went. As soon as the _Sayang_ was over they made _pakalon_ for Kanag and Tabyayen, and Kanag married Dapilisan, and Tabyayen married Binaklingan, and the marriage price was the _balaua_ about
nine times full for each of them. As soon as they both were married Tabyayen staid in his house which had been up in the air before. Kanag staid in another house which Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen had.

(Told by Angtan of Lagangilang.)


16

"Look out for our children, Ligi, while I wash my hair," said
Ayo. "Yes," said Ligi. As soon as Ayo reached the spring Ligi went to make a basket, in which he put the three little pigs which had little beads around their necks. As soon as he made the basket he put the three little pigs in it, and he climbed a tree and he hung
the basket in it. Not long after he went down and Ayo went back home from the well. "Where are our children--the little pigs--?" [245]
said Ayo to him. As soon as Ligi said he did not know, Ayo began to search for them, but she did not find them.

The little pigs which Ligi hung in the tree grunted, "Gek, gek, gek,"
and the old woman, Alokotan of Nagbotobotan, went to take a walk. While she was walking she stopped under the tree where the pigs hung. She heard them grunting and she looked up at them and saw that the basket contained three pigs. "What man hung those little pigs in the basket
in the tree? Perhaps he does not like them. I am going to get them and take them home, so that I will have something to feed." So she got them. She took them home, and she named the older one Kanag, the second one Dumalawi, the third was Ogogibeng.

Not long after the three little pigs, which had the beads about
their necks, became boys, and Ogogibeng was naughty. When the old woman Alokotan gave them blankets, he was the first to choose the

one he wished. "Shame, Ogogibeng, why are you always the naughtiest and are always selfish." "Yes, I always want the best, so that the
girls will want me," said Ogogibeng. When Alokotan gave the belts,
and clouts, and coats, he always took the best, and Kanag and Dumalawi were jealous of him, and they said bad things. Ogogibeng said to them,
"I am not ashamed, for she is my mother, so I will take the best."

Not long after they were young men. "Mother Alokotan, will you let us go to walk? Do not worry while we are gone, for we will return soon,"
said the three young men. The old woman said "yes" and they went. They agreed on the place they should go, and Ogogibeng said to them,
"We will go where the young girls spin." Kanag and Dumalawi agreed, so they went. Not long after they arrived where the young girls
were spinning. "Good evening, girls," they said. "Good evening," they replied. "This is the first time you have been here, rich young
men. Why do you come here?" "We came to join you and get acquainted," they said, and they talked. They waited for the girls to go home,
but they did not go. Not long after it became morning, and they did not wait any longer for the girls to go home, so they went away. As
soon as the three boys went home the young girls went to their homes also. Not long after they arrived where Alokotan was and they ate breakfast. As soon as they finished eating they went to take a walk again. Not long after they arrived in Kaodanan, in the middle of the day. "Good morning, Aunt," they said to Aponigawani. "Good morning, my sons," she replied. "What do you come here for, boys?" "What do you come here for, you say, Aunt; we come to take a walk, for we are anxious to see you," they said. "That is good. Where did you come
from?" said Aponigawani. "We came from Nagbotobotan where our mother Alokotan lives." Not long after Aponigawani went to cook for them to
eat. As soon as she cooked she fed them. So they ate. Not long after they finished eating and they talked. After that it became night. When they had finished eating in the night they said, "We are going back home, Aunt, but first we are going to the place where those young girls spin." "No, I will not let you go back to Nagbotobotan now, for
it is dark. If you are going to the place where the girls are spinning it is all right, but if you are going home I will not let you go down from the house, for I fear you will be lost." So the three young boys said to her, "If you will not let us go back home tonight we will go
tomorrow, but we will go where the young girls spin." So Aponigawani and Aponibalagen let them go to where the girls were spinning.

Not long after they arrived at the place where the young girls were and they said, "Good evening, young girls." "Good evening," answered the girls who were spinning. "Why do you come here, rich young men?" "'Why do you come here,' you say, we come to see you spin and to talk with you." Not long after they talked together, and the young men did not
wait until the girls went home, for it became morning, so they went
back home. As soon as they went away, the young girls went home. When

the boys reached the house of Aponigawani and Aponibalagen they told
them they were going home to Nagbotobotan. Aponigawani and Aponibalagen did not want to let them go until they had eaten breakfast. The three
boys went even though they did not want them to go. As soon as they reached Nagbotobotan the old woman Alokotan asked them where they had been, and she was very angry with them. "Do not be angry with
us, mother, for we want to take a walk; we were not lost." "Where did you go, then?" "We went to Kaodanan to see the pretty girls who never go out doors, but we did not find any. We found some young girls spinning at night, but they were not as pretty as we wished, and we talked with them until morning, for we wanted to see where they lived, but we could not wait for them to go back home."

Not long after the old woman Alokotan went to cook. As soon as she finished cooking they ate. Not long after they finished eating and
they agreed to go at once to Kadalayapan. The old woman Alokotan would not let them go, so when they finished eating at night they went to Kadalayapan without her consent. As soon as they arrived at the place where the young girls were spinning they said, "Good evening, young girls." "Good evening," the girls answered. "How are you? What do you want here?" "'What do you want here,' you say, and we came to watch
you spin and we want to talk with you." So they talked until morning, but the young boys could not wait until the girls went to their homes.

Ayo was still searching for the pigs who had become boys. She heard somebody say that three young boys were talking with the girls last night and they said to her that they were pretty young boys. Ayo said,
"Those were my sons. I think they have become men." So she went around the town looking for them. Not long after she met them and she saw
that they were no longer little pigs. "Where did you come from, my dear sons?" "We came from Nagbotobotan, Aunt," they answered. "Do not call me aunt, call me mother," said Apon=lbolinayen. The young
boys would not call her mother. So Aponibolinayen pressed her breasts and the milk from her breasts went into Kanag's mouth, and when she pressed again the milk went into the mouth of Dumalawi, and when
she pressed her breasts the third time the milk went to the mouth of Ogogibeng. So Aponibolinayen was sure that they were her sons. The little boys asked her why it was that the milk from her breasts went into their mouths. "I pressed my breasts to make sure that you are
my sons. I am surprised that you have become men, for you were little pigs. That is why you must call me mother, not aunt. For a long time I have searched for you, and when I heard that you were talking with the young girls last night, I came to look for you." So the boys believed that she was their mother. "Why did we grow up in Nagbotobotan with our mother Alokotan, if you are truly our mother?" "I think she found
you and took you away, for she is a good woman. She thought you were lost and took you to Nagbotobotan." So Aponibolinayen took them home.

As soon as they arrived home Aponibolinayen said to Aponitolau, "Here are our sons whom I found. They said that they came from Nagbotobotan and that Alokotan was their mother. I told them that I was their
mother, but they did not believe me." "I do not believe that they are our sons, for our children were three little pigs." "I also had
doubts when I met them, but I pressed my breasts and the milk went to their mouths, so I am sure that they are our sons." Aponitolau was
glad that they were men, for he did not want them when they were pigs.

Not long after Aponitolau said to Aponibolinayen, "We are going to make _balaua_, so that we can invite all our relations in the other towns, especially Alokotan." Aponibolinayen used magic, so that when she put a grain of rice in each of twelve big jars they were filled. [246] Not long after Aponitolau commanded his spirit helpers to go and get betel-nuts, to send to the relatives who lived in other places, to invite them. As soon as one of the betel-nuts arrived in
Nagbotobotan it said, "Good afternoon, old woman Alokotan. I cannot stay long. Aponibolinayen and Aponitolau sent me to invite you to attend their _Sayang_". "I cannot go, for I am searching for my three sons." "If you do not come I will grow on your knee." "You go first
and I will follow, but I cannot stay there long." Not long after all the people from the other towns arrived and they danced until the
old woman Alokotan arrived. The three young boys went to hide when Alokotan arrived. Not long after when the _batana_ was nearly finished, "I cannot wait until your _balaua_ is finished, for I am searching
for my three boys." "Do not go home yet, for we will see if they
will come here to see the young girls. Perhaps they are near here," said Aponitolau. Not long after the three boys appeared to her and Alokotan was glad to see them. "Where have you been, my sons?" "We came to this town and we intended to go back to Nagbotobotan, but
our mother Aponibolinayen saw us and she detained us, for she was sure that we are her sons. She pressed her breasts and the milk came
into our mouths." The old woman Alokotan was surprised and she went to Aponibolinayen and Aponitolau and talked with them. "Are you sure those boys are your sons? They are my sons. They grew up with me." "Yes,
we are sure that they are my sons, for the milk from my breasts went to their mouths. I am surprised that they have become men, for they were three pigs. I searched for them a long time. That is why I was surprised when I saw them, so I pressed my breasts." "Why were you searching for them? Did someone else hang them in the tree?" said
Alokotan. Aponibolinayen was surprised and she asked Aponitolau if he saw someone hang the little pigs in the tree while she was washing
her hair. Aponitolau laughed, "I did not see anyone get them." One
of the women had seen Aponitolau hang them in the tree and she told Alokotan that Aponitolau had hung them up. Alokotan hated Aponitolau and she asked why he had hung them in the tree. "I went to hang them up for I was ashamed, because they were not men but pigs." "That is why you hung them up. You have power. If you did not want them to be

pigs you could change them to men. If I had not found them, perhaps they would have died." Not long after the _balaua_ was finished,
and the people went home, and the old woman Alokotan went home after the others. She gave all her things to the three boys. This is all.

(Told by Angtan of Langangilang).


17

Aponibolinayen and Aponitolau had a son and they called him Kanag Kabagbagowan, who was Dumalawi every afternoon. Soon he became a young man and he went to make love to Aponitolau's concubines. When Aponitolau went where his concubines were he said, "Open the door." The women did not open the door, but answered, "We do not want to open
the door unless you are Dumalawi." "Please open the door," said Ligi [247] to them. The women did not open the door, so he went
back home and he was very angry. In the second night Aponitolau went again. "Good evening, women," he said. "Good evening," said the women, and Aponitolau asked them to open the door. "You put your hands into
the door and let us see if the marks on the wrist are the marks on
Kanag Kabagbagowan." Aponitolau showed them his hands and they said, "You are not Kanag, but you are Ligi, and we do not wish you." Ligi
was very angry and he went back home.

Five days later he said, "Sharpen your knife, Kanag, and we will go to cut bamboo." So Kanag sharpened his knife. Not long after they
went where many bamboo grew. As soon as they reached the place Ligi said, "You go up and cut the bamboo and sharpen the ends." Ligi cut the bamboo below him. As soon as Ligi had cut many bamboo he asked Kanag if he had cut many, and Kanag said, "Yes." "Did you sharpen
the ends? If you pointed them, put them in one place." Kanag soon put them in one place. After that Aponitolau said to him, "Ala, my son, throw them at me so that we can see which is the braver of us." "Ala, you are the first if you want to kill me," Not long after Aponitolau
threw all the bamboo at Kanag, but did not hit him. "Ala, you are the next, my son," said Aponitolau. Kanag said, "No, I do not want to throw any at you, for you are my father and I am ashamed." Aponitolau said, "If you do not wish to throw at me we will go back home." As soon as they arrived in Kadalayapan Kanag laid down in their _balaua_. When they called him at meal time he did not wish to go.

When Aponitolau and Apo=nibolinayen finished eating they said, "If you do not wish to eat we will go to see our little house in the fields." "We will go and fix it so we will have some protection during
the rainy season," said Aponitolau. So they went truly. As soon as they arrived at the little house in their farm, "Dig up the jar of _basi_

[248] which I buried when I was a boy." So Kanag dug up the _basi_ which Aponitolau had made when he was a little boy. As soon as he had dug it up they drank it, and they put the _basi_ in a big coconut shell. Aponitolau made his son drink a shell full of _basi_, so Kanag truly drank all of it. "Ala, dip again and I will drink next," said
Ligi to him, and Ligi drank a shell cup of _basi_. "Ala, dip again,
we will drink three shell cups of this _basi_," said Ligi. When Kanag had drunk the three shells of wine he was drunk and he slept. As soon as he was asleep, "What shall I do now," said Ligi to himself. "The best thing for me to do is to send him away with the storm." So he
used his magical power and soon the big storm came and took Kanag to Kalaskigan while he was sleeping.

Not long after Aponitolau went back home to Kadalayapan. Aponibolinayen asked him where Kanag was. "I thought he came ahead of me," Ligi
said. "I think you have killed him," said Aponibolinayen, "for you think he loves your concubines." Aponitolau went to lie down in their
_balaua_ and Aponibolinayen laid down in the house and their hair grew long along the floor, they laid so long.

Not long after Kanag awoke and he saw that he was in the middle of a field so wide that he could not see the edges of it. "How bad my father is to me, for he sent me here," he said. "The best thing for me to do is to create people so that I will have neighbors. I
will use magic so that many betel-nut trees will grow in the middle of the field." Not long after the betel-nut trees bore fruit which
was covered with gold. He took the betel-nuts and cut them in many pieces. In the middle of the night he used his power and he said, "I will use magic and when I scatter all the betel-nuts which I have cut,
they will become women and men, who will be my neighbors tomorrow."

Not long after it became morning and he saw that he had many neighbors and he heard many people talking near to his house and many roosters crowing. So Kanag was glad, for he had many companions. He went down the ladder, and he went where the people were burning fires in the
yards of their houses, and he went to see all of them. While he was visiting them he saw Dapilisan in the yard of her house and Kanag said
to Bangan and Dalonagan, "My Aunt Bangan and my Uncle Dalonagan, do not be surprised, for I want to marry your daughter Dapilisan." "If you
marry our daughter, your father and mother will be greatly ashamed," said Dalonagan. Kanag said to them, "My father and mother did not want me and they will not interfere." So they were married.

"The best way for us to do, Dapilisan, is for us to make _Sayang_"
said Kanag. So Dapilisan commanded someone to go and get the betel-nut fruit which was covered with gold. Not long after, "Ala, you betel-nuts
which are covered with gold come here and oil yourselves, and go and invite all the people to come and attend our _Sayang_." So the

betel-nuts oiled themselves and they went to invite the people in the different towns. Not long after they went. One of the betel-nuts went
to Kadalayapan, and one went where Kanag's sweetheart lived. Some of them went to Pindayan and Donglayan, which is the home of Iwaginan and Gimbangonan.

Not long after Aponibolinayen was anxious to chew betel-nut. "I
am going to chew. What ails me, for I am so anxious to chew? I had not intended to eat anything while Kanag is away." She looked up at her basket, and she saw that an oiled betel-nut, which was covered with gold, was in it. She picked it up and tried to cut it. "Do not
cut me, for I came to invite you, for Kanag and his wife Dapilisan sent me to summon you to their _Sayang_ in Kalaskigan," said the betel-nut. Aponibolinayen was glad when she heard that Kanag was alive. So she got up and told all the people of Kadalayapan to wash their hair so that they might attend the _Sayang_ in Kalaskigan. The
people asked who was making _Sayang_ in Kalaskigan, and she replied that it was Kanag and his wife Dapilisan. Not long after they washed their clothes and hair, and took a bath. When it became afternoon they
went and Aponitolau followed them, and he looked as if he was crazy. As soon as they arrived at the river near the town of Kalaskigan, Kanag
saw them and there were many of them by the river. He sent crocodiles and they went to take the people across the river. Aponitolau was the first who rode on one of the crocodiles and the crocodile dived, so Aponitolau went back again to the bank of the river. Not long after Aponitolau's companions were all on the other side of the river,
and he was alone, for the crocodiles would not carry him across. He shouted as if crazy, and Kanag sent one of the crocodiles to get
him. Not long after one crocodile went where Aponitolau was, and he stood on its back and it took him to the other side of the river.

When they all sat down beside the river, Dalonagan said, "What shall we use for the _alawig_, [249] for your father and mother?" "The singed pig, for it is the custom of the people in Kadalayapan," said Kanag to his mother-in-law. "Go and get some of the pigs and singe them," said Dalonagan to him. Not long after he singed the pigs and he carried them to the people, and his wife Dapilisan carried one little jar which looked like a fist, filled with _basi_. As soon
as the woman who was making _Sayang_ had finished the _diam_ [250] near by the well, Dapilisan made the people drink the _basi_ which
she carried. Each person drank from a golden cup filled with _basi_ from out of the little jar which looked like a fist, and one third
of the _basi_ in the jar was still left. [251] As soon as the people drank they took them up to the town.

When they arrived in the town Aponibolinayen was anxious for them to chew betel-nut. So she gave some to Kanag and his wife Dapilisan and to some others. So they chewed and Kanag said to them, "You are first

to tell your names." "My name is Aponitolau of Kadalayapan," said the man who looked like he was crazy. "My name is Aponibolinayen." As soon as they had told their names Kanag was the next and he said,
"My name is Kanag Kabagbagowan who was carried by the big storm." "My name is Dapilisan, who is the daughter of Bangan and Dalonagan, who is the wife of your son Kanag, for whom you did not make _pakalon_. It
is bad if you do not like the marriage." "Our daughter, Dapilisan,
we like you, for Kanag wanted to marry you," said Aponibolinayen. Not long after the _balaua_ was nearly finished, but the people were still dancing. "Now my _abalayan_ [252] Dalonagan, we are going to pay the marriage price according to the custom," said Aponibolinayen. "Our custom is to fill the _balaua_ nine times with the different kind of
jars." So Aponibolinayen said, "Ala, you _alan_ [253] who live in the different springs and _bananayo_ of Kaodanan and you _liblibayan_,  go and get the jars, _malayo_ and _tadogan, sumadag_ and _ginlasan_ and _addeban_ and _gumtan_, which Kanag must pay as the marriage
price for Dapilisan." As soon as she had commanded they went, and they filled the _balaua_ nine times, and Aponibolinayen said to Dalonagan,
"I think now that we have paid the marriage price," and Dolonagan said, "No, there is more still to pay." "All right, if we still owe, tell
us and we will pay." So Dalonagan called her big pet spider and said, "You, my pet spider, go around the town of Kalaskigan and spin a thread as you go, on which Aponibolinayen must string golden beads."

When the spider had put a thread around the town Dalonagan said to Aponibolinayen, "Now, you put golden beads on the spider's thread which surrounds the town." Aponibolinayen again commanded the _liblibayan, alan_, and the other spirits to go and get the golden beads. As soon
as they secured the beads they put them on the thread which surrounded the town. Not long after they arrived and they strung the beads on
the thread. As soon as they finished, Dalonagan hung on the thread to see if it would break. Dapilisan said, "Ala, you thread of the
spider be strong and do not break, or I shall be ashamed." Truly, the thread did not break when Dalonagan hung on it. "Ala, my _abalayan_, is there any other debt?" asked Aponibolinayen, and Dalonagan said, "No more." When the _balaua_ was over the people who went to attend the _Sayang_ went home, and Aponibolinayen said to Kanag, "Now, we will take you back to Kadalayapan," and he replied, "No, for
I wish to live here." When they could not take him to Kadalayapan, Aponibolinayen said to Aponitolau, "I am going to stay here with him," but Aponitolau would not let her stay, but took her back.

(Told by Angtan of Lagangilang).


18

Aponibolinayen went to the spring. As soon as she arrived there she washed her hair. When she washed her hair she dived into the water, and she did not know that blood from her body was being washed away by the water.

"I am going to the spring," said the _alan_, who was Inil-lagen. As soon as she arrived at the river she took her headaxe and scooped up the blood which was carried by the stream and she went back to
Dagapan. As soon as she reached her house she put the blood on a big plate which was inherited through nine generations, and she covered it.

"I am going to the well," said Aponigawani of Natpangan. As soon as she arrived she burned rice straw, which had been inherited nine times, and she put it in the pot with water. After that she took the water from
the jar and put it in the coconut shell and she washed her hair. As soon as she washed her hair she dived in the river, and she washed her arm beads which twinkled in the evening, and she did not know that her blood was flowing and was being carried away by the stream.

"I am going to the well," said the _alan_ Apinganan who lived in Bagonan, and she saw the blood of Aponigawani, and she secured it on her headaxe, and she put it inside of her belt. After that she went
home. As soon as she arrived in her house she put the blood in the big dish, which had been nine times inherited, and she covered it.

"I am going to uncover my toy," said the _alan_ Inil-lagen. "No do not uncover me, grandmother; I have no clout and belt," said the little boy. So she gave him a clout and belt and after that she uncovered it. "Ala, we will give him the name of Ilwisan of Dagapan," said all
the _alan_.

"I am going to uncover my toy," said the _alan_ Apinganan. "No, do not uncover me, because I have no clout and belt," said the little
boy. So Apinganan gave him a clout and belt and uncovered him. "Ala, there is no other good name, but Dondonyan of Bagonan.

"I am going to fight," said Dondonyan of Bagonan. He took his headaxe, which was one span long, and he went to get Ilwisan of Dagapan, and so Ilwisan took his headaxe, which was one span long, and they went. As soon as they got out of the town they began to strike their shields
with a stick. The sound of the beating was as great as that made by one hundred. As soon as Aponibolinayen heard the noise of the shields
she shouted and Danay of Kabisilan shouted also, and those who shouted were the ladies who always staid in the house. [254] When they passed by the spring of Natpangan Aponigawani shouted. When they passed by
Pindayan, Gimbagonan shouted and the world trembled while she shouted.

While they were walking they arrived at the spring of Giambolan of

Kaboyboyan, who was an _alzado_. [255] Not long after they reached the
_alzado_ woman at the spring, for she was still making _Sayang_. Not long after Ilwisan of Dagapan killed the tattooed _alzados_, who were more than one hundred, who were dipping water from the spring. "We go to the town," said Ilwisan of Dagapan to Dondonyan. "Yes," he said,
and they went. As soon as they arrived in the town, Giambolan saw them and he was surprised, for they were two boys who entered the town. "You little boys who come in my town, you are the first who ever came here," said Giambolan, who had ten heads. He went up into the house and the little boys said, "Take your headaxe and spear Giambolan; although we are little boys we are not afraid of you, for we came here to fight
with you. It is the last of your life now." "Giambolan, you first fight against us," said Ilwisan. He used his power. "You headaxe and spear of Giambolan, if he throws you against us, do not strike us." When all the spears and headaxes of Giambolan were lost, the boys truly were not hurt. "Now we are next to throw our spears. You, our headaxes, when we strike and throw the spear you pierce the side of Giambolan," they said. Not long after Giambolan laid down. "You, my headaxe, cut off the heads of Giambolan at one blow," they said. So the ten heads were cut off. "You, my spear and headaxe, go and kill all the people
in the houses of the town, who live with Giambolan," they said. The spears and headaxes went and killed all the people in the town, and the pig troughs were floating in blood toward the river. "You, heads, gather together in the yard of Giambolan. You, heads of the women, separate, and you, heads of Giambolan, go first, and you, storm, carry the house of Giambolan. You go near to our house in Dagapan."

"I will tramp on the town of Giambolan so it will be like the ocean," they said. Not long after the town was like the ocean. They went home and they followed after the heads, which they sent first to their
town. Not long after, "I use my power so that we arrive at once in Dagapan," said Ilwisan. So they arrived truly.

"All the heads of Giambolan stay by the gate of the town; all the heads of the people who live with him stay around the town."

"You _alan_ who look like me, we will go and see Ilwisan and make him go into the house, for he has returned from fighting." Not long after they made him climb the _sangap_ [256] so he could talk with the star, it was so high. Ilwisan did not climb, but he jumped over the ladder and he did not touch it. "You, _alan_, take down the _gansas_ for we are going to have a big party, for we have come back from
fighting." So the _alan_ took down the _gansas_ and they danced. "You send your people to go and invite our relatives," said Ilwisan,
"so that they will come to attend my big party, for I have returned from the fight." So they sent the messengers to the towns where the relatives lived.

When the spirit messengers arrived by the _balaua_ where Aponitolau of Kadalayapan was lying down, "Good morning," they said. "How are you," said Aponitolau. "I came here because Ilwisan of Dagapan sent me to get you, for they make a big party, for they have returned
from fighting." "This is the first time I have heard of a town called Dagapan," said Aponitolau. "You people who live with me, come with me and we all will go to Dagapan, because Ilwisan will make a big party,
for he has returned from fighting; all you ladies who stay in the house come also."

Not long after they went and Aponitolau guided them, and they met the people who live in Natpangan and Pindayan in the way. Gimbagonan, who was the wife of Iwaginan, and Danay of Kabisilan went to Dagapan. When they arrived at the spring of Ilwisan of Dagapan they all stopped. "We
will all stop here and wait until someone comes to meet us," said Aponitolau. Not long after Ilwisan and Dondonyan saw all the visitors who were at the spring, so they went to meet them. Each of them took a glass of _basi_ and gave the drink to them. When they had all drank they took them up to the town. Not long after, when they arrived in
the town, they sat down, and Aponitolau and the other people took
the _gansa_, and Iwaginan took the _alap_ [257] and they danced first with Aponibolinayen. As soon as they finished dancing they took out
of their belts the girls who never go out doors, and they joined
the people. The girl whom Aponibolinayen took out of her belt was Daliknayan, and the girls whom Aponigawani took out of her belt were Indiapan, and Alama-an, and the girl whom Danay of Kabisilan took out of her belt was Asigtanan, and the girl whom Gimbagonan took out of her belt was Dalonagan. [258] As soon as they had taken the girls out they made them sit in one row and the circle of people was very bright, because of the girls, for they were all pretty. After that
Iwaginan made Daliknayan and Dalonagan and Alama-an and Asigtanan dance with Ilwisan of Dagapan. When they had danced across the circle five
times they stopped. As soon as they finished dancing Iwaginan made Aponitolau dance with Danay of Kabisilan. When Aponitolau stamped his feet as he was dancing all the fruit of the coconut trees fell
down. After they finished Balogagayan and Gimbagonan danced. After they danced Kabin-na-ogan of Kabitaulan danced with Aponigawani. After they danced they went to eat. The food was of thirty different kinds,
and they were abashed in the golden house of Ilwisan, which had many valuable jars in it, for the _alan_ had given them to him.

As soon as they finished eating they gathered again, and the _alan_ Kilagen told them that Ilwisan was the son of Aponibolinayen, and Dondonyan was the son of Aponigawani. She said, "The reason that we made your son come to life was that we might have someone to give our things to, for we have no children to inherit them." "If that is so we
are going to change their names. Ilwisan will be Kanag Kabagbagowan," said Aponitolau. "Dondonyan will be Dagolayen, who is a rich man." "Now

it is two months since we came here and we go home," they all said. As soon as they agreed, the _alan_ gave them valuable things. Aponitolau used his power and the golden house of Kanag which the _alan_ gave him was pulled up and went to Kadalayapan and the gold house of Dondonyan went to Natpangan. Aponigawani used her power, and when it became morning Kanag cried because his golden house of Dagapan, which was the _alan's_ town, went to Kadalayapan. "Do not cry, Kanag; this is
your town; we are your father and mother." So Kanag stopped crying.

The next month Kanag said to his father and mother, "The best thing for you to do is to engage me to Daliknayan, who never goes out doors, and there is no one to compare with her, who looks like the firefly
in the evening, and her footprints are loved by all the men, for they look like the rainbow." Not long after Aponibolinayen took the golden
beads, which look like the moon, to use as an engagement present. Not long after Aponibolinayen and Aponitolau arrived at Kabisilan. "Good morning, Aunt Danay," they said. "How are you?" said Danay. "Come up and we will eat." They went up the stairs, and Danay took the rice
out of the jar and took out the meat, and they ate. As soon as they finished eating, "We cannot stop here long, for we are in a hurry,"
and they showed her the gold which was like the moon, for they wished to make the engagement. Danay of Kabisilan agreed, and they set a day for _pakalon,_ and it was three days later. Not long after they went
back home. As soon as they arrived they told their son Kanag and he was very happy.

When the day for _pakalon_ came they summoned all the people, and so they went, and some of them went first. "You, my jar, _bilibili,_ and
my jar _ginlasan_, and you my jar _malayo_, go first." So all the jars preceded them, and they followed. Not long after they arrived. When all the people whom they invited arrived, they fed them all. When they had all finished eating, "Now that we have finished eating we are going
to settle on the price. My _balaua_ must be filled eighteen times with different jars before Kanag and Daliknayan can be married." So they filled the _balaua_ eighteen times. "Now that the _pakalon_
is finished and we have paid the price, we will take her home, and you prepare the food for her to take." So they started to fix a box for her with pillows, and they gave her a golden hat which looked like a bird, and she put her skirt on her head and it twinkled. Not long after they went. As soon as they arrived in Kadalayapan, they went upstairs, and they made her sit on the bamboo floor, and they
counted the bamboo strips on which she sat, and it was an arm span long of agate beads. [259] Not long after they had a son and they named him Dumalawig. This is all.

(Told by Magwati of Lagangilang).

19

"I am going to hunt deer with the dogs, mother," said Kanag. "No, do not go, you will be lost," said Aponibolinayen. "No, I will not
be lost. Give me provisions to take," he said, and he fretted so his mother let him go, and she gave provisions, for she could not prevent him from going. So he went.

"Ey-Ey-kota, my puppy, Ey-Ey, my fat dog, do not catch anything until we reach the middle of the wood, which is the place where the _anteng_ tree grows." Not long after while he was walking the puppy went into
the jungle and it barked in the wood. He went to reach it. When he arrived he saw that what the puppy barked at was a very small house by the resin tree. He went up to the house. Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen went to hide under the hearth and Kanag did not go out of the house until the girl appeared. One night had passed, then the girl who owned the house appeared. He saw that she was a beautiful girl and they talked. "It is not good for us to talk until we know our names," said Dumanau, [260] and he gave her betel-nut, and she did not receive it, so he made it very good so that she wanted it after two days. After
that she received the betel-nut which was covered with gold. As soon as they chewed, "You first tell your name, for you live here; it is
not good for me to tell first, for I come from another place," said Dumanau. "No, it is not good for a girl to tell her name first. You
are a boy and even though you came from another place you tell your name first," said Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen. "My name is Dumanau, who is the son of Aponibolinayen and Aponitolau of Kadalayapan." "My name is Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen, who is the daughter of an _alan_ in Matawatawen." When they put down their quids, they laid in good order as agates with no holes in them. "We are close relatives,
and it is good for us to be married." So they married.

Three years passed. "The best thing is for us to take our house to Kadalayapan, and go there; perhaps my father and mother are searching for me." "No, we must not go, because I am ashamed, for they did
not engage me to you," said Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen. "No, we go; we must not stay always in the jungle," he said. So in the middle of
the night Dumanau used his power. "I use my magic so that this house we are in goes to Kadalayapan. You stand there by our house," he said; so the little house went there while they were asleep. The next morning
Wanwanyen was surprised because many chickens were crowing and many people were talking, and when she went to look out of the window there were many houses. "Why, Dumanau, it is not the jungle where we are now; where are we?" she said. "It is the town of Kadalayapan."

Not long after their three children went to look out of the window and

they saw the sugar cane, and they were anxious to chew it. "Father, go and get the sugar cane for us to chew," they said. Dumanau went,
and he advised Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen to fasten the door while he was gone. "If anyone comes do not open the door." He went, and Dumanau's father and mother were frightened, because the little house was by
their dwelling, for there was no little house there before. As soon
as Dumanau arrived in the house of his father and mother they were surprised, for they had searched for him three years. They asked where he had been, and he said he had found a wife in the wood when he had staid for three years. He told his mother that she must not
go to his house and say bad words to his wife. So Dumanau went to the place of the sugar cane, and his mother went to the house and  said bad words to his wife. "Open the door, you bad woman, who has no shame. You are the cause of my son being lost, and we spent much time to find him. What did you come here for, worthless woman?" said Aponibolinayen. Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen did not answer her. Not
long after Dumanau arrived at their house and Wanwanyen said to him, "It is true what I told you. I told you not to go and you did truly,
and your mother came and said many bad words. I said it was best for us to stay always in Matawatawen, but you paid no heed. Now my stomach is sick, for your mother came here to say many bad things to
us." Not long after she died. Dumanau sharpened his headaxe and spear, for he wanted to kill his mother, because she said bad things to his
wife Wanwanyen, but he did not kill her, because she fastened the door.

As soon as Dumanau arrived in their house he made a _tabalang_ [261] of gold, and put the body of Wanwanyen inside of it, and he put a golden rooster on top of it. As soon as he finished he put the body
of Wanwanyen inside of it. As soon as he had done this he said, "If you pass many different towns where the people get water, you rooster crow." The rooster said, "Tatalao, I am _tabalang_ of Kadalayapan;
on top of me is a golden rooster." He pushed the _tabalang_ into the river and so it floated away. When it passed by the springs
in the other towns, the rooster said, "Tatalao, I am _tabalang_ of Kadalayapan, and on top of me is a golden rooster." That is what the rooster always said when they passed the springs in the other towns.

Dumanau wandered about as if crazy, and his oldest son walked in front of him. He carried the next child on his back and carried the third
on his hip. When the _tabalang_ arrived in Nagbotobotan, "Tatalao,
I am _tabalang_ of Kadalayapan, and on me is a golden rooster," said the rooster on the _tabalang_ which was made of gold. The old woman Alokotan was taking a bath by the river and she was in a hurry to
put on her skirt and she followed the _tabalang_. "You _tabalang_, where did you come from? Are you the _tabalang_ of Kapaolan? If you are not from Kapaolan, are you from Kanyogan?" The _tabalang_ did not stop and it nearly went down into the hole where the stream goes. [262] So Alokotan ran very fast. "Are you _tabalang_ from

Kaodanan?" The _tabalang_ hesitated a little. "Are you _tabalang_
of Kadalayapan?" "Yes," said the _tabalang_ and stopped; so she went inside of the _tabalang_ and she took the body to her house. She was afraid of the _tabalang,_ because it was made of gold and she was surprised because the woman who was inside was beautiful and there was no one to compare with her. As soon as they arrived to her house, "I whip perfume _alikadakad_ and make her wake up directly." "I whip my perfume _banaues_ and directly she will say, '_Wes_,'" "I whip my perfume _dagimonau_ and directly she will wake up entirely." [263] "How long I slept, grandmother," said Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen. The old woman Alokotan took her inside of the house. "'How long my sleep,' you say, and you were dead. There is the _tabalang_ they put you in and I was surprised, for it was made of gold and has a golden rooster on top of it. They used it to send you down the river." Not long
after the old woman Alokotan hid her, and Dumanau, who was always wandering about with his children, approached the place where the women were dipping water from the spring. All the women who were dipping water from the well said, "Here is a lone man who is carrying the babies. We agree that we all salute him at one time." As soon
as they agreed Dumanau arrived to the place where they were dipping water and he said, "Good day, women." "Good day also," answered all the women in unison. "Where are you going, lone man who is carrying the babies?" "'Where are you going,' you say, women. I am following Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen whom I put inside the _tabalang_ for she was dead. Did you see the _tabalang_ pass here?" said Dumanau. "It passed by here long ago. Perhaps it is in Nagbotobotan now." "Ala, I
leave you now, women, and I go and follow." "Yes," answered the women.

While they were walking they arrived in Nagbotobotan and Dumanau saw the _tabalang_ in the yard by the house of Alokotan and they exchanged greetings. "Good afternoon," they said, and Alokotan took them upstairs; so they went up. Not long after while they were talking,
"This was my _tabalang_, my grandmother old woman Alokotan; bring out of hiding Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen, so that I may take her home," said Dumanau, and the old woman Alokotan did not bring her out because she did not believe that he was the husband of Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen; so she used magic, and when she found that he was the husband of Wanwanyen she said, "She is over there. I hid her." So she went to get her and Dumanau, was joyful, for he saw Wanwanyen alive again. "Ala,
now grandmother old woman Alokotan, how much must I pay, because you saved my wife Wanwanyen?" "That is all right, no pay at all. That
is why I stay in this place so as to watch and see if any of my dead relatives pass by my house and I make them alive again. If you were not my relative I would have let her go." So Dumanau thanked her many times and they went back home.

Not long after they arrived in Kadalayapan. "The best for us to do, Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen, is for us to build _balaua_ and invite all

of our relatives; perhaps you are not the daughter of an _alan,_" said Dumanau. "Why not? I am the daughter of the _alan,_" said
Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen. "Ala, let us build _balaua_ anyway." Not long after they commanded people to pound rice, and as soon as Wanwanyen was ready she commanded someone to go and secure the betel-nuts which were covered with gold. As soon as they arrived they oiled them. When
it became evening they made _Libon._ [264] The next morning they sent the betel-nuts to invite their relatives. So they went. Not long after,
"I am anxious to chew betel-nut. What is the matter with me?" said Aponigawani, who was lying down on her bed. As soon as she got up she found an oiled betel-nut which was covered with gold beside her. "Do
not cut me; I came to invite you to the _balaua_ which Wanwanyen and Dumanau make," said the betel-nut, when she took it intending to cut it. So Aponigawani told the people of Kaodanan to start to
attend _balaua_ with Dumanau and Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen. She was surprised because Dumanau had arrived, for they had heard that he was lost when he went to hunt deer. She said, "Perhaps he met a lady who never goes outdoors, who has power, when he went to hunt deer." Not long after, "Ala, you people who live in the same town, let us go
now to Kadalayapan for Dumanau's and Wanwanyen's _balaua_."

As soon as they arrived in the place where the people dipped water from the spring they asked where the ford was. "You look for the shallow place," said the people who were dipping the water. Not long after
they went across the river and some of the people who were dipping water went to notify the people making _balaua_ that the visitors were there, so Dumanau and Wanwanyen went to the gate of the town and met them there and made _alawig_. [265] Aponigawani and Aponibolinayen
looked at the woman who was the wife of Dumanau and she was almost the same as Aponigawani. As soon as they finished _alawig_ they took them  up to the town. While they were sitting, Aponigawani was anxious to
know who Dumanau's wife really was, so she went to Dumanau and said that they were going to chew betel-nut. "That is the best way to do
so that we may know if we are related," said Dumanau. So they took the betel-nuts and divided them in pieces. "You tell your name first, because you are the people who live here." "No, my uncle, you old men are the first to tell your names." "My name is Aponibalagen, who is the son of Pagatipanan and Ebang of Natpangan, who is the brother of Aponibolinayen." "My name is Aponitolau, who is the son
of Pagbokasan and Langa-an, who is the brother of Aponigawani, whose son is Dumnau." "My name is Dumanau, who is the son of Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen of Kadalayapan." "My name is Aponigawani of Kaodanan, who is the wife of Aponibalagen, who has no sister." "My name is Aponibolinayen of Kadalayapan, who is the wife of Aponitolau, whose
son is Dumanau." "My name is Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen, who is the daughter of an _alan_ of Matawatawen."

When they had told their names the quid of Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen

went to the quid of Aponibalagen and Aponigawani and Dumanau laid down his quid. The quid of Dumanau went to those of Aponibolinayen and Aponitolau. "Now, Aponitolau, we know Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen is our daughter; it is best for you now to pay the marriage price, nine times
full the _balaua_," said Aponigawani and Aponibalagen. Aponibolinayen, the mother of Dumanau, begged the pardon of Dumanau and his wife, for she did not know that his wife was the daughter of Aponigawani
and Aponibalagen, who was her brother. Not long after they gave the marriage price. "I use my power so that the _balaua_ of Wanwanyen and Dumanau is nine times filled," said Aponibolinayen, and it was nine times filled with different kinds of jars. Then Aponigawani
raised her eyebrows and half disappeared, and Aponibolinayen used magic again and the _balaua_ was full again. When they gave all the marriage price they danced. As soon as the dance was over they went to eat, all the people whom they invited.

When they finished eating Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen talked. "You, father and mother, you were not careful of your daughter. I
would not have heard any bad words if you had been careful." "Ala, Wanwanyen-Aponibolinayen, that is our custom, because we are related to the Kaboniyan and the _alan_ always picks up some of us," said her father and mother. "It is good that Dumanau found you, who is your husband. Aponibolinayen, who talked bad before, is our relative. She
is my sister," said Aponibalagen. "It is true that I said bad words to her, because I did not know that we were related, though I am your relative; forgive me, daughter, your father is my brother,"
said Aponibolinayen to Wanwanyen. Not long after they drank _basi_, for they knew each other and made friends. As soon as they drank they danced during one month. When the _balaua_ was finished all of the people went home and took some of the jars. As soon as they went home the father and mother-in-law of Dumanau took all the other jars to Kaodanan. It is said.

(Told by Madomar of Riang barrio Patok.)


20

"We are going away, Cousin Dagolayan," said Kanag. "If that is what you say we must go." Not long after they went. As soon as they reached the middle of the way they agreed upon their destination. "Where are we going?" they asked. "We are going to the place Ginayod of Binglayan," said Kanag. "Why are we going there?" said his cousin Dagolayan. "We are going because Ginayod of Binglayan has a pretty girl who never goes outdoors, and we are going to see her," said Kanag.

Not long after they arrived where the young girls spun at night. "Stay

here, Cousin Dagolayan, and I will meet you here. I am going to see the daughter of Ginayod, who is Asimbayan of Ilang." "If that is
what you say it is all right," said Dagolayan. Not long after Kanag reached the place where the girl was, and he talked with her. The girl who never goes outdoors said to him, "If you will get the perfume
of Baliwan I will believe all you say." "If you will agree to my mission I will go and get whatever you want," said Kanag. "Ala,
if you do not believe me, you take my arm beads from my left arm, for you are kind to go for me." So she gave him her arm beads, and
Kanag started to go at once. As soon as he arrived at the place where the young girls spun and had joined his companion, his cousin asked, "What did she say?" "She told me that if I will secure the perfume of Baliwan she will do everything I ask of her. Let us both go." "No, I
do not wish to go with you, for you will not go with me where I wish to go." "Please come with me and another time I will go with you," said Kanag.

Not long after they went and they met the _doldoli_ [266] in the
way. "Where are you going, rich young men?" it said to them. "Where are you going,' you say, and we are going to get the perfume of Baliwan,
for though we are far from it still we can smell it now." "Ala,
young men, you cannot go there, for when anyone goes there, only his name goes back to his town." But the boys replied, "We are going anyway. That is the reason we are already far from home, and it is the thing the pretty girl wants." "If you say that you are going anyway,
you will repent when you reach there." "It is the thing which will
make the girls love us." So they left the jar and walked on. When they reached the middle of the jungle they met a big frog, and it said, "Where are you going, young men?" "'Where are we going,' you say, and we are going to get the perfume of Baliwan, for that is what Asimbayan of Ilang desires." "No, do not go there, for everyone who has gone there has died." "We will go on anyway, for we are already far from our town and we cannot return without the perfume." So they left the frog and walked on. Not long after they approached the place where the perfume was, and while they were still a long way off they could smell its odor. "What a fine odor it has. That is why the young girl who never goes outdoors desires it so much." They walked on and in a short time they reached the place below the perfume. When they were there Dagolayan said to Kanag, "Take some from the lower branches." "No, it is better for me to climb and get some from the
top, for I think they are better above than below." So Kanag climbed and as soon as he broke off the stem which held the perfume his legs became like part of a snake. Dagolayan looked up and he saw that the legs of his companion had changed to part of a snake. He said,
"Now, my Cousin Kanag, I am going to leave you, for you are no longer a man, but you are a serpent." "Do not leave me even if I do become a serpent. I will not injure you. Do not be afraid." In a short time all
his body had become a real serpent, and Dagolayan ran and went home,

and the big serpent followed him.

Not long after Dagolayan arrived in Kadalayapan, and Aponitolau
and Aponibolinayen asked where Kanag was. "Kanag has become a big serpent. As soon as he broke off the perfume of Baliwan which the young girl desired he became a serpent." Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen went around the town and told the people that they must accompany them,
for they were going to see if Kanag had really become a serpent. When Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen had killed many animals and given much food to the searchers and they did not find him, they stopped searching.

Not long after Kanag thought he would go to the river where the people took their baths. So he went. Not long after Langa-ayan was anxious to wash her hair, so she went to the river and washed it,
and Do-ansowan washed his hair first and Langa-ayan helped him, for he was her husband. As soon as she had washed his hair, he said to her,
"I am going to the town." So he went and left Langa-ayan alone by
the river washing her hair. When she had washed her hair she washed her arm beads. While she was washing her upper arm beads she heard a great commotion in the river, and soon after a big serpent appeared on the other bank. Langa-ayan saw that it was a big serpent and she was
so frightened that she started to run, but the serpent said to her, "Do not run, my aunt, I am not a real serpent, for I was a young
boy before." So Langa-ayan stopped and asked him why he had become a great serpent. "Because I went to Ilang to see the pretty girl,
and she told me that if I could get the perfume of Baliwan she would do whatever I asked, so I went. I did not want to go, for I was not sure that she told the truth, but she gave me her left bracelet, so I
went. When I was still far away from Baliwan I could smell the perfume, and when I reached the tree I climbed it and I tried to break the stem which held the perfume, and my companion saw that I was changing to a serpent and he ran away. I truly became a serpent and now I have come here and have met you. If you do not believe that I was truly a boy,
I will show you the arm beads." So he lifted his head and Langa-ayan truly saw the arm beads around his neck. "My aunt, will you find out how I may become a man again?" She said, "If what you have said is true you follow me." So they went up to the town.

Do-ansowan said to his wife, "How long you have staid at the river, my wife." "I was there a long time, for I met a big serpent. If you wish to see it, it is in the yard. He says he was a young boy and he
showed me the arm beads of a young girl, which he has about his neck. I believe that he is a young boy who has become a serpent. When he broke the stem of the perfume which the girl wanted he became a serpent. He wants to know how he can again become a boy." "Ala, if that is what
he wants, you go and take him to my Uncle Ma-obagan." So they went and when they arrived where Ma-obagan lived she said, "Good morning,

uncle." "Good morning," he answered. "The reason I came is because a young boy who became a big snake is here. Will you please put him in your magic well which changes everything which goes in it and make him a young boy again?" "If he will go into the water, even if it
feels bad, you call him and let him go in." So they went and when they arrived at the well the serpent went into the water, and the serpent's skin began to crack and fall off and he became a boy again.

Not long after they went back to the house of Langa-ayan. As soon as they arrived there the boy went to the _balaua_ and did not follow
Langa-ayan to the house. Do-ansowan saw that he was a handsome young boy. As soon as Langa-ayan had finished cooking they called him to
come and eat and he said to them, "I do not wish to eat if there are no girls to eat with me." "We are afraid if you do not eat, for you
did not eat for a long time, while you were a serpent." The boy said, "Even though I did not eat while I was a serpent I will follow my custom, for I do not eat unless a pretty young girl who never goes
outdoors eats with me." When they could not persuade him Do-ansowan said to his wife, "Go and call our daughter Amau." Not long after she went to call her. When she arrived where they had put her she said, "Come and eat with the rich young man." "How can I go? I do not know how to walk." "Take the big gold basket and hold on to it while you  walk." Not long after she arrived where the food was, and Langa-ayan and Do-ansowan said to the boy who was still in the _balaua_, "Come and eat now, nephew, with our daughter who never goes outdoors." So the boy went quickly, and when he reached the place where the girl was, they ate. When they had finished eating he said that he was sick, but
he was not. So they went to fix a place for him to lie and he said, "Perhaps I am sick because of the spirit of the young girl." So they went to call their daughter, for Kanag wanted her to touch him, and he wanted to see her. The girl went to touch his body and he was all right, for he wished her to touch him, and he said, "Now, my uncle and aunt, if you wish me for a son-in-law I wish to marry Amau. I
will not go any further to find a wife." The father and mother of
the girl agreed to what Kanag said, for the girl wanted to marry him, so they were married.

"Now, Kanag, we are going to make _Sayang_ and invite your mother and father so that they can see that you are a young man again," said his father-in-law and mother-in-law. They made _Sayang_ and they sent someone to invite their relatives, and someone went to Asimbayan of Ilang and told her that Kanag Kabagbagowan, who lived in Kalaskigan, and his wife Amau were making _Sayang_. Some of the betel-nuts which they sent arrived in Kadalayapan where Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen lived and they said, "Good morning," to Aponitolau who was lying
down in the _balaua_. He felt badly because Kanag was a serpent and he said to the betel-nut, "Good morning. Come to Kalaskigan, for
Kanag and Amau are making _Sayang_ and they want you to come." So

Aponitolau got up quickly and told Aponibolinayen who was lying down in the house that Kanag and his wife were making _Sayang_, and they were happy because Kanag was a boy again. They told all the people to prepare to go to the _Sayang_ of Kanag and his wife. So they went,
and when they arrived they saw that Kanag was handsomer than before, and Asimbayan went also, for they had invited her. Asimbayan saw
that Kanag was the boy who had taken her bracelet and had gone to get the perfume for her, and while she was watching him Kanag went to talk with her. He told her what had happened when he went to get the perfume for her, and he told her how he had become a snake and his mother-in-law had met him by the river and had taken him to the old man who changed him again to a boy, and he had married the daughter of Do-ansowan and Langa-ayan. Kanag said, "Now, I cannot marry you, so I will give back your bracelet." So he gave it back.

Not long after Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen asked how much they must pay for the wife of Kanag, and Langa-ayan and Do-ansowan said, "Fill our _balaua_ nine times with valuable things." When they had
paid all, they said, "Now we are going to take them to Kadalayapan, for we have paid all you asked." "No, do not take them. They are
going to stay here," said Do-ansowan and Langa-ayan. "They will come there bye and bye." "Ala, if that is what you say they must come
and visit us, even if they stay here." Not long after Kanag and his wife went to Kadalayapan to visit his father and they staid there
three months. Then Do-ansowan and his wife were anxious for them to return. When Kanag and his wife returned to Kalaskigan they said, "Why did you stay so long? We thought you were going to live in Kadalayapan and we intended to follow you." "We staid a long time,
for my father and mother would not let us return when we wished," said Kanag.

(Told by Angtan of Lagangilang.)


21

"Goto watch our _langpadan_, [267] Kanag, because the wild pigs spoil it." Kanag went. When he arrived at the field he went around it and
it was not injured, so he went to the little watch house and he was sorrowful, and he always hung his head. Not long after Aponitolau said to Aponibolinayen, "Cook some rice and meat for I am going to our field and carry the food to Kanag." So Aponibolinayen went to cook. As soon as she finished cooking they ate first. As soon as they finished eating Aponitolau took the rice and meat and started for the field where their son was. When Aponitolau appeared Kanag took his _lipi_ nuts and he played, and the mountain rice which he went to watch was not injured. As soon as Aponitolau arrived to the

place where he was playing, "Come to eat, Kanag," and Kanag said, "I am not hungry yet. Put the food in the house. I will play awhile first." When Aponitolau could not make him eat he put the provisions in the house, and he went home and left the boy. Kanag did not go
and eat. The next morning Aponitolau went to take him food again and as soon as Kanag saw him he took his game and went to play. When Aponitolau arrived he called him to go and eat, but he did not go
for he wished to play, and he asked his father to put the rice and meat in the house. Aponitolau was surprised, because he did not eat, and the provisions for the first day were still untouched. He asked,
"Why do you not like to eat?" and he said, "I am not hungry yet." When Aponitolau could not make him eat he went home again, and Kanag used magic and he became a _labeg_. [268]

Aponitolau said to Aponibolinayen, "I wonder why Kanag does not like to eat." "I think he is sorrowful, because he was sent to
watch the mountain rice." "What is the reason that you sent him to the field when the fences are strong and no wild pigs can get in," said Aponibolinayen. "You must cook and we will eat, and then I will go and get him." Aponibolinayen went to cook. As soon as she finished cooking they ate and after that Aponitolau took some rice and meat for Kanag to eat. Aponibolinayen said to him,
"As soon as he finishes eating bring him home. Do not let him stay there alone. That is why he does not wish to eat." Aponitolau said, "Yes," and so he went. When he arrived at the field he could not see Kanag any more. He called to him, and the little boy answered him from the top of the bamboo tree. His father felt very sorry
that he had become a little bird. "Why did you become a little bird, Kanag? Come and eat. I will not send you here any more." Kanag said, "I do not wish to eat and I would rather be a bird and carry the signs
to everyone." So his father went back home and he was sorrowful. As soon as Aponitolau arrived in Kadalayapan he said to Aponibolinayen, "Kanag has become a bird. Perhaps he felt sorry because we sent him to watch the rice. He said that when I am going to war he will fly
over me, and he will give me the good and bad signs." [269]

Not long after Aponitolau started out to fight. He took his spear,
headaxe and shield, and he went. When he was near the gate of the town, Kanag gave the bad sign. "Go back, father, for you have a bad sign,"
said the little bird. So his father went back at once. The next morning he started again and he went. When he reached the gate of the town the little bird gave him a good sign, so he went. The little bird
flew near to him and he always gave the good sign. Aponitolau was happy for he knew that nothing would injure him.

Not long after they arrived at the _alzado_ [270] town, and the
_alzados_ were glad when they saw Aponitolau and they said to him, "You are the only man who ever came to our town. Now you cannot

return home. We inherit you," said the bravest of them. "Ala,
if you say that I cannot go back home, you summon all the people in your town, for we are going to fight," said Aponitolau, and the
_alzado_ said to him, "You are very brave if you wish to fight with all of us." So the bravest summoned all the people to prepare, for Aponitolau wished to fight all of them. The people were surprised that one man wished to fight with them, and they said to Aponitolau, "One of my fingers will fight with you. Don't say that you will
fight with all of us." Aponitolau replied, "Do whatever you wish. I still want to fight you." The _alzados_ were angry. The bravest of
them ran toward Aponitolau, and he threw his spear and headaxe and Aponitolau jumped. The _alzados_ were surprised, for he jumped very high, and they all began to throw their spears at him, and they ran and tried to cut his head off. Aponitolau jumped and he secured all their spears and headaxes, and he said to them, "Am I the next now?" "Yes, because we are now unarmed."

Aponitolau used magic so that when he threw his spear it would fly among them until they were all dead. When he threw his spear it flew to all the _alzados_ and killed all of them; so Aponitolau again
used magic, and his headaxe cut off the heads of the _alzados_, and Aponitolau sat by the gate of the town. The little bird flew
by him and said, "The good sign which I gave to you, father, was all right and you have killed all the enemies." Aponitolau said, "Yes." As soon as the headaxe had cut off all the heads from the dead _alzados_, he used his power again so that all of the heads went to Kadalayapan. The heads went first and he followed them, and the little bird always followed him.

As soon as they arrived at the gate of the town the little bird flew
away and Aponitolau used magic so that the heads were stuck around the town. As soon as the heads were placed around the town, Aponitolau commanded all the people in his town to go and invite the people who lived in different places to come and attend his big party. He told
them to invite all the pretty girls who never go outdoors. So the people went all over the world to invite the people to attend the party. As soon as the people arrived in Kadalayapan they played the
_gansas_ and danced and Aponitolau said to Kanag, "Come down, Kanag. Do not stay always in the tops of trees. Come and see the pretty girls
and see if you want to marry one of them. Come and get the golden cup and put _basi_ in it, and make them drink." The little bird said,
"I prefer to stay in the trees and make the signs when anyone goes
to fight." When Aponitolau could not make him become a boy and come down he felt very sorry.

When the party was over all the people whom they invited went home and Kanag said to his father, "Now that your party is over and the people
have gone, I will go down and get the fruit of the trees to eat." [271]

Aponibolinayen said to him, "My dear little son, do not go down and eat the fruit of the trees; we have all we need here. Forgive your father
and me, we will not send you again to the field." Kanag did not pay attention and he started to go down. So Aponibolinayen and Aponitolau commanded the spirit helpers. "Go and follow Kanag wherever he goes, so that he has companions; do not leave him. Find a pretty girl for
him so that he will not go down." Not long after they overtook Kanag in the forest and they all sat down and they said to him, "Wait here for
us a minute, Kanag, while we find a toy for you." "No, I do not wish a toy; I am going down and eat the fruit of the trees." "No, please wait for us. It is very near; we will be back soon. If you do not care
for any, you will see. Wherever you go we shall accompany you." Kanag answered to them, "Yes," and they went. As soon as they arrived at
the well they used their power so that all the pretty girls who never go outdoors felt very hot, so that they all came to the well to bathe.

Not long after the pretty girls went to the well in the early morning, and their parents did not know about it. As soon as the pretty girl arrived at the well the helpers saw the girl who appeared like
the flame of fire about the betel-nut blossoms. As soon as they
saw her washing her hair, they went back in a hurry where Kanag was waiting. "Kanag, come and hurry and see the pretty girl." Kanag said, "I do not wish to see her. I am going down to eat the fruit of the
trees," and they said again, "Please come; it is very near. If you do not like her we will go wherever you wish." So Kanag went with them, and when they arrived he flew to the top of the betel-nut tree, and
he saw the pretty girl, and he flew to another betel-nut tree above her. "What can I do, if I become a man now? I have no clothes and
headband." The helpers said, "Do not worry about that. Your father and mother told us to give you whatever you wish, and we have everything here." So Kanag went down and took the clothes and headband and he became a man. He went and sat on the girl's skirt and she said,
"Do not harm me. If you are going to cut me, do it only in one place so there will not be so much to heal." "If I was an enemy I would have killed you at once." Kanag went to her and handed the skirt to her. Not long after he gave her betel-nut and they chewed. As
soon as they chewed they saw that it was good for them to marry, for they both had magical power and Kanag told his name first and said, "My name is Kanag Kabagbagowan, who is the son of Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen of Kadalayapan, who did not like him, and they sent him to watch their mountain rice, and he became a bird which is a
_labeg_." "My name is Dapilisan, who is the daughter of Bangan and Dalonagan of Kabno-angan." After that the girl was in a hurry to go home, for she was afraid her father and mother would see her, for they did not know that she had gone to the well. She did not want Kanag
to go with her to the town, but he did not want to leave her, and
the sun shone in the east. The girl went home and Kanag followed her.

Not long after they approached the town and Bangan was in the yard of their house, and Dalonagan was looking out of the door. Not long after she saw them. "What is the matter with Dapilisan? A boy is with her as she returns from the well," said Dalonagan. Bangan was surprised and he did not believe it, for their daughter never went outdoors. "If you
do not believe it, look at them; they are coming here," she said. So Bangan turned and saw them. As soon as they arrived where Bangan sat, "Good morning, uncle," said Kanag. "Do not be surprised because I am with your daughter, for I am to be married to her. My father and mother sent me to our rice field and left me there alone, and I was sorry
that they did not like me, so I became a bird which gives the sign to those who go to war. When my father went to fight I went with him, and he killed all the _alzados_ in one town and he invited all the people
in the world to his party to see if any of the young girls pleased me, but I do not think they came here. I did not like to go to the pretty girls who attended the party, so I started to go down to eat the fruit of the trees, but they sent their spirit helpers to follow and take
care of me. When I was in the wood the helpers met me and said 'Wait for us here while we go to find you a toy,' and I scarcely waited,
but finally waited, and they made all the pretty girls go to the well,
for they felt hot, so your daughter Dapilisan went to take a bath. When the helpers saw her they came to tell me and I did not wish to go, but they compelled me. As soon as I saw her I thought it was good for me to
marry her, so I became a man and came home with her. If you wish me for a son-in-law I will be very happy." Bangan and Dalonagan said to him,
"I wondered why my daughter went to the well. I did not believe that Dapilisan was there, and I am afraid that your father and mother will not like our daughter Dapilisan, for they did not send an engagement present to us." Kanag said to him, "This is why I came here, and they sent their spirit helpers with me to find a pretty girl to marry,
so I will not go down. They will be glad when they know that I am here and want to marry your daughter." So Bangan and his wife sent someone to call Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen, and to tell them that
Kanag was in Kabno-angan. Before the messenger arrived in Kadalayapan Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen knew that Kanag was in Kabno-angan, for the spirit helpers went to them when Kanag went with the girl to the
town. Aponibolinayen and Aponitolau were ready to go to Kabno-angan before the messenger arrived in Kadalayapan. They went there directly, and they took many things to be used in the wedding.

As soon as they arrived in Kabno-angan they were glad to see that Kanag was a man again. Bangan and his wife asked if they liked Dapilisan
as a daughter-in-law, and they replied, "It is all right for Kanag
to marry Dapilisan. We are glad he found her and did not go down, and remain always a bird." So they agreed on the marriage price, and Bangan and his wife said, "The _balaua_ nine times full of different kinds of jars." As soon as the _balaua_ was filled nine times Dalonagan raised her eyebrows and half of the jars vanished,

and Aponibolinayen used her power and the _balaua_ was filled again, so it was full truly and Dalonagan said to Aponibolinayen, "The web
of the spider will be put around the town and you put golden beads on it, and if it does not break Kanag can marry Dapilisan." When
Aponibolinayen had put the golden beads on the web, Dalonagan said again, "I am going to hang on the thread and if I do not break it
the sign is good and Kanag and his wife will not separate." When she hung on the thread and it did not break they allowed Kanag to marry Dapilisan. After that they played on the _gansas_ and they danced. When they had danced all the guests took some jars before they went home. As soon as the people went home, Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen took Kanag and his wife to Kadalayapan. This is all.

(Told by Magwati of Lagangilang.)


22

"I am going to take a bath," said Ligi, so he went. "I am going to take a bath," said Gamayawan also. As soon as she arrived in the
river she went to bathe and Ligi took a bath further down the stream, and he put his _balangat_ [272] on the bank, and it flew and alighted on the skirt of Gamayawan. Not long after Gamayawan went in a hurry to seize it. "Here is my toy," she said, and she put on her skirt,
and Ligi was sorrowful, and he went home.

As soon as Ligi arrived by his house he went at once to the _balaua_ and laid down in it and his mother saw him from the window. "What are you so downcast for? Why do you lie on your stomach?" said his
mother. "Why are you downcast for, you say, my mother; my _balangat_ is lost," he said. "Do not grieve; it will appear bye and bye,"
said his mother.

When Gamayawan arrived in her town of Magsiliwan: "You _alan_ who live with me, look at my toy which I found by the river," she said,
and was very happy, and the _alan_ truly looked at it and it was
the _balangat_ of Ligi, and they all laughed. "What are you laughing
for?" said Gamayawan to them? "We laugh because we are happy, because it is beautiful," said the _alan_. Not long after Gamayawan had a
baby. Not long after she gave birth. "What are we going to do? I am about to give birth to a child," she said. "The best thing for us to
do is for us to get a thorn and stick your little finger." So they truly stuck her finger, and the little baby popped out like popped
corn. [273] "What are we going to name it?" they said. "The best name is Galinginayen, for it is the name of the ancestor of the people who
live in Kadalayapan," said the _alan_. Gamayawan gave him a bath and he grew about one span, for she used her magic. Not long after the baby

was large, for she always used her magic when she bathed him. [274] Not long after the baby could fly.

"What can I do for this baby? I cannot work so well," said Gamayawan. "The best thing for you to do, so you can do much work, is for you to carry him to Kadalayapan and give him to his father," said the _alan_. "That is good, I think; we will go and take him to
Kadalayapan tomorrow." When it became early morning she truly prepared cakes to use as food for the boy on the way. When it became day they started. As soon as they arrived at the spring of Kadalayapan she
used her power so that all the people in the town and all who were dipping water at the well went to sleep; so all the people who were pounding rice and working slept truly. Not long after they went up to the town. When they were approaching the _balaua_ of Ligi they
saw him there asleep. As soon as they reached the _balaua_ they put the boy beside the man who was sleeping. "Stay here and wait, do not fall down," they said to him. "Yes, mother," said the boy. They advised him not to tell who was his mother or where he came from, and they went home. As soon as they reached the edge of the town,
she used her power again and all the people who were asleep woke up.

Ligi was surprised when he saw the boy beside him when he woke up. "Why here is a boy by me, with my _balangat_ which I lost when I went to
take a bath," said Ligi, and he asked where the boy came from and the name of his mother and how he came. "Who are you talking to," said his mother Langa-an. "'Who are you talking to,' you say mother, here is a boy with my _balangat_," said Ligi. Langa-an was in a hurry and she went down from the house and she went down two rounds of the ladder at one step. As soon as she got down she took the boy to their house, where she was cooking and they asked him many questions. "My mother is an _alan_" said Galinginayen. "What is your name then?" "My name
is Galinginayen who is the son of an _alan_ of Kabinbinlan," [275] said the boy. "No you are not the son of an _alan_," they said. When Langa-an finished cooking they tried to feed him, but he would not eat. "If you eat my cake I will eat with you," said the boy. So they
ate truly of the boy's provisions and he ate also with them.

When it became afternoon Gamayawan went to get the boy. As soon as she arrived at the edge of the town of Kadalayapan she used her power again and all the people who were working and dipping water slept. She went to the town and Ligi slept again, and she took the boy. As soon
as she reached the edge of the town she used her power again and all the people who slept woke up. As soon as Ligi woke up he saw that the boy was not by him. "What has happened to the boy? Perhaps his mother came to steal him while I was sleeping," said Ligi. Langa-an was surprised and sorry because the boy was gone.

As soon as the boy and his mother arrived in their house, he

asked his mother how many blankets she had woven while he was in Kadalayapan. "Ala, tomorrow you send me again to Kadalayapan." "Yes," said Gamayawan. When it became early morning she made cakes for his provisions. When it became day they took the boy to Kadalayapan. When they approached the town Gamayawan used her power again so that all the people, even though they were working, slept again, and so they slept truly; then they went to the town and they left the boy beside
Ligi who was sleeping in the _balaua_. As soon as they were far away from the town Gamayawan used her magic, and all the people who slept awoke. As soon as Ligi woke up he saw the boy by him again, and they at once hid him.

When it became afternoon Gamayawan and her companions went to Kadalayapan to get the boy and as soon as they arrived she used magic again so that all the people slept, then they went up to the town. They looked for the boy, but they could not find him, and they were troubled. They went back home crying. As soon as Ligi woke up he went outdoors.

Five days later Ligi told his mother he thought they should build
_balaua_. "We are going to make _Sayang_, mother, for we want to find the mother of this boy." Langa-an said, "Yes." Not long after
they made _balaua_ and when it became afternoon they made _Libon_
[276] and they commanded someone to go and get the betel-nuts which were covered with gold, so that they might send them to invite all
the people in the world. As soon as the people whom they sent arrived they oiled the betel-nuts, and sent them to all parts of the world
to invite all the people.

Not long after the betel-nut which went to the town of Gamayawan arrived, "Good afternoon, lady. I cannot tarry, I came to invite you,
for Ligi and his mother and father of Kadalayapan make _Sayang_," said the betel-nut. "I cannot come for there is no one to watch the house," said Gamayawan. "If you do not wish to come I will grow on your knee," said the betel-nut. "Grow on my big pig, for I cannot go," she said,
so it went on to her big pig and the pig squealed very much. "You get off and come on my knee," said Gamayawan to the betel-nut, for she was sorry for her pig. So the betel-nut went on her knee, and it grew high so that it hurt her. "Ala, you betel-nut, I am going now
to take a bath, and then I will come." So the betel-nut got off and she went to take a bath. When she arrived at the river she was in no hurry, for she did not wish to go, and the people from Pindayan, who
were Iwaginan and his wife Gimbagonan, and the other people passed by the place where she was bathing, when they were going to attend the
_Sayang_ in Kadalayapan. They saw the pretty lady taking her bath by the river. "Ala, you Gimbagonan, give me some betel-nut so that I can give that lady a chew," said Iwaginan. "No, do not lose any time, we are in a hurry," said Gimbagonan. He compelled her to give it to him,

so he went to give the lady the betel-nut and Gimbagonan was angry. As soon as Iwaginan reached the lady and offered her the betel-nut to
chew she refused it, but he compelled her to chew it with him. As soon as he gave the betel-nut to her he urged her to go with them to
attend the _Sayang_. The lady did not want to go, but he urged her very long, until she went with them. She said, "Wait for me here while I
go to change my clothes, if you want me to accompany you, but it is shameful for me to go, for they did not invite me." She went slowly to their house and when Iwaginan and the others waited a long time
for her Gimbagonan was angry with Iwaginan and said bad words to him.

Not long after an Agta [277] woman passed by them at the river. "Ay, Agta, did you not see the lady for whom we are waiting?" said Iwaginan. "No, I did not see her," said the Agta. "If you did not
see her you come with us and we will go to attend _Sayang_" said Iwaginan to her. "I am ashamed to go, for I have no clothes," said the Agta. "No, if I wish it, do not be ashamed," said Iwaginan. Not long after they went. As soon as they arrived in Kadalayapan the Agta went
to sit down behind a rice winnower, and Galinginayen was carried by his father and he took him past all the people and he noticed none of them, and when they were in front of the Agta he wanted to go to her, but the Agta winked at him and he did not go to her though he recognized her as his mother. Not long after the Agta became drunk, for they gave her much _basi_ to drink. While she was drunk Iwaginan called Ligi. "Now, cousin Ligi, my companion the Agta is drunk and she has laid down on the ground. I want you to take her into the house and give her a mat."

Ligi took her into the house and he held her by the little finger
for he did not want to touch her. As soon as they were in the house he put her by the door and he put some old clothes over her, and the boy said, when he saw his mother, "How bad my father is, for he gave my mother the old blankets which the dogs lie on." As soon
as his father was among the people the boy changed the blankets on his mother, and he sucked milk from her breasts. As soon as he had sucked the milk from her breasts he went to play by the window, and the guests went below him, for they feared that he would fall. When they were there all the time Ligi went to the house. Not long after
he arrived in the house he saw the breasts of the Agta twinkle like stars, and Ligi took the sharp knife and cut the skin off from the Agta. As soon as he had cut off all of the black skin, he threw
it out of the window. He lifted her up and put her on a good mat, and all the people who went to attend _balaua_ went to where the skin had fallen, for they thought it was the child who had fallen, and they saw it was the skin of the Agta. They were surprised.

Not long after Iwaginan was anxious to go home. "Ala, now, cousin Ligi, I want to go home, for we have been here so long a time, do not detain us. Go and get my Agta companion so that we can go home." "I

don't know where your Agta companion is now, for I did not see where she went." Iwaginan was sorry and he went to look for her. Not long after he saw her on the mat. "She is on the mat, my cousin Iwaginan, but I do not like to let her go with you, for she is the cause of my making _Sayang_, for I wanted to find out who was the mother of the boy. Now she is his mother. The best thing for you to do is to marry Aponibolinayen and I am going to marry this woman," said Ligi.

Not long after Iwaginan went back home. As soon as they
arrived in Pindayan he divorced Gimbagonan, and he went to marry Aponibolinayen. So truly he married Gamayawan. As soon as the _pakalon_ was over, he paid the marriage price. Next evening Iwaginan and Aponibolinayen lived together. Next morning they went to wash their
hair. "Wait for me here for I am going to dive in the river," said Iwaginan. So he dived, and he went to the place where the _alan_ lived under the water and the _alan_ said, "Eb we have something to eat for breakfast, it is a man." "No, do not eat me, I came to change my clothes," said Iwaginan. "Is Aponibolinayen here?" they
said. "No," he said, and the _alan_ covered each hair of his head with golden beads, and they gave clothes to him. After that when he went back home, they went to guide him. As soon as they arrived by the river they saw Aponibolinayen. "How cunning you are, Iwaginan! You told us she was not here, and she is here," said the _alan_. "If we had known that Aponibolinayen was by the river we would have eaten you, for we wanted to take her," they said. "No," said Iwaginan,
and they went home. A day later he took Aponibolinayen to Pindayan
and Gimbagonan prepared the _baladon_ poison, because she wanted to kill Iwaginan. As soon as he and Aponibolinayen arrived in Pindayan, Gimbagonan went to their house, and she took betel-nuts. As soon as she reached the house she gave the nut to Aponibolinayen, and it had
_baladon_ poison on it. She gave also to Iwaginan, but it had no poison on it. As soon as they chewed the betel-nut Aponibolinayen died. Not long after Iwaginan sharpened his headaxe and spear, for he intended to cut off Gimbagonan's head. They went to get a medium
[278]	to make the ceremony for Aponibolinayen, and when the medium was making the ceremony she said, "Aponibolinayen cannot be cured unless Gimbagonan comes to cure her, for she used the poison which is
_baladon_." Not long after they went to get Gimbagonan and Iwaginan was anxious to get her head, but she asked his pardon and she went to cure Aponibolinayen. As soon as she made Aponibolinayen drink of her medicine, she was at once alive again. Not long after Gimbagonan went back to her house, and when she went back Iwaginan said to her, "Do not do that." "You are not good, Iwaginan. I do not know why you divorced me," she said.


23

"Tikgi, tikgi, Ligi, if you want us to cut rice for you, we will
come to work with you," said the _tikgi_ birds, "Because we like to cut your rice _amasi_, which is mixed with _alomaski_ in the place of Domayasi." Ligi said to them, "What are you going to do? I do not
think you can cut rice, for you are birds and only know how to fly, you
_tikgi_." But they still asked until he let them cut his rice. "Ala,
Ligi, even if we are _tikgi_ we know how to cut rice." "If you want to come and cut, you must come again, because the rice is not yet ripe. When you think it is ripe, you come," he said. "If that is what you say Ligi that we shall come when the rice is ripe, we will go
home and come again," said the _tikgi_. Not long after they went home.

As soon as the birds went Ligi fell sick; he wanted always to see them, and he had a headache, so he went home to Kadalayapan. The _tikgi_ used magic so that Ligi's rice was ripe in a few days.

Five days later, Ligi went back to his rice field and the _tikgi_ went also, and they arrived at the same time. "Tikgi, tikgi, Ligi, Ala, now
we have come to cut your rice _amasi_ which is mixed with _alomaski_ in the place of Domayasi," said the _tikgi_. "Come, _tikgi_, if you
know how to cut rice," said Ligi. Not long after the _tikgi_ went. "We use magic so that you cut the rice. You rice cutters, you cut alone the rice. And you tying bands, you tie alone the rice which the rice cutters cut," said the _tikgi_. So the rice cutters and bands worked
alone and Ligi went home when he had shown them where to cut rice. He advised the _tikgi_ to cut rice until afternoon, and they said, "Yes,
Ligi, when it is afternoon you truly come back." "Yes," said Ligi.

When it became afternoon Ligi went. As soon as he arrived at the field the rice which they had cut was gathered--five hundred bundles. "Now, Ligi, come and see the rice which we have cut, for we want to go back home," said the _tikgi_. Ligi was surprised. "What did you do, you
_tikgi_? You have nearly finished cutting my rice _alomaski_ in the place of Domayasi," he said. "'What did you do', you say, and we cut it with our rice cutters." "Now you _tikgi_, I am ashamed to separate the payment for each of you. You take all you want," said Ligi, so the _tikgi_ took truly one head of rice for each one. "Now, Ligi, we have taken all we can carry," said the _tikgi_. "All right if that is
all you want, help yourself," said Ligi, "and you come again." After that the _tikgi_ flew and took with them one head of rice each.

After the _tikgi_ left Ligi had the headache again, so he did not
put the rice in the carabao sled, but went home in a hurry. As soon as he arrived in his house Ligi used his power so that it again became morning. As soon as it became day the _tikgi_ went and Ligi went also and they arrived at the same time. "Tikgi, tikgi, Ligi,
can we cut your rice which is _amasi_ mixed with _alomaski_ in the

place of Domayasi?" "Are you here now, _tikgi_?" said Ligi. "Go and cut the rice and see if you can cut it very soon, and after that I
will make _Sayang_, and you must come _tikgi_," said Ligi. "Yes, we are going to cut and you do not need to stay here. You can go home if you wish," said the _tikgi_. So Ligi went home.

As soon as he arrived in his house he went to make a rice granary. When it became afternoon they had finished cutting the rice and Ligi went
to the fields to see them. As soon as he arrived there, "We have finished all the rice, Ligi," they said. "Come and give us the payment and then you can go home and see the rice granary where you put the rice, and all the rice bundles will arrive there directly, for you
cannot carry them home." "I cannot take them home, for I always have a headache when you go. Since you came I began to have headaches," said Ligi. "Why do you blame us, Ligi?" "Because since you came I have had headaches." After that Ligi went home to see the rice granary.

As soon as Ligi left them they used magic so that all the rice went to the granary of Ligi in his town. As soon as Ligi arrived at the drying enclosure he saw the rice which the _tikgi_ had sent and he was surprised. "I wonder how those _tikgi_ sent all the rice? I think they are not real _tikgi_" said Ligi. As soon as the _tikgi_ sent
all the rice to the town they went home, and Ligi went to his house.

Not long after he built _balaua_ and made _Sayang_, and he invited all the _tikgi_. As soon as the people whom Ligi invited arrived
the _tikgi_ came also and they flew over the people and they made them drink _basi_. Not long after they became drunk. "Now Ligi we must go home, because it is not good for us to stay for we cannot sit among the people whom you have invited, for we are _tikgi_ and
always fly." Not long after they went home and Ligi followed them. He left the people in the party and he watched where they went, and they went to the _bana-asi_ tree and Ligi went to them and he saw them take off their feathers and put them in the rice granary and Ligi said to
them, "Is that what you become, a girl; sometimes you are _tikgi_ who come to cut rice for me. Now that you are not _tikgi_ I would like to marry you." "It is true that I am the _tikgi_ who came to cut rice, because you would not have found me if I had not done it." He
married the woman who had power so that she became several birds,
[279]	and he took her home.

When they arrived in Kadalayapan the people whom Ligi had invited were still there and were dancing. The father and mother of Ligi were surprised and so they chewed betel-nut so as to find out who the lady was. The quid of Ebang and Pagatipanan and the quid of Aponibolinayen (the _tikgi_) went together. The quid of Langa-an and Pagbokasan went to the quid of Ligi and thus they knew who Aponibolinayen was. Ebang and Pagatipanan were surprised that she was their daughter, and they

called her Aponibolinayen, and they called Ligi Aponitolau. As soon as they found out who she was, Ligi gave the payment to the relatives of Aponibolinayen. As soon as he made the payment, they played the
_gansas_ and danced for three months. As soon as the _balaua_ was over all the people went home and Aponibolinayen's father asked
her where she had been. She said she had been in the _bana-asi_ tree where Kaboniyan [280] had put her, and they were surprised for they did not know when Kaboniyan had taken her from them. After that
they used magic and the house where Aponibolinayen had lived went to Kadalayapan. This is all.

(Told by Madomar of Riang barrio of Patok.)


24

There was a man named Wadagan, and his wife was Dolimaman. They were sitting together in the middle of the day, and Dolimaman commanded Wadagan to stick with a thorn the place between her fourth and little
finger. So Wadagan stuck her finger with the thorn and as soon as he did so a little baby popped out. "What name shall we give to this
boy?" said Wadagan. "You ask what name we shall give him, we are going to call him Kanag Kabagbagowan," she replied. "Give him a bath every day." "I use my power so that every time I give him a bath he will
grow." [281] She always said this when she bathed him and every time the baby grew. Not long after she said, "I use my power so that when
I bathe him again he will be so big he will ask for his clout, belt,
and top." As soon as she said this and bathed him the boy became big and asked for his clout, belt and top. Not long after he dressed up
and took his top and went to play with the other boys.

Not long after Dolimaman said to Wadagan, "Take care of the boy while I go to the well," and Wadagan said, "Yes." As soon as Dolimaman arrived at the well Wadagan made a little raft and Kanag went to the place where he was working and asked, "What is that for father?" "'What is
that for,' you say. I am going to make it for your toy." Not long after
he said, "My son go and change your clothes and as soon as you change your clothes I will see you." When Kanag went to change his clothes
his father was watching for him. He said, "My dear son, now we will follow your mother to the well." So they went, but they did not go
to the place where Dolimaman was. They went to the east of Dolimaman, and Wadagan said, "Ala, Kanag, go on the raft which I have just made, and I will drag it up stream with a rope." Kanag did not want to,
but his father lifted him and put him on the new raft. As soon as
he put him on the raft he pushed it out into the current and then he went back home.

When he reached the yard Wadagan went into the _balaua_ and laid down, and when Dolimaman returned she inquired for Kanag and she said, "Where is Kanag? Why can I not see him here?" Wadagan said, "I do not know. I think he is playing with the other boys in the east." Not
long after Dolimaman went to ask Agtanang and Gamayawan, and she said to them, "Did you see our son Kanag?" "No, we did not see him," they replied. Not long after, while she was inquiring, they told her
the truth, and they said, "He went to the well with his father and they carried a little raft which had just been made." Not long after
Dolimaman went to the west of the well and she saw the marks of the raft in the sand by the river and she sat there for along time and Agtanang and Gamayawan shaded her while she sat there by the river.

Not long after the old woman Alokotan went to the well for she felt hot. As she was taking a bath she saw the little raft which was
just made and said, "You new little raft, if the son of Wadagan and Dolimaman is inside of you, come here." So the little raft went to
her where she was making a pool in which the dead or sick were put to restore them. As soon as she finished the pool she took him to her house and Kanag asked for something to eat. The old woman Alokotan said, "Go and eat, it is already prepared." So Kanag went and ate
and he said, "Mother, give me that nose flute so I can play." So she gave it to him and he played. "Agdaliyan, you are feeling so happy while your mother is feeling unhappy, and is going to die by the river side," said the flute as he played. So he stopped playing and he said, "What is the matter with this flute? It sounds bad. I am going to break you into pieces." Not long after he asked the old
woman Alokotan for the _bunkaka_ [282] and she gave it to him. When he received it he played, and the _bunkaka_ said the same as the flute. "What is the matter with this _bunkaka_ that it talks bad? I
am going to break you." He put it down again and said to Alokotan, "Mother, I am going to play with the other boys." "No, do not go," said the old woman, but he went nevertheless to play with the boys.

Not long after he reached the _balaua_, and he met a little boy playing with _lipi_ nuts, and they played together. "Will you come with me to the place where my mother is while I ask for my tobacco?" said Dagolayan. "If that is what you say we will go,"
said Kanag. So they went to the place where Dolimaman was and the milk from her breasts went to Kanag's mouth. "Here is my son now,"
said Dolimaman who was lying down and she sat up. "What is the matter of this woman, she called me her son and she is not my mother," said Kanag. "Where is your mother then?" said Dolimaman. "My mother is
in Nagbotobotan and her name is Alokotan," said the boy. "Ala, let
us go. Where is Nagbotobotan? Guide me," said Dolimaman. As soon as they arrived, she said, "Good morning, my Aunt." "Good morning also," said Alokotan. "My son is with you," said Dolimaman. "Yes, your son
is with me, because I met him by the river near the well." "How much

must I pay you, my Aunt, because you found him and he has staid with you," said Dolimaman to the old woman. "I do not wish anything, for my reason for taking him was so that I might have someone to inherit my possessions, because I have no child." "That is not my mother," said Kanag to Alokotan, and she replied, "Yes, that is your mother,
but your father put you on the river when you were a little boy, and I found you there and I took you, so I might have someone to inherit my things." Not long after, "Ala, my Aunt, now we are not going home we will stay here, because my husband Wadagan does not like us." So they used magic so that their house in Kadalayapan went to Nagbotobotan, and the people were surprised at the noise made by the house when
it went to Nagbotobotan. They saw that it was a big house all made of gold, and they placed it near to the house of Alokotan. Not long
after Wadagan made _balaua_, because he could not find his family in their golden house.

Wadagan got out of the _balaua_ and said, "I am going to take a
walk and see if I can meet Dolimaman and our house which is made of gold." Not long after he went to walk, and he did not meet any of
them. "I am going to go to Nagbotobotan and see if the new raft went there." So Wadagan went and not long after, while he was walking, he reached the edge of the town of Nagbotobotan, and he saw the golden house, and he went to it directly, and he said, "Perhaps that was our house, for there was no other to compare with it." When he arrived in the yard he said, "Good morning." "Good morning also,"
said the old woman Alokotan. "How are you, my Aunt?" She said, "We are well." And he asked her if she had seen the little raft pass
by and she said, "Yes, it passed by here and I took it." So they
made him go upstairs and when he got up there he saw Dolimaman and Kanag, and Kanag did not know his father. "You call me father, for
you are my son," said Wadagan to him. "No, you are not my father," said Kanag, "If you do not wish to call me so, then I will go home, and we will leave you here. Let us go Dolimaman. If Kanag does not like me it is all right," said Wadagan. "I don't like you, for you
sent me away," said Kanag. "Go back home, we are going to stay here,"
said Dolimaman. So Wadagan went back home and he went everywhere and Dolimaman, Kanag and Dagolayan staid in Nagbotobotan.

(Told by Madomar of Riang.)


25

There was a man Awig and Aponibolinayen, and there was a girl named Linongan. "Ala, you make Linongan start for she goes to watch the mountain rice. You cook for her so that she goes to watch and I go to guide her," said Awig. "Why do you dislike our daughter Linongan? Do

not make her go to watch for she is a girl. If she were a boy it would be all right. You know that a girl is in danger. That is why you must not put her to watch the field." "No you give her cooked rice and
cooked meat and make her start, for I am ready to go now," said Awig.

Not long after they went to the place where the mountain rice grew,
and he went to station her in the high watch house. He commanded her to climb, and when she was in the middle of the ladder she was afraid, for she nearly fell down, it was so high. Not long after she reached
the watch house. When she looked down it seemed as if her eyes fell down it was so high. "Ala, you my daughter Linongan live here and watch our rice, I will come to see you. Do not show yourself if anyone comes," said Awig to her and he went home to Natpangan. "Ala, you are so happy now, Awig, for you cannot see our daughter Linongan," said his wife Aponibolinayen, and Awig laid down in the _balaua_ and Aponibolinayen laid down in the room.

As soon as Awig left Linongan in the field, the tattooed _alzados_ went to the watch house, and Linongan laid down for she was afraid of them. When the tattooed _alzados_ looked up toward the watch house it seemed as if the moon shone, "Ala, we will go up and see what
that is." They went up, and when they arrived in the place where the girl was they were surprised at her beauty. "We will not kill her," said the young men to the bravest of them. "Yes," said the bravest, "get away so I can see her, if she is very beautiful." When the young
men got away he cut her in two at her waist. They took her body and
her head and went home. "Why did you kill her," said the young men. "So that you do not get a bad omen, young men," said the bravest of them.

Not long after they had killed Linongan, "Why does my breast flutter so, Awig?" said Aponibolinayen. "I feel sad also," said Awig. "Ala, Aponibolinayen you cook food for me to take when I go and see our daughter," said Awig. Aponibolinayen truly went to cook for him. When Aponibolinayen finished cooking, "Ala, give me my dark colored clout and my belt which has pretty colors, so that I go at once to the place
where the tattooed _alzados_ are. Perhaps they found our daughter. Look often at the _lawed_ which I shall plant by the stove. If it wilts
so that its leaves are drooped, you can say Awig is dead." [283]

When Aponibolinayen thought he had arrived at the field she looked at the _lawed_ and it was green and flourishing. Not long after Awig saw the blood below the watch house. "Perhaps this is the blood of my daughter. I am going to see if they have killed her." He climbed
up, and when he got up, the body and head were not there, so he went down. As soon as he got down he sat and he bent his head, "What can I do? Where am I going to go to find my daughter?" he said. Not long after he took a walk. When he reached the jungle he looked at the big high tree. ["We can see all over the world from the high trees." This

was a side remark by the story-teller.] "The best thing is for me
to climb so that I watch and see where the _alzados_ live, where my daughter is," he said, and so he climbed. As soon as he climbed up he saw all over the world. He looked to the west, there were no people there who celebrated. "There is no one there," he said. He looked toward the north. There were none there who celebrated. "There is no one there," he said. He turned his face to the east, there was no one
there. When he looked in the south he saw the _alzados_ who were making a celebration; and they danced with the head of his daughter. "Perhaps
that is my daughter," he said. "How terrible if it is my daughter," and his tears dropped. Not long after he went down. As soon as he got down, "If I follow the path I will spend much time. The best way is for me to go through the woods, to make the way short. I will go where they are," he said, and he went.

When he had almost reached the place where the _alzados_ were dancing he said, "What can I do to get the head of my daughter?" and he bent
his head. Not long after he remembered to go and get the juice of the poison tree. As soon as he secured it he split some bamboo for his torch, as he went to the celebration of the _alzados_. As soon as he arrived there he said, "Good evening." "Good evening," they answered. He laid down the torch by the fire of the _alzados_, who
thought him a companion. "Where did you come from? It has taken you so long to arrive we thought that you were dead. We did not meet you, but we found one lady who never goes out of the house, who is very beautiful, that is why we celebrate." "I took long because I was in
the middle of the wood, for I wanted to get a head. I was ashamed to go back home without a head, but I did not meet anyone, so I did not secure one, for I had a bad sign. That is why I did not reach the town where I wanted to go and fight," he said. "Ala, make him sit down," said the bravest. "Yes," said _alzados_ and they made him sit, and they danced again. "Ala, you give him a coconut shell filled with
_basi_, then he must dance, when he finishes to drink," said the bravest again. Awig stood up. "Ala, I ask that if it is possible I
take the coconut shell, for I am the one who must give the people to drink, and when I have made all drink, then I will dance. I will make
_kanyau_ [284] so that next time I may be successful," he said. "Ala, you give the golden cup to him, and let him serve us drink. As soon as he will make us drink we will make him dance." "Yes," they said. Not long after he took the cup and he used his power so that though he drank the _basi_ the poison which he put in the big jar would not
kill him, and he drank first. As soon as he drank he made the bravest drink. Not long after he made all of them drink, and the _alzados_
all died, for he used magic so that when they had all drunk then they all died. He put a basket on his back, and he went to put the head
of his daughter in the basket. He took the head into the middle of the circle, and he took all the valuable things which the _alzados_ had put on her. As soon as he got all the things he went home.

When he was in the middle of the field he turned back his face and saw four young _alzados_ who followed him through the cogon grass, and he used magic so that the flame of the fire was so hot that the
_alzados_ who followed could not reach him. [285] When the flame of the fire was over he turned his face again when he reached the middle of the next field. He used his magic again so that the flame was so high there that the _alzados_, who always followed, could not reach him. As soon as the flame was gone they followed again, and Awig shouted. The _alzados_ were frightened and were afraid to
follow him for they were then near to Kaodanan. "Ala, we will go back or the people of Kaodanan will inherit our heads," and they went back home. Those were all who were left for Awig did not give them poison.

Not long after Awig arrived in Natpangan. He went back to get the rest of his daughter's body from the place where the mountain rice grew. When he arrived in their house he joined the body and the
head. They looked at her and she was sweating. "Ala, Awig you go and command someone to get the old woman Alokotan. When she speaks to the cut on our daughter's body the body and head will join better," said Aponibolinayen to Awig. Not long after, "Ala, you spirit helpers go to
get old woman Alokotan of Nagbotobotan, so she will speak to the cut on Linongan," said Awig. "Yes," said the spirits and they went. Not long after they arrived at Nagbotobotan, "Good morning," they said,
"What are you coming for you spirits," said old woman Alokotan. "'What are you coming for you say?' Awig sent us to call you and take you
to Natpangan, for you to speak to the cut on their daughter, for  the _alzados_ killed her when they sent her to watch the mountain
rice." "That is why those people are bad, for when they have only one daughter they do not know how to take care of her." "Ala, what can you do, that is their custom. Please come," said the spirits. "Ala,
you go first, and I follow. I ought not come for I want them to feel sorrowful for their only daughter, which they sent to the field, but I will come for I want Linongan to live. You go and I will follow," she said. "Yes," they said.

When the spirits arrived in Kaodanan the old woman Alokotan arrived also. As soon as she arrived she went at once where Linongan was lying. "Ala, you Aponibolinayen and Awig this is your pay, for although you have only one daughter you sent her to the mountain
field," said the old woman Alokotan to them. Awig and Aponibolinayen
did not answer for they were ashamed. When the old woman had finished to talk to them she put saliva around the cut on Linongan and caused
it to join. When she finished joining it, "I use my power so that when I snap my perfume [286] which is called _dagimonau_ ('to wake up')
she will wake up at once." When she snapped her perfume Linongan woke up at once. "I use my power so that when I use my perfume _alikadakad_ (sound of walking or moving) she will at once make a movement." When

she snapped her perfume Linongan moved at once. "I use my power so when I snap my perfume _banawes_ she will blow out her breath!" When she snapped her perfume, she at once breathed a long breath. "_Wes_ how terrible my sleep was," said Linongan. "'How terrible my sleep' you say. The tattooed _alzados_ nearly inherited you. I went to follow you because they took you to their town and they danced with your head," said Awig.

Not long after Awig went to take four small branches of the tree
and he used magic, "I use my power so that when the four sticks will stand they will become a _balaua_." He used his power and truly the
four sticks became a _balaua_ and Aponibolinayen commanded someone to pound rice. Ten days later they made _Libon_, on the tenth night. When
it became morning Awig commanded someone to go and get the betel-nut which is covered with gold. As soon as they arrived they oiled the
betel-nuts. "Ala, all you betel-nuts, you go to invite the people
from the other towns who are relatives so that they will come to make
_balaua_ with us. You go to all the towns where our relatives live and invite them, and if they do not wish to come you grow on their knees." So the betel-nuts went.

Not long after the people whom they invited came to the place where they made _balaua_ and they all danced. The companion of Ilwisan of Dagapan in dancing was Alama-an. When Ilwisan stamped his feet the earth rumbled. When he looked up at Alama-an he said, "How terrible is the love of the ladies toward me; she thinks that I love her," but he wished to dance with Linongan. When they finished dancing, Asigtanan
and Dondonyan of Bagtalan danced next. When Dondonyan shook his foot the world smiled and it rained softly. When they finished dancing,
Iwaginan and Linongan, who never goes outdoors, danced. When Iwaginan stamped his feet, all the coconuts in the trees fell, and when Linongan moved her toes in dancing all the tattooed fish came to breathe at
her feet for the water covered the town when they danced. When they were still dancing the water flowed, only a little while, and it was
only knee deep, "Ala, you Iwaginan and Linongan, stop dancing because we are deluged," said Awig and the old woman Alokotan. They stopped dancing and the water went down again from the town. "How terrible are the people who are like Kaboniyan for they are so different from us,"
said the other people who went to attend _balaua_ with them.

Not long after, when all the people had finished dancing and the
_balaua_ was over, the people went home and Iwaginan was engaged to Linongan. Aponibolinayen said, "We do not wish that our daughter
be married yet," but Awig agreed. "Why do you agree, Awig, do you not like our only daughter?" said Aponibolinayen. "I like her, but
it is better for her to be married. He seems to have power. Don't you know that a girl has many dangers? It is better for her to be married, because she is the only daughter we have," said Awig. Not

long after they made _pakalon_. "Ala, now, sister-in-law, how much will we pay?" said Dinowagan to Aponibolinayen. "The _balaua_ three times full of jewels," said Aponibolinayen. "Ala, yes, sister-in-law,"
she replied. So she used her magic and the _balaua_ was three times full of jewels, and Aponibolinayen raised her eyebrows and half of
the things in the _balaua_ disappeared, and Dinowagan used her power again and filled the _balaua_. "Ala, stop that is enough to pay for
our daughter," said Aponibolinayen. "I pay now." "Yes," they said. "Now that we have made the payment we will go home," said Dinowagan. "If you do not let us take Linongan to Pindayan, Iwaginan will live here and I
will come to visit them," said Dinowagan to Awig and Aponibolinayen. As soon as Dinowagan and her companions went home. "Ala, my wife we go to Pindayan to see our mother Dinowagan," said Iwaginan. "Yes,
if that is what you say we will go," said Linongan. Not long after
they asked Awig and Aponibolinayen, "You go, but do not stay long," they said. "Yes," they answered.

When they arrived in Pindayan, Iwaginan and Linongan went to bathe in the river, and Iwaginan saw the place where the _alzados_ had cut Linongan in her side, and he went to make a magical well in which
a person can bathe and lose all scars and wounds; and it looked as if she had no cut and she was prettier, and they went home. When
they arrived in the house Dinowagan was surprised, for she was more beautiful than before. "I made the magic pool and cured the cut in
her side which I saw," he said. Not long after when they had been two days in Pindayan, they went to Natpangan.


26

Dumanagan sent his mother Langa-an to Kaodanan. When she arrived there she said, "Good morning Ebang," and Ebang replied, "Good morning,
cousin Langa-an. Why are you coming here?" "I came to visit you." So they made her go upstairs and they talked. Not long after they all became drunk and the old woman asked if Aponibalagen had a sister, and they told her that he had one. Soon they agreed on the day for the _pakalon_.

When the day agreed on came, Aponibalagen put Aponibolinayen inside of his belt [287] so they went to Kadalayapan. As soon as they arrived at
the gate of the town of Kadalayapan, Sinogyaman carried cake and rice to the gate of the town, to take away a bad sign if one had been seen while on the way. They did not like her so she went back to the town and they sent Kindi-ingan, and they did not like her either. As soon
as Kindi-ingan returned they sent Aponigawani. When she arrived at the gate of the town they were very glad and Dumanagan thought that Aponibalagen had used his power so that the sweets, made of rice,

were not in the basket until Aponigawani went to meet them at the gate of the town.

Not long after they went up to the gate of the town and they agreed on the marriage price when Dumanagan should marry Aponibolinayen. They said the price was the _balaua_ filled nine times. Not long after
when they had paid they all danced. Then the people went back home and Aponibalagen and his people went back home also.

Not long after Aponibolinayen was very anxious to eat _biw_ fruit
of Tagapolo. So Dumanagan went to get it for her. He arrived where the _biw_ was and he got some, and in a short time he returned to Kadalayapan and he gave the fruit to his wife to eat. As soon as she ate it she became well again. After seven months she gave birth and they called the boy Asbinan. As soon as the boy became large he went to play with the girls.

As soon as Asigowan of Nagwatowatan noticed the braveness of Asbinan she made _balaua_, and she commanded the people to pound rice. Not long after she commanded the betel-nuts to go and invite their
relatives. The betel-nuts went to all the towns in the world and invited all the people. The next day they oiled the _gansas_ and
the people played them and all the people who heard them danced for they liked the sound of them very much. So Asbinan went to attend the
_balaua_. All the people arrived at the place by the spring and a big storm came and wet all of them. Not long after the people who lived
in the same town as Asigowan, which was the town of Nagwatowatan, went to meet them at the spring, to give them dry clothes. They changed their clothes and went up to the town. As soon as they all
danced Asbinan saw Asigowan and he wanted to marry her. So he gave her betel-nut to chew and they told their names, and when they had told
their names their quids showed that it was good for them to marry. The father and mother of Asigowan were Gagelagatan and Dinowagan, but she lived with the _alan_. Her father and mother did not know her until
she made _balaua_ and Asbinan did not know her until the _balaua_, then he married her at once.

As soon as he married her all his concubines used their magic power so that while he was living with Asigowan she would cut her finger. Not long after she truly cut her finger and died. They put her in the _tabalang_ [288] which had a rooster on top of it. Then all the concubines of Asbinan were glad. Not long after they sent
the _tabalang_ along the stream and the rooster on top of it crowed, and the old woman Alokotan went to see it. She stopped the _tabalang_ and took out the body of the dead person. Not long after she made
her alive again. As soon as she made her alive again she put her in a well and she became a beautiful girl. Not long after she became a bird and she flew back to the place where Asbinan lived. The bird

flew above him, and he tried to catch it. When he could not catch her, she went to the top of a tree, and Asbinan went into his house and
he was sorrowful, because his wife was dead. Soon he fell asleep and the bird went near to him and Asbinan awoke and caught it. The bird became a girl again, the same as before, and Asbinan saw that it was his wife, so he was very happy and they made a big party. They invited all their relatives. Not long after all the people arrived and they
all danced. The old woman Alokotan was there and Asigowan told Asbinan that she was the woman who gave her life again, so they treated her
very good and the old woman Alokotan gave them all her property, and all the people who went to attend the party were very glad.

(Told by Masnal of Abang.) 27 [289]
"When I was a young fellow I went to all parts of the world, to every town where the tattooed Igorot live, who were all enemies.

"Mother Dinowagan put the rice in the pot which looks like the rooster's egg, [290] so that I eat rice, for I go to fight the tattooed Igorots," said Ibago wa Agimlang who was four months old. "Do not go my son Agimlang your feet are too young and your hands look like
needles they are so small. You just came from my womb." "Oh, mother, Dinowagan, do not detain me for it will make me heavy for fighting," said Agimlang. As soon as he finished eating, "Mother Dinowagan
and father Dagilagatan let me start, and give me the little headaxe and spear and also a shield, for I am going to walk on the mountain Daolawan." Not long after he started. As soon as he arrived on top
of the mountain Daolawan he sat on a stone which looked like a bamboo bench under the Alangigan tree, and there were _alan_ [291] there who were young girls. "Oh, why are you here Ibago wa Agimlang who just came from your mother's womb?" said the _alan_. "'What, are you here?' you say young _alan_, whose toes on your feet are spread out. I am going
to fight with the tattooed Igorot," said Ibago wa Agimlang to them, and they talked for nine months, in the place where the stone bench was. The _alan_ girls wanted to see him all the time. After that, "You young _alan_ girls, I am going to leave you." "Do not go," said the _alan_, "because you are a little baby, you just came from the
place where your mother gave birth to you." "Do not detain me, young girls, for it is bad for me if you detain me, for I will be too heavy
for fighting," said Ibago wa Agimlang. "If I return from war, I will invite you to attend my big party," he said to them, and so he went.

Not long after he arrived at the town where the tattooed Igorot lived, and they were so many they looked like locusts. He used his power, "You, my headaxe and my spear, go and fight with the tattooed Igorot, and kill all of them." As soon as the tattooed Igorot heard what he

said, they said, "Why, do you brave baby come to fight with us for,
you are very young? Now you cannot return to your town, for we inherit you," said the bravest of the _alzados_. [292] "If you had said that
you intended to kill me I would have killed all of you, even though I
am a baby just from my mother's womb," said Agimlang. So the bravest of the _alzados_ told his people that they should prepare to fight
with the baby, and they began to throw their spears at him, but they could not hit him. As soon as all the spears and headaxes were gone, the baby fought with them, and his spear and headaxes killed all the people who lived in that town. As soon as he killed all of them he used magic so that the heads of the tattooed _alzados_ went to Pindayan. Not long after truly all the heads went to Pindayan and he followed them.

When he arrived at the spring of Lisnayan in the town of Ibowan he rested and he sat on the high stone and began to play the bamboo
Jew's harp and Igowan saw him. "Adolan come and see this young fellow and hear him play the Jew's harp." The harp said, "Iwaginan Adolan, Inalangan come and see your brother, if he is your true brother." So Adolan went truly to see him and he found that it was a newborn
baby who was just beginning to walk. "Where did you come from little baby?" said Adolan. "'Where did you come from?' you say. I come from fighting the tattooed Igorot." "How does it happen that you went to
war, for you are only just from your mother's womb?" "'How does it happen?' you say. I heard my father saying that when he was young he went to all parts of the world in all the towns," said Ibago wa Agimlang to Adolan.

Not long after he gave him betel-nut and they chewed. As soon as they finished chewing they told their names, and Adolan told his name first and Ibago wa Agimlang was next to tell his. After that they laid down their quids and they saw that they were brothers. "Now, my brother, Adolan we will go to Pindayan, for I am going to make a big party,
for I just return from fighting," said Ibago wa Agimlang. "Ala, you go first and I will go to see our brother," said Adolan.

Not long after Ibago wa Agimlang started to go and he lost his way,
and he went through the mountain rice clearing of Kabangoweyan, who was the _Lakay_ [293] and he walked through many _lawed_ vines which were wide spreading and when anyone cut off a leaf they smiled. As soon
as he arrived at the little house of the old man, "Oh, grandfather,
tell me the way back home and I will not take your head," said Ibago
wa Agimlang to the old man. "Where are you going?" he said. "I am going home to the town of Pindayan, for I am returning from fighting." "Stop while I cook, and you can eat first, and then you can go," said the old man. "No, I do not wish to eat. Tell me the way back home," said Ibago
wa Agimlang. So he showed him the way to Pindayan, but missed the way and they went through the middle of the reeds, and the place where the
_lawed_ vines grew, and he met the pretty girl who was his sister,

who had been hiding between two leaves. "Now, pretty girl, I have found you among the _lawed_ vines, and I am going to take you," said Ibago wa Agimlang. So he took her and he put her inside of his belt.

Not long after he arrived in Pindayan and he made a big party. Adolan and Iwaginan and Igowan went to attend the party. Not long after
he took Inalingan out of his belt, she was a pretty girl who looked like the newly opened flower of the betel-nut tree. "Where did you get her?" "'Where did you get her?' you say. I met her in the place where there are many _lawed_ vines, and when you cut their leaves they smile," said Ibago wa Agimlang.

"Now, brother, we are going to chew betel-nut, and see if we are
truly relations," said Daliwagenan (Ibago wa Agimlang), and he called Adolan, Igowan, and all his brothers and sisters, and his father and mother. He gave them betel-nut to chew, and Dagilagatan and Dinowagan told their names first and Iwaginan was the next, and then Adolan
and then Igowan, but he said that he was the son of the _alan_, and next was Agimlang and then the pretty girl. She said, "My name is Inaling who is the little girl who never goes out of the _lawed_ vines, which when somebody cuts they smile." After they finished chewing the betel-nut and telling their names, they laid down their quids, and the quids Igowan and Ginalingan (Inaling) went to the
quids of Iwaginan and Adolan. "Oh, my son, Igowan and my daughter Ginalingan, I thought that I did not have any more my daughter and son and that the _alan_ had taken. We did not feed you rice," said the old woman Dinowagan. "Ala, my son, Agimlang, do not feel sorry,
because you heard what your father Dagilagatan said to you, because you met your brothers and sister who are Igowan and Ginalingan," said the old woman Dinowagan. After that they danced for about nine
months. After that Igowan and Adolan and Iwaginan went home and they did not let Ginalingan go back home.

As soon as Igowan arrived in his town he built _balaua_ and he invited all his relatives who lived in different towns and all the _alan_
in the world. Not long after the people whom he invited arrived in
the town of Igowan, and all the _alan_ went to his _Sayang_, and the
_alan_ were surprised that Dagilagatan and Dinowagan knew that Igowan and Ginalingan were their son and daughter, so they asked them. They said that Ibago wa Agimlang met them when he came from war and he took them to his party so they knew that they were their son and
daughter for they chewed betel-nut. As soon as Igowan's _Sayang_ was over the _alan_ gave all their valuable things to him, and also those who had taken Ginalingan. As soon as they had given them all their things the _alan_ flew away and Dinowagan and her husband took their sons and daughters to Pindayan.

28 [294]

There was a man named Asbinan who was the son of Ayo, but the old woman Alokotan took care of him. "Ala, my grandmother Alokotan, go and engage me to Dawinisan who looks like the sunshine, for I want to marry her,"
said the young boy Asbinan. The old woman replied, "I do not think they will like you, for she is a young girl who never goes outdoors." [295] "Ala, grandmother, you go anyway, and if they do not like me I will
see what I shall do," said Asbinan who was a handsome young man. Not long after the old woman went. As soon as she arrived at the stairs
of the house of the mother and father of Dawinisan, they said, "Good morning," and the mother of Dawinisan said, "Good morning, what did you come here for, Ayo and Alokotan of Kadalayapan?" "'What did you come here for?' you say. Our son Asbinan wants to marry Dawinisan," said Ayo. She called them up into the house and they talked. "We will
ask our daughter and hear what she says." When they asked Dawinisan if she wished to marry Asbinan, she said, "Oh, my mother, I am ashamed
to marry yet, I do not know how to do anything; so I do not wish to be married now. Do not dislike me, but be patient with me." So her
mother said, "Pretty Ayo, I think you heard what she said. Be patient."

Not long after Ayo and Alokotan went back to Kadalayapan. When they arrived there, Asbinan asked them the result of their mission. "Did
they wish me to marry their daughter Dawinisan?" His mother replied, "They said that Dawin-isan does not wish to be married yet; so we came back home." When he knew that they did not wish him for a son-in-law, for they did not give any reason, he thought and he said, "My mother, hand me my golden cup, for I am going away." So his mother gave it to him. As soon as he arrived in the yard of Dawinisan, he said, "Good morning, Dawinisan, will you look out of the window at me?" Dawinisan said to the _alan_, who had spreading toes and who bent double when they walked, [296] "Look out of the window and see who it is." The
_alan_ said to her, "He wants you to look at him." Dawinisan said, "I cannot go to the window to look at him, for the sunshine is hot. I
do not wish the sun to shine in my face." When Asbinan could not get her to go to the window, he used magic and went inside of the golden cup, and he pretended that he was ill in his stomach. He said, "Ana, mother, I am going to die, for my stomach suffers greatly," and he said to the _alan_, "Ala, you _alan_, tell her that she must look
out of the window to see me." The _alan_ said to Dawinisan, "Come and look at him; he wants you to see him. He says that his stomach is ill." But Dawinisan said to the _alan_, "Tell him that I cannot
go and look at him, I am ashamed. You look at him and then you rub his stomach." The _alan_ told Asbinan that Dawinisan would not look at him, and he would not let the _alan_ rub his stomach. He said,
"If Dawinisan does not want to look at me from the window, and if I die it is her fault, for I came here because of her."

The _alan_ who saw that Asbinan was a beautiful young boy, said,

"If you will not go to look at him, we are going to leave you, for we fear that he is going to die because of you." Dawinisan did not wish the _alan_ to leave her, and she said, "Ala, bring him up on the porch
and I will see him." The _alan_ took him up on the porch, and she went to look at him. When she saw that he was a handsome boy, she said, "I am ashamed, for I did not think he was a rich and handsome boy." When she saw that the boy appeared to be suffering greatly she went into
the house; she changed her dress and went out on the porch, and she looked like the sunshine. When she reached the porch, she rubbed the boy's stomach, and directly Asbinan sat up. Dawinisan said to him, "Come into the house and we will tell our names and see if we are relatives." So they went into the house and she told him to set down on a golden seat which looked like a fawn. As soon as he sat down he said, "Pretty, young girl, when I see you I am blinded by your beauty. I
came here because I wish to marry you." "Oh, Asbinan! I am ashamed, but I do not want to be married yet," said Dawinisan. "Dawinisan,
even if you tell me to leave you, I will not do it until you promise to marry me. I will stay with you now," he said. Dawinisan replied,
"Even though you should stay here one month, I do not care," Asbinan said. "Let us chew betel-nut and see if the quids turn to beads with
no hole, and lie side by side; or if they lie parallel, then it is not good for us to marry; so we shall see."

Not long after they chewed betel-nut, and when they laid down their quids they were agate beads, and they laid side by side; so they saw it was good for them to marry. "Ala, now it is good for us to marry and we are related." Dawinisan replied, "Ala, go and tell your mother that if they have everything we want and will pay what we want, you can marry me." Asbinan said, "Yes," and he went to his grandmother
Alokotan. "Ala, my grandmother Alokotan, what shall we do? Dawinisan said that if we have everything they want and will pay it for her,
she will marry me." The old woman said, "Ala, do not worry about that, I will see."

Not long after they started and took Asbinan, and when they arrived at the house of Dawinisan they agreed on the marriage price. Her mother said, "If you can fill our _balaua_ nine times with gold shaped like deer, and jars which are _addeban_ and _ginlasan_, Asbinan can marry our daughter." Alokotan and the others replied, "Ala, if that
is what you say it is all right, and we can pay more." So Alokotan used magic and the _balaua_ was filled nine times with the things they wished, and there were more golden deer than jars. The father and mother and relatives of the girl said, "Asbinan and our daughter
Dawinisan can be married now." When the _pakalon_ was over, Alokotan used magic and she said, "I use my power so that they will not know
that they are transferred to Kadalayapan," and all the houses went to Kadalayapan. Not long after the people who went to attend the _pakalon_ found that they were in Kadalayapan and they were surprised, and the

people from the other towns went home when the _pakalon_ was finished.


29

"I am going to lie down on the stone which is like a seat below the
_dumalotau_ tree," said Ayo, for she felt hot in the middle of the day. "What shall we call our son?" "We shall call him Asbinan, who looks like the spreading branch of the betel-nut tree which looks pretty in the afternoon," said Ligi, her husband.

"Ala! Agben, my loving son, go to eat," said Ayo. "Mother--pretty Ayo--I do not wish to eat when we have no fish roe." After that Ligi went to his friends who use the big fish net in the ocean. "Ala, my friends, search fish roe, for my son Asbinan wishes to eat." They went to examine the bellies of nine baskets of fish, but there
was no roe. He went to his friends who fish in the river. "Ala, friends secure fish roe which my son wishes to eat." Soon after, "How much do I pay?" "You do not pay, for this is the first time you have come to buy," said those friends who fish in the river. "Agben, my child, come and eat." "Mother, pretty Ayo, I do not wish to eat the fish roe when there is no _dolang_, [297] and I do not like to
drink out of the scraped cocoanut shell when there is no glass which comes from the place of the Chinese, and I do not like to eat from the bamboo dish when there is no dish from Baygan (Vigan)." After that Ligi went and got the cup and the dish from the Chinese store.

"Agben, my loving son, come and eat, for everything is here which you wish," said pretty Ayo. When they had finished eating, "Father Ligi give me your love charm [298] which you used when you were young, for I wish to go to the place where the maidens spin at night."

"Good evening, young girls," said Asbinan. "I do not like to light my tobacco unless the fire is taken from the light of your pipes." They were anxious to offer their pipes, but when Tiningbengan stubbed her toe she stopped and Sinobyaman, who was the prettiest, was the one on whom he blew his smoke (a part of the love charm). She vomited and her eyes were filled with tears, and after that they went home,
all those who spun together.

"Ala! go and fetch Asbinan, for she (Sinobyaman) turns over and over and sways to and fro since he blew on her last night." They went to get Asbinan who was sleeping, and he stepped on their heels as they walked.

"Ala, aunt, I cannot cure her unless we are married." Then they decided on the day for _pakalon_, and the price was the lower part of the house filled nine times with jars, which are _malayo_ and _tadogan_. Then

she made the cakes for the parents-in-law, and they carried the pig, and they received the marriage price which was the lower part of the house nine times filled.



30

"Ala! my wife Iwanen who loves me every afternoon, make cakes of rice which shall be my provisions when I go to the southern place
San Fernando and Baknotan, which is a part of Pangasinan. [299] I am going to investigate the report concerning the beautiful women, who are like the rift in the clouds--the escaping place of the moon--;
who are like the bright stems of good betel-nuts."

"Ala! my soldiers who are many, catch my horse which is a pinto, which paces, which walks fast, which goes, which gallops, which has sore sides." "It is here already, the horse which is a pinto, the saddle is already placed."

"Ala! now my wife Iwanen, I am going to leave you here. Keep your honor as a person of wealth. Perhaps some one will entice you and we two will be ashamed before the people of our town."

After that he went and started--Tolagan who went toward the south. He whipped the pinto, he ran, he walked.

When he was in the town of Kaodanan his body was thirsty. "I go to the place of betel-nuts, where I shall drink the water which is white like coconut oil." He arrived at the place of the betel-nuts. He met
a maiden who was like the place of a large fire. There was no other such maiden.

"Good morning, maiden who takes water in the shady place of the leaves which grow, which are stripped off in the middle of the place of
betel-nuts, which bear fruit which anyone gathers. I come to drink with you the water which looks like oil," said Tolagan. "If you
are the old raider cut me only once so that I have less to heal," (she said). "No, I am not the old raider, for I live in Baliwanan
and I go to the south to Pangasinan." "Do not continue the journey, for you have a bad sign. The birds skimmed past in front of you, also in the rear and the sides. [300] Go back to Baliwanan." "If that is what you say pretty one, I shall turn back because of this sign."

He arrived at Baliwanan, but his wife was not there, for she had run away with Kaboniyan [301] to the town of the sky.

There was not a place he did not search for her. He went to the head man. "Ala, _presidente_ of our town, I come to ask for companions while I search for my wife, who vanished last night." He gave
(the searchers), but when they did not find her, he went to another town. He went to the place of Baingan in the town of the north. "Good morning, I came to ask companions to search for her who was absent last night." "If that is still your trouble" said Baingan, "you go
and see my sister, who is Imbangonan, whom you shall take for wife, who cannot belt herself unless there are nine belts. She is in the middle of the place of the betel-nuts."

"Good morning, Imbangonan," said Tolagan. "I came to see you, for your brother told me we are to marry if you like me."

"If you like me, we will chew green betel-nut and see what is your fortune." When they finished chewing, the two quids went into a line. "Ala! we will marry if you agree to pay 100 _gumtang_ and 50
_ginalman_". [302]


31

There were two girls who went to take a walk and a rich man met them, and he asked, "Where are you going, you two girls?" "We are going to
walk around the town." The rich man said, "Come and walk with me." When they reached their house he gave them some work to do and he treated them just the same as his daughters. The rich man was a king, and he
put the girls in a room and the princesses Mary and Bintolada were in the other room. The king and the queen gave dresses to the girls but they did not give them any bracelets and rings.

Not long after the two girls went to the house of the jeweler and they ordered him to make rings and bracelets for them like those
the princesses had. As soon as they went in the house of Indayo and Iwaginan in the town of Pindayan, they asked for water to drink. After that Iwaginan and Indayo gave them water to drink, and they thought that the two girls, who were dressed like men, were ladies, so they followed them when they left and they took _basi_ for them to drink.

As soon as the princesses arrived in the jeweler's house they commanded him to make rings and bracelets for them. As soon as the jeweler began to make the rings and bracelets for them Iwaginan and Indayo arrived
with the _basi_. Soon it became night and they ate and drank in the night and they became drunk, and they all slept in one room. The people
saw the beads on their arms and the jeweler awakened them and put them in another room so they did not sleep in the same room with the others and he said, "I thought you were princes, for you dress like princes,

but when I saw your beads I woke up, for I think those two men are planning bad for you. Go and sleep in the other room." So they went into the other room to sleep.

Not long after it became daylight and they returned home, and Iwaginan and Indayo did not see them, and they were very sorry for they thought the princes were truly girls. So they went back home, and as soon
as they arrived there they said, "We are going to make _balaua_, to find out if those princes were truly girls." So they began to
build _balaua_. They sent messengers to go and invite people in every town. Not long after the people whom they invited arrived, and they saw that the princes were not there. So they commanded their spirit aids to go to all the world and find those princes. So the spirits
became hawks and they flew about the world. As soon as they came near to the palace of the king they alighted on a tree and they watched the princesses in the windows and hawks said, "_Tingi_." The princesses heard the word "_Tingi_," and they were Ganinawan and Asigtanan. They saw the birds from the window, and the hawks flew by them and the princesses stroked their feathers, because they were pretty.

Soon the hawks seized them in their talons and flew away with them and carried them to Pindayan. Not long after they reached there and
Iwaginan and Indayo were very glad, and they made a big party and they invited the king. The king had been searching for them for a long
time. Some of the spirit helpers who had gone to the palace said, "Good morning. We came here to invite you, for Iwaginan and Indayo sent us. They are making a big party for those princesses for whom you are searching, for we took them to Pindayan, and Iwaginan and Indayo
married them." When the king heard the news he was glad, and he went to the party. Indayo and Iwaginan made him dance when he arrived, and Kanag and Dagolayen went to that party. Not long after they put those girls, whom Iwaginan and Indayo had stolen, in their belts and they
did not know what had become of their wives and they were sorry. Kanag and Dagolayen took them home. When they arrived home they told their names and they chewed betel-nut and they found that it was good for them to be married, instead of Iwaginan and Indayo. Kanag married Asigtanan and Dagolayen married Ganinawan. The mother of Ganinawan was Aponibolinayen and the mother of Asigtanan was Aponigawani.

As soon as they were married and they had learned who their mothers were they built _balaua_, and they sent some betel-nuts to invite all
of their relatives in other towns. Iwaginan and Indayo went to attend the _balaua_, and they danced. They saw that those girls were their
wives and they tried to take them back home, but Kanag and Dagolayen would not let them. They said it was not good for them to be married even though they wished to be married to them, because the girls would become oil when they went close to them. So Indayo and Iwaginan were very sorry. Ganinawan was the sister of Kanag and Asigtanan was the

sister of Dagolayen. They did not find out that they were related until Indayo and Iwaginan took them, for their mothers had lost them
in miscarriages, and the girls became women by themselves, and the king found them.

(Told by Talanak of Manabo.)

Ritualistic and Explanatory Myths 32 [303]

The Ipogau [304] are making _Sayang_. [305] "Why do not those Ipogau who are making _Sayang_ start the _balaua_ [306] correctly?" said the spirits above. Those _anitos_ [307] who are married, who are Kadaklan and Agemem, [308] say, "It is better that you carry the pig." Then
truly they carried the pig up the river, those two Ipogau who are married. "Ala! you walk and walk until you arrive at Sayau, for a person who lives there is making _Sayang_," said the spirits. After that they arrived, those who are married who carried the pig, at
the place of the man who made _Sayang_. "Where are you going?" asked the man of Sayau of those who carried the pig. "We came to see how
you make _Sayang_, for we have not yet learned how to make _Sayang_ correctly," said those who are married. "Ala! watch what I am doing
and imitate." They watched what he did when he made _Sayang_, and he did everything. He made _balag, sagoyab, aligang,_ they made also
_tangpap_, they made _adagang, balabago_, and what is needed for
_al-lot_. [309] After that, "You go home, and when you make _Sayang_ you do as I did," said the man from Sayau. They went home truly,
those Ipogau, and they imitated the man who made _Sayang_ in Sayau; then those who are married--Kadaklan and Agemem--caused the spirits to come whom they called, those who made _diam_ when they built
_balaua_. (Here the medium names the spirits which cause sickness.) Now you get better, you who build _balaua_.


33 [310]

"Those who knew to make _dawak_, went to make _dawak_, but they did not prepare the pig correctly. Not long after Kaboniyan, [311] above, was
looking down on those who make _dawak_. Kaboniyan went down to them, he went to tell those preparing the pig, because they did not prepare
it correctly--those two who make _dawak_. After that they prepared the pig correctly and the sick person got well of the sickness.

"Ala, when there is again the repetition of the sickness to the
person for whom you go to make _dawak_, do not neglect to prepare the pig correctly, so that the sick person may get better, whom you try to make well. I also, Kaboniyan, prepare correctly when there
is a person for whom I make _dawak_, and you, Ipogau, do not prepare correctly when you make _dawak_." After that when there is the person they go to cure who is sick, they always prepare correctly because
it was Kaboniyan who told them to do always like that. When some one is ill whom they go to cure, they prepare correctly.


34 [312]

The spirit who lives in Dadaya [313] lies in bed; he looks at his
_igam_ [314] and they are dull. He looks again, "Why are my _igam_ dull? Ala, let us go to Sudipan where the Tinguian live and let us take our _igam_, so that some one may make them bright again." After that they laid them (the _igam_) on the house of the Ipogau [315] and they are all sick who live in that house. Kaboniyan [316] looked down on them. "Ala, I shall go down to the Ipogau." He truly went down to them, "What is the matter with you?" "We are all sick who live in the same place," said those sick ones. "That is true, and the cause of your sickness is that they (the spirits) laid down their _igam_ on you. It
is best that you make _Pala-an_, since you have received their _igam_, for that is the cause of your illness." After that they made _Pala-an_ and they recovered from their sickness, those who lived in the same place. (Here the medium calls the spirits of Dadaya by name and then continues.) "Now those who live in the same place make bright again those _igam_ which you left in their house. Make them well again,
if you please."


35 [317]

Those who live in the same town go to raid--to take heads. After they arrive, those who live in the same town, "We go and dance with
the heads," said the people who live in the same town, "because they make a celebration, those who went to kill." "When the sun goes down, you come to join us," said the mother and baby (to her husband who goes to the celebration). After that the sun truly went down; she
went truly to join her husband; after that they were not (there), the mother and the baby (i.e., when the father arrived where they had agreed to meet, the mother and child were not there).

He saw their hats lying on the ground. He looked down; the mother and

the baby were in (the ground), which ground swallowed them. "Why (are) the mother and the baby in the ground? How can I get them?" When he raises the mother and the baby, they go (back) into the ground. After
that Kaboniyan above, looking down (said), "What can you do? The spirits of Ibal in Daem are the cause of their trouble. It is better
that you go to the home of your parents-in-law, and you go and prepare the things needed in _Ibal_ [318]," said Kaboniyan.

They went truly and prepared; after that they brought (the things) to the gate. After that the mother and child came out of the
ground. "After this when there is a happening like this, of which you Ipogau are in danger, you do like this (i.e., make the _Ibal_ ceremony) and I alone, Kaboniyan, am the one you summon," said Kaboniyan.

After that they got well because they came up--the mother and the baby.


36 [319]

There is a very old woman in the sea who says to her spirits--Dapeg (a spirit which kills people) and Balingenngen (a spirit which
causes bad dreams) and Benisalsal (a spirit which throws things and is unpleasant), "Go beyond the sea and spread your sicknesses." The spirits are going. They arrive and begin their work, and if the people do not make _Sangasang_ many will die. Now it is morning and the spirits are going to the river to see what the people have offered to the old woman, who is Inawen (mother). If they do not find anything, they will say, "All the people in this town shall die," and then they
will go on to another place.

Inawen, who is waiting, sends Kideng (a servant) to search for the spirits who are killing people, to tell them to return. Dapeg leaves
the first town. He goes to another and the dogs bark so that the people cannot sleep. A man opens the door, to learn the cause of the barking, and he sees a man, fat and tall, with nine heads and he carries many kinds of cakes. The man says, "Now take these cakes, and if you do not make Sangasang for my mistress, at the river, you shall die. You must find a rooster with long tail and spurs; you must mix its blood
with rice and put it in the river at dawn when no one can see you."

The man makes _Sangasang_ the next night, and puts the blood mixed with rice in a well dug by the river, so that the spirits may take
it to their mistress. Kideng also arrives and says, "You must come with me now, for she awaits you who are bearing this offering." They go and arrive. Their mistress eats and says, "I did not think that
the blood of people tasted so badly, now I shall not send you again, for you have already killed many people."


37 [320]

"You whom I send, go to the place where our relatives live in Sudipan,"
[321] said Maganawan of Nagbotobotan, "because I desire very much the blood of the rooster mixed with rice." He gave his cane and sack, "When you arrive at the place (of those who live) in Sudipan you wave my cane and the husks of betel-nut which are here in my sack." They truly waved when they arrived: many snakes (were creeping) and many birds (flying) when they waved there by the gate.

"How many snakes and birds now," said the Ipogau. [322] "Go! command to make _Sangasang_" said the married ones.

"We shall wait the blood of the rooster mixed with rice, because they remember to command to make _Sangasang_" said those who Maganawan of Nagbotobotan commanded. They took the blood of the rooster mixed with
rice, which was put in the _saloko_ [323] in the yard; they arrived to their master. "How slow you are," said Maganawan. "We are only slow, because there was no one who listened to us where we arrived first," said those whom he commanded; "we went up (the river) until there was
one who remembered to command to make _Sangasang_, which is what we now bring to you--the blood of the rooster mixed with rice." They gave;
he put in his mouth--the one who commanded them--he spit out. "Like this which is spit out (shall be) the sickness of the Ipogau who remember me," said Maganawan of Nagbotobotan. After that it is as if nothing had happened to the family.



38 [324]

The Ipogau are digging where they make stand the poles of their houses. "You go to give the sign," said the master of the sign to the
_siket_. [325] _Siket_ went. "Why do we have a bad sign? We remove the poles," said the Ipogau, and they removed that there might be no bad sign. The deer went to call when they were digging where they removed those poles which they made stand. "We remove again the poles,"
said the Ipogau, and they removed again. When they were digging, where they made to stand those poles which they removed, the wild
pig went to grunt. They removed again the poles which make the house.

As before, the snake went to climb the pole with which they made the house, and they removed again. When they were digging again where they made the poles stand with which they made the house, the _labeg_

[326] skimmed over, and as they had a bad sign the Ipogau moved again the poles with which they made the house. "Koling," and "Koling"
and again "Koling" (the bird cried); they removed again the log
which they made stand, with which they made the house. The _salaksak_ clucked, who flew where they dug, where they made those poles stand, with which they made the house.

Since they have the bad sign again, they say to the others--those who make the poles stand--"We are very tired always to dig and dig,
and to make stand and make stand those poles, we go ahead to make the house," and they placed their lumber and they went--one family
of the Ipogau. Then they finished what they built, their house. There was nothing good for them, and there was nothing which was not their sickness (i.e., they had all manner of sickness).

"My wife," said Kaboniyan, "give me the coconut oil, that I oil
my spear, for I go to see those Ipogau who are sick." When those Ipogau who were sick were in their house, his spear fell in their house. "What is the matter with you, Ipogau?" said Kaboniyan. "What is the matter with you, you say, and there is nothing which we do not do for our sickness, and we are never cured," said those Ipogau. And
Kaboniyan answered, "How can you become cured of your sickness when you have a bad sign for that which you made--your house? The reason
of your sickness is because you do not make _Sangasang_. The good way (is) you find a rooster, and that you command the one who knows how to make _diam_ of the _Sangasang_ to make _Sangasang_. I (am) always the one for whom you make _diam_," said Kaboniyan. And truly, before they had finished making _Sangasang_, it was as if there had been nothing wrong, that family was cured of their sickness.


39 [327]

The poles of the Ipogau's house were quarreling. Said the floor supports to the poles who were quarreling, "What can you do if I am not?" "What can you do if I am not?" said the foot-boards to those floor supports who are quarreling. "What can you do if I am not?" said the cross supports to those floor supports who are quarreling. "What can you do if I am not?" said the cross supports to those foot-boards who are quarreling. "What can you do if I am not?" said the floor to those cross supports who are quarreling. "What can you do if I am not?" said the wall to the floor boards who are quarreling. "What
can you do if I am not?" said the beams to the wall boards who are quarreling. "What can you do if I am not?" said the _pongo_ [328]
to the beams who are quarreling. "What can you do if I am not?" said the _daplat_ [329] to the _pongo_ who are quarreling. "What can you do if I am not?" said the end pole to those _daplat_ who are

quarreling. "What can you do if I am not?" said the _salabawan_ to those end poles who are quarreling. "What can you do if I am
not--who am _legpet_?" said those _legpet_ to those _salabawan_, "Though you are _legpet_, you can do nothing if I am not," said
the _gakot_, "because you fall," said the _gakot_ to the _legpet_ who are quarreling. "And what can you all do if I am not, who am grass? you all decay if I am not," said the grass (roof) to those
who are quarreling. "Therefore we are all the same use to the house of the Ipogau; we will unite our thoughts and breath, so that in the same manner the thoughts of the Ipogau are united, who live in us," said those who are quarreling. And they united their thoughts and breath. After that the Ipogau who were sick were cured, those who lived in the house. It was as if there was nothing bad for that family.


40 [330]

The great spirit lives in the sky, and he is carrying the goods of the people. He says to himself, "To whom shall I give these goods
which I am carrying? I shall take them to the earth." He looked down on Bisau, for the people there promised to make _Ubaya_. Soon the
people saw a man entering the town and they sent a man to prevent him [331]. He said, "Let me come in, for I bring goods for you. Your food
and animals and other things which you need shall be increased." After that he said, "Let all the people in the world know of this so that
they will make _Ubaya_ for me, and I will aid them also."


41

Dayapan was a woman who lived in Ka-alang. For seven years she was sick. She went to the spring to bathe and while she was in the water
a spirit sent by Kadaklan [332] entered her body. The spirit held sugar-cane and rice. He said to her, "Take this sugar-cane and rice and plant them in the ground. After you reap the sugar-cane and rice, you will build a bin to hold the rice, and a sugar mill for the cane;
after that you will make _Sayang_ and that will make you well." Dayapan took those things and went back home. She planted the sugar-cane and rice. When she was planting, the spirit entered her body again and taught her how to plant. When she reaped the sugar-cane and rice,
she began to make _Sayang_. The spirit Kaboniyan went again into her to teach her how to make _Sayang_. The spirit said, "Send a man to get _bolo_ (bamboo) and weave it into _talapitap_. [333] Take _lono_ and _bolo_ as big as a finger and make _dakidak_, and put a jar with water upstairs in the house. Dance _daeng_ [334] for ten nights. You will pass seven evenings, then you will build _balaua_. [335] Send

some persons to get wood and bamboo and rattan and cogon, and take ten baskets with cooked rice to follow the number of nights (i.e.,
on the first night one basket of cooked rice on the _talapitap_;
the second night, two; and so on). When you finish the time you will know how to make _dawak_ and to call all the spirits, and you will teach the people how to do _dawak_."

When she finished the _dawak_, the spirit sent her to wash in the river as a sign that she had finished _Sayang_. He told her to get a dog and a cock. She went to the river and she tied the cock and the dog by the water, and while she was gone, the dog killed the cock. Dayapan wept, but for a long time the spirit did not come. When Kaboniyan came again, he said, "If the dog had not killed the cock, no person would die,
but this is a sign and now somebody will die and some will be well."

Dayapan went home and when she arrived there she began to learn to make _dawak_, and she called all people to hear her and she told all
she had seen and heard. Then the people believed her very much. When somebody was sick, they called Dayapan to see them and to show them how to make them well. So Dayapan taught them all kinds of _dawak_ which the spirit had told her because before when Dayapan was sick,
no one knew the _dawak_. [336]


42

Many years ago there was a woman whose name was Bagutayka. She had had only one daughter whose name was Bagan. A boy who lived in Lantagan wished to marry Bagan, but she did not wish to marry him because she
had no vagina, and she was ashamed. Her mother said, "Take this little pot with pictures on the outside, and this sucker of banana and go
to the roadside where people are passing. When people are passing, you will make them sick in their knees or feet." Then poor Bagan went by the roadside. In a short time a man passed by her; after that he was sick in his knees and did not walk, he only lived in his house,
and could not move his hands or feet. His parents were troubled to find medicine for him, for none they found did him good. They used all the medicine that they knew. Then Bagan went to see him in his house and told him to make _bawi_. [337] The sick man said to her, "How
do we make _bawi_, for we have never heard about that?" Bagan said, "Bring me a white cloth, a basket of rice, some thread, a betel-nut, coconut, a rooster, and _toknang_." [338] They brought all of these,
and Bagan took them. Then they built a _bawi_ in the garden and planted the sucker by it. They broke the coconut shell, killed the rooster,
and took his feathers to put in the coconut husk, and they broke the coconut meat.

They made _sablau_ near the _bawi_ and put the coconut meat in it. When they had done this, the man who was sick was as good as if he had not been sick, he could walk just as before. This is the way the Tinguian people learned to make _bawi_.


43 [339]

In the first times Kaboniyan told a sick man to go to the mango tree at the edge of the village. "Take a feather for your hair, a clay
dish with oil, a headaxe, a spear, and a small jar of _basi_, when
you go to the tree." He did as he was bidden, and when he reached the tree the _pinaing_ [340] were there. "Ala! now kill a small pig and
offer its blood mixed with rice. Oil the heads of the stones well,
and decorate them with yellow head bands. When you do this Apadel will always guard the town." The man and his companion always did as Kaboniyan said, and when they made _balaua_, or were sick, or went to fight, they did this. They ate of the pig, they played the _gansas_
and danced. All who obeyed were always well, but one man who urinated on the stones became crazy.

One day when the people were preparing to go and fight against Manabo,
[341] they went to the _pinaing_, and while they danced a red rooster with long tail feathers came out of the stones and walked around
them. When they stopped dancing, he went again into the stones. Since that time a white cock has sometimes appeared and once a white dog came out while the people danced.


44 [342]

One night a man saw a woman, who wore a black cloth, walking near the _pinaing_. When she would not speak to him, he cut her in the thigh with his _bolo_. [343] She ran to the stones and vanished. Next morning the man went to the guardian stones and found one of them cut in the middle, as it is now. The man soon died of smallpox.


45 [344]

In the first times, the old men saw the stones traveling together
down the river. Above them flew many blackbirds. Then the people went down to the river and watched the stones on their journey. After
that they caught them and put them near to the gate of the town, where they still remain.


46

The evil spirit Ibwa once had a body like a man and used to visit the people. In those days they kept the body of the dead person seven days, and when the fat ran from the body they caught it and placed it in
the grave. [345] One day when he visited a funeral, a man gave Ibwa some of this fat to drink. Since that time he has always been bad and always tries to eat the body of the dead and steals his clothes. He comes to the funeral with another evil spirit Akop, who has a large head, long slim arms and legs, but no body.

Kaboniyan has told us how to keep the evil spirits away, but if we fail to do as he said, they always make trouble.


47

A man died. He had a wife and married son. They buried him under the house and made _bagongon_. [346] After that his wife was in the field and was watching their corn. His daughter-in-law was in the house watching her baby. While she was swinging the baby, the dead man said, "Take this _saloyot_ [347] to Gadgadawan." The girl took it. The
spirit said to her, "Let me swing the baby and you cook the _saloyot_ in Gadgadawan." When she cooked it, the spirit ate it, and he asked, "Where is your mother-in-law?" She said, "She is in the field watching the corn." The spirit went there. When he reached there, his wife was afraid of him, but she did not run. He slept there that night with his wife, and he did what he wished with her that night. In the daytime he went away. His wife got big stomach, but had no baby, and died. The spirit did that because the fire for the dead man was not out yet
and she had gone from the town before the _kanyau_ [348] was past.


48

One man in Solay [349] said to another, "Tomorrow we meet on the mountain to get wild carabao." The other man agreed, and early the next morning the first man set out on horseback. The second man died that night, but the first man did not know this. When he got to the
place agreed, he said "Sh-sh" through his teeth, and the spirit of
the dead answered a little way off. The man went towards the answer and signalled again. The spirit again answered, and then the man saw the spirit of the dead, which was very big, was running to catch

him. He ran his horse at full speed, but the spirit was gaining when the _lasta_ [350] on the saddle caught on a dead limb and was jerked away. "Very good that you leave that or I would take your life," said the spirit. Then the man ran his horse until he got to Solay. When he got there, he could not get off his horse, for his legs were stuck
very tight to each side of the horse, so a man had to pull each leg loose and lift him from the saddle. That is why we know that the spirits of the dead men sometimes do harm and go places.


49

A man and his wife were living in the field where they planted corn
and rice. When they were there, the man died. The woman did not want to go to the town, because there was no one to watch the dead man. She could not bury him. The Ibwa [351] noticed that there was a dead man
in the house. He sent one of his sons to get the dead man. When the Ibwa came in the house, the woman took the headaxes and cut him in the doorway. The Ibwa went under the house. His father could not wait for him; he sent his second son and his third son. The boys
could not take the body, because they were afraid of the headaxes, for the woman had one in each hand. The Ibwa went there. He said to his sons, "Why do you not take the dead man?" His sons said, "We could not take him, because if we go up in the house the woman takes the two headaxes and tries to kill us." Ibwa went up into the house; he broke the door of the house. He said to the woman, "Now I
am your husband." The Ibwa took the two ears of the dead man; he ate one and gave the other to the woman to chew, like betel-nut, to see
the sign. The sign of the saliva was good. He made the woman's two breasts into one in the center of her chest. He took her to his house.


50

The stems of the _alangtin_ are good charms against the spirits of the dead, and are often worn concealed in the hair or hat.

There were two brothers, and one died. The other went to hunt and killed a deer. While he had it over the fire to singe, his dead
brother's spirit came to him. [352] Then the man began to cut the meat into small pieces, and as fast as he cut it up, the spirit ate it; and
as fast as he ate it, the meat came out of his anus. When the meat was almost all gone, the man became very much afraid and started to run, and the spirit chased him. When he ran where some _alangtin_ grew, the spirit stopped and said, "If you had not gone to the _alangtin_,
I would have eaten you also."


51

One person was dead in a town. They buried him under the house. They did not put _banal_ [353] and a plow iron over the grave. The Ibwa
went there and saw there was no _banal_ on the grave, so he was not afraid. He went there and took the dead man. He put one foot of the dead man over each shoulder and let him hang down over his back. A man saw him while he was walking in the street. The man told the people in the town what he had seen. The people did not believe it
and went to see the grave. No dead man there, only the clothes and mat.


52

It is good to put some branches of trees in the ground near your head when you sleep out doors, so the spirits can not spit on you, for if they do, you will die.

One man who had lost his carabao went to the mountains to find; and at night he did not find, so he lay down near the path to sleep. He did
not put any branches near his head, and in the night an evil spirit came and wanted to eat him; but when the spirit saw that he had the skin disease, he did not care to eat, so he spit on him. The man got up and went home, but soon he got sick and died.


53

When Itneg [354] go to hunt or have to sleep anywhere that spirits
can get them it is good to use _sobosob_ [355] or _banal_ under them for a mat.

Two men were in the mountains and had no mats to sleep on, so they pulled much _sobosob_ and put it under them. That night the evil spirits came to get them but did not come very near. The men heard them say that they wanted to get them, but that it was bad for them
if they got near the _sobosob_, so they left them alone.

(_Sobosob_ and _banal_ are sometimes put with the plow iron over a new grave as an added protection.)

54

In the first time, three Tinguian went to hunt. At night they lay down
to sleep and one of them, who had a _kambaya_, [356] had not gone to sleep when two spirits came near and saw him under the blanket. One turned to the other and said, "Here we have something to eat, for
here is a little pig." Then that man took the blanket from the other man and put his blanket in its place, and the spirits came and ate that man. So we know it is bad to use that kind of blanket when you go where the spirits can get.


55

A man and woman had a beautiful daughter whom they always kept in the house. [357] One day while they were away in the fields, the girl went outside to pound rice. While she pounded, the spirit Bayon who lives
in the sky came to see her. He was like a fresh breeze. Then the girl was like a person asleep, for she could not see nor hear. When she awoke in the sky, she dropped her rice pounder so that it fell near
her home and then the people knew she was above. Bayon changed her two breasts into one large one, which he placed in the middle of her chest. When her parents made _Sayang_, the mediums called Bayon and his wife to come. They still come when some one calls them in the
_Sayang_. The woman's name is Lokadya.


56

In the first times men went to the mountains to hunt deer and hogs. One man kept his dog in the open land outside of the forest, to wait for
the game. While he waited there with his dog, the big bird Banog came to take him away; and it flew with him over the mountains near to Licuan. [358] The bird took him to her nest in the tree. There were
two young birds in the nest. When the bird laid him in the nest he was on a branch of the tree. Three young pigs were in the nest. The bird went away to get animals. After it went away, the man cut the meat
in small pieces for the young birds, and the man ate also because the tree was big and he could not go away. The bird brought deer and pigs all the time, and the man always cut the meat in small pieces. After
a while the two young birds could fly near to the nest. When they were standing outside of the nest he held on to their wings and the birds flew down under the tree. Then the man took his bolo and cut off their heads and took them to his town and made _layog_ [359] for the
heads. After the man's _layog_, he wanted to go to _alzados_ [360] town

to fight them. He had been near to the _alzados_ town about one month.

While he was away, his wife died. He came back to the town and in the way he met his wife (her spirit) with a cow and two pigs. The man asked his wife where she was going. She said to him, "I am not
a person any more, I am dead." Her husband wanted to touch her hand and his wife gave only her shortest finger. Her husband said, "Wait a while for me, I will go with you." His wife said, "If you go to our
house, take the white chicken and you will see the footmarks of the cow and pigs." He followed the footmarks, and while he was walking he saw his wife washing in the river, under the tree. She said,
"You come and I go with you to own town (i.e., spirit town), and I will put you in the rice bin, because the people in the town will want to eat you in the nighttime; but if they come in the nighttime,
you must take some of the feathers of the chicken and throw at them, and I will bring you something to eat."

They went to the spirit town, and she put him in the rice bin, and gave him something to eat. In the evening, the spirits came to eat the man. The man took some of the feathers and threw at them. The spirits were afraid of the feathers. They did this every night, and
his wife brought him something to eat every day. The spirits said to the man's wife, "We smell Ipogau." [361] His wife said, "No Ipogau
in here." In about two weeks the feathers were nearly gone. Then his wife told him, "It is better for you to go home, because there are no more feathers. I will give you some rice for you to eat in the way. I
will show you the road." The man agreed, and they went in the way. She showed him the road. While the man was walking in the way he saw his town and he asked for his wife. They said his wife was dead and they had buried her under his house; then he made _layog_ for his wife.


57

The father of Siagon [362] was head man of Patok. He walked one night
on the road which goes to Domayko. In the road he saw a big man whom he thought was Padawil. Then he smelt a bad odor and knew it was a _ladag_
[363] He struck it with his whip and it said, "Hah." It was night and he ran very fast to the council house, and on the way he threw away his clothes. When they came to the place where the spirit had stood, they found a deep hole there like a carabao wallow.


58 [364]

Dalioya died; they put her in the ground under the house. After a

while Baluga's rice was ripe and was ready to cut. Baluga went to cut it. He went home before dark from his field. Dalioya came out from the ground. She went to cut the rice for him. The next morning he went
to cut the rice again. He saw the rice had been cut, but he did not know who cut it. He went home again before dark and went to cut the rice again the next morning. He saw again the rice cut by Dalioya, but he did not yet know who cut it. He said to himself, "I must
wait for the person who comes to cut my rice." After dark his wife came, and Baluga lay down very still; when Dalioya walked near him, he waked up and caught her. Dalioya said, "Let me go." Baluga said, "No, I will not let you go." She said, "If you come with me to get
my life, I will be very glad." "Yes," said he. Then they went down in the ground where is the spirit's home. When they got there the spirits were sleeping. Dalioya said, "Take that green bamboo cup, because they put my life in it." Baluga took it and they went up on
the ground. One spirit waked up and said, "There are Baluga and his wife walking in our vine way." All the spirits ran to catch them. When the spirits were going up in the vine, Baluga cut the vine with his bolo. The spirits fell down. Baluga and his wife went home. As soon
as they reached their home, they made a party. There were many people there on that big day. They were drinking _basi_, eating rice and meat, and singing and dancing because they were having a good time. That party lasted two days. After that the people went home. Baluga and Dalioya went to cut their rice.


59

The _alan_ [365] once found the afterbirth outside the town and made it a real baby whose name was Sayen.

Sayen lived in Benben. He was very brave and often went to fight without companions.

He wanted to marry Danipan who lives in Kadalayapan, but she did not wish. She hid; so Sayen married her servant, thinking she
was Danipan. The name of the servant was Laey. Sayen took her home. They had one baby. One day Sayen was making a plow under the house. Laey was in the house with her baby. She was singing in the house to her baby. "Sayen thinks I am Danipan, but I am Laey, Laey no aglage-le-gey-ley." Sayen heard the song and said to himself that his wife was not Danipan. He went up into the house and said, "Take off your upper arm beads, and in the morning you will go to
the fields with your baby, because I will go there to plow." She said, "Yes." In the morning he went there. He went to cut down the bamboo bridge. At noon his wife carried food to him. She took her baby with her. When she reached the bamboo bridge it fell with her

and they fell into the water. Sayen went back to his house. When he got there, he took his headaxe, spear, and shield, and he went to Kadalayapan. When he got there, he began to kill the people of the
town. When he had killed many people the _lakay_ [366] called Danipan, "Come out, Sayen is killing many people of the town, because you
did something bad to him." She came out to Sayen and said to him, "Do not kill all the people, leave some of them so I can go to borrow fire from them." Sayen answered her, "Take the betel-nut in my bag and cut it in two pieces for me to eat, for I am very tired." She
took the betel-nut from his bag and cut it in two pieces, and Sayen chewed the betel-nut. Sayen spat on some of the dead people and made them alive again and he married Danipan and took her to Benben.

When the people in Magisang [367] went to hunt deer and when they went to divide it, the _komau_, a big spirit who looks like a man,
and who kills people, [368] went to them to ask them, "How many did you catch?" If they had caught two they told him "Two," and the _komau_ said, "I caught two also." When they went to their town, there were two dead people there in their town. Anytime they went to hunt the _komau_ asked them how many they had caught, and when they said how many, the _komau_ always said he had that many, and when they reached the
town that many were dead. The _komau_ did that often and many people were dead. The people in Magisang heard that Sayen was a very brave man and they went to him to tell him about the _komau_. Sayen said to them, "I come, but I must hide by the trees. When the _komau_ comes and asks you how many deer you have caught he will ask you where I am. You will say to him that you do not know where I am, because you did not hear of me yet. I am sure the _komau_ will ask you where I
am, because he will smell me." The people said, "Yes." They went to hunt. When they reached the forest, they caught two deer and they went to the place where they singed and divided those deer which they had caught. While they were sitting there, the _komau_ came to them and said, "How many have you?" They answered, "Two." The _komau_ said, "I have two also. Sayen is here." The people said, "We do not know
about Sayen, where he is." Then Sayen came out and killed the _komau_.

Kaboniyan [369] went to Sayen in Benben and said, "Are you a brave man, Sayen? You are brave, because you killed the _komau_." Sayen said, "Yes, I am a brave man." Kaboniyan said, "If you are a brave man, I will meet you in that place at a distance." Sayen said,
"Yes." Kaboniyan told him the day when he would meet him, and Sayen was to stay in the lower place and Kaboniyan in the higher place. Sayen went there on that day. When he reached there and was waiting he heard a sound like a storm and said to himself, "Here
is Kaboniyan." Kaboniyan called to him, "Are you there, Sayen?" "I am here," said Sayen. "Are you a brave man?" said Kaboniyan to Sayen. Sayen said, "Yes." Kaboniyan said to him, "Catch this," and he threw his spear. Sayen caught the spear. It was as big as a large

tree. Kaboniyan asked, "Did you catch it?" "Yes," said Sayen. "Here is again," said Kaboniyan, and threw his headaxe. Sayen caught it. "Did you catch it, Sayen?" said Kaboniyan. Sayen said, "Yes." The axe was as large as the end roof of a house. Kaboniyan said, "Here is again," and threw his shield. Sayen caught it again. "Did you catch it,
Sayen?" Sayen said, "Yes." Kaboniyan said, "Here is again," and threw a very big stone. Sayen caught it. "Did you catch it, Sayen?" said Kaboniyan. Sayen said, "Yes," and Kaboniyan said to him, "Wait for me,
I come down to you." When Kaboniyan got there, he and Sayen fought face to face and they got tired, because Kaboniyan could not beat Sayen,
and Sayen could not beat Kaboniyan. Sayen said, "I take my headaxe, because I am very tired." Kaboniyan said, "Do not take your headaxe; you are a brave man; I will be your friend and we will go to fight anywhere." Sayen said, "Yes." Then they were friends and went to fight in many towns. If the people in the town caught them in the way when they went home from fighting, or when they were in the river, Sayen could be a fish and hide. They fought in one town. Sayen became a chicken after fighting. He went under the house where the chickens roost. He did that many times and the people in the town noticed that Sayen could be a chicken or a fish. When he came with Kaboniyan to the town to fight the people, he went under the house to the chickens' place. The people said to themselves, "We will put a fish trap there, because Sayen after fighting goes in the chicken coop." They put a trap under the house by the coop. Sayen came in the town again to fight. After fighting he went under the house and he went into the
trap, and the people caught and killed him. This all happened not very long ago.


60

In the old times Malilipeng was walking along the trail in the woods when he heard the _alan_ [370] in the trees. He laid down on his face as if dead and the _alan_ who saw him began to wail, for they thought he was dead. When they brought gold and beads to place on him, he
sprang up and drove them away. "Give us the one bead which is _nagaba_, or we will burn your house," said the _alan_. The man refused. When
he reached home his house was burned, but he still had the bead.


61

Two men went to hunt wild pig. They killed one, but had no fire to singe it, so one man climbed a tree to see if he could see where was a fire. He saw a little fire at a distance and went to get it. When he

got where the fire was, he saw it was in the house of an _alan_. He was very much afraid, but he went up and saw the _alan_, who had a baby, was asleep. He walked very quietly, but the _alan_ woke up and said, "What do you want?" "I want fire, for we have killed a little wild
pig." "Do not say little pig, but larger," said the _alan_. "Larger," said the man, for he was afraid. "Do not say larger, but big," said
_alan._ "Big." "Do not say big, but very big," said the _alan_. "Very big," said the man. Then the _alan_ gave him the fire, and she took her
big basket and went with him to where the pig was. They singed the pig, and the _alan_ cut it up with her nails. Then she gave the liver to
the man, and told him to take it to her house and feed the baby. The man went, but on the way he ate the liver. When he got to the house, he saw a big caldron with hot water on the fire. He took the _alan's_ baby and put it in the hot water and then went back. "Did the baby eat well?" asked the _alan_. "Very well," he answered. Then the _alan_ put most of the meat in her basket and started home. The man told
his companion what he had done and they were both very much afraid; so they ran to hide.

When the _alan_ got home, she saw the baby dead in the water. Then she went to find the men. They had climbed a high tree which stood near the water, and when the _alan_ looked in the water, she saw them in it. She put her hand in the water and tried to get them,
but could not; then she looked up and saw them again. "How did you get up there?" she asked. "We climbed up feet first." Then the _alan_ seized a vine and started up the tree feet first. When she had almost reached them, they cut the vine and the _alan_ fell to the ground
and was dead. The men came down from the tree and went to the house of the _alan_. When they got there, they saw three jars: the first
was full of dung; the second, of beads; the third, of gold. They took the jars with the beads and gold and went home.


62

The earth, which is very flat, was made by the great spirit
Kadaklan. He also made the sun and moon, which chase each other over and under the earth. Sometimes the moon almost catches the sun,
but it always gets tired and gives up before it succeeds. The sun
and moon are the lights of Kadaklan and so are the stones which are stars. The dog of Kadaklan is the lightning.


63

Kaboniyan once sent a flood which covered all the land. There was no

place for the fire to go, so it went into the bamboo, the stones, and the iron. Now that is why you can get fire out of the bamboo and stones.


64

A man planted rice in the high land. When it was grown, he saw that something was eating it, though he had a fence around it. One night
he went to watch his field. About midnight he heard many wings and saw some big animals with wings alight in his rice. He ran and caught one, and cut off its wings. The animal was pregnant and soon had a young one. Since then there have been horses on the earth, but people have never seen any more fly. You can see the place on the horse's legs where the wings used to be.


65

A lazy man was planting corn in the high land. He would plant a few seeds and then put his planting stick in the ground and lean back on it. After a while the stick grew there and was a tail, and the man became a monkey. [371]



66

A very lazy boy got a piece of sugar-cane and went home with it. When he got home, he told his mother to take off the outside of the stalk
so he might eat it. His mother was angry to see him so lazy and told him that if he could not take it off himself, to stick it up his
anus. He did so and became a monkey.


67

A very lazy girl would not learn to spin, and always pretended that she did not know how. One day she took the cotton and asked the women what to do with it. "Beat it out," they said. Then she asked, "What shall I do with it then?" "Put it in a betel leaf on a stick
and spin it." Again she asked, "How shall I spin it?" "If you do not
know how to spin, put the stick up your anus." She did so, and became a monkey. After that there were many monkeys.


68 [372]

In an early time, the Tinguian were like the _alzado_, [373] and hunted heads. The men from one town started to another on the other side of the Abra river to get heads. While they were on the way, it rained very hard; and when they reached the river, they could not get across, so they prayed to the Spirit that he would give them wings
to cross. They at once became birds; but when they reached the other side of the river, they could not resume the forms of men. Some of
the men's wives had just died, and they had bark bands on their heads, as is the Tinguian custom. When these became birds, their heads were white; but those of the others were black, and so they are to this day.


69

A mother had a very lazy boy who could do nothing. One day she went away to get something, and she put a big basket over the boy. When she came home, she took the basket up, but instead of the boy there was
a bird which flew away, crying "sigakok, sigakok, sigakok,"--"lazy, lazy, lazy." And so that bird is called _sigakok_.


70

A long time ago there was a young man who cut all the trees in a little wood. When he had cut up them, he burned them, and he planted rice in the field. In a few days the rice was ready to cut and the young man went to find a girl for him to marry. He found a girl in the other
town. He married her and he took her with him to his home. When they got home the man said to his wife, "Let us go to see our rice." They went to see the rice. At midday they went home. The next day the
man sent his wife to go to cut the rice. When she got to the rice, she thought to herself that she could not cut it in a month. Said she to herself, "I want to be a bird." She lay down on the floor in
a little house that the man had made. She put her hat over her to be her blanket. Then she became a bird which we call _kakok_ now. Her cloth became her feathers. In the morning the man went with some rice for his wife to eat. When he got there, he could not see his wife. He walked and walked, but he did not find her, then he came to the little house. He saw his wife's hat, and he picked it up. The bird flew away, crying "_kakok, kakok_."

71

In the first time Ganoway was the man who possessed a dog which caught many deer; and Kaboniyan allowed. The dog pursued the deer which went in a cave in the rock. The dog went in also, and Ganoway followed into the hole in the rock. He walked, always following the
dog which was barking, and he felt the shrubs which he touched. The shrubs all had fruit which tinkled when he touched them. Then he broke off those branches which tinkled as he touched them, and Kaboniyan allowed. He came to the end of the cave in the rock which was at the river Makatbay, and his dog was there, for he had already caught the deer, which was a buck. It was light in the place where
he was, at the river Makatbay, and he looked at the shrub which he had broken off in the dark place in the cave. He saw that the shrub was _denglay_ which bore fruit--the choice agate bead, which is good for the Tinguian dress. He was glad. He cut up the deer into pieces and placed it on a bamboo pole which he carried. He thought always of the beads and wished to return to that shrub which he touched. He returned and searched, but was not able to find it, and because he failed he returned to his home in An-nay. There was not one who did not envy him those beads which he brought home, and they asked him to show them the way to the cave. He showed them the hole in the rock where he and his dog had gone in. They took torches and walked, always walked, but at last they were not able to go further, for
the rest of the cave was closed. That place is now called Ganoway, for he was the one who secured the beads which grew in the cave of Kaboniyan, which cave the spirit always keeps clean. [374]



72

Magsawi, my jar, when it was not yet broken talked softly, but now its lines are broken, and the low tones are insufficient for us to
understand. The jar was not made where the Chinese are, but belongs to the spirits or Kaboniyan, because my father and grandfather, from whom I inherited it, said that in the first times they (the Tinguian) hunted Magsawi on the mountains and in the wooded hills. My ancestors thought that their dog had brought a deer to bay, which he was catching, and they hurried to assist it. They saw the jar and tried to catch it but
were unable; sometimes it disappeared, sometimes it appeared again, and because they could not catch it they went again to the wooded hill on their way to their town. Then they heard a voice speaking words which they understood, but they could see no man. The words it spoke were: "You secure a pig, a sow without young, and take its blood,

so that you may catch the jar which your dog pursued." They obeyed and went to secure the blood. The dog again brought to bay the jar which belonged to Kaboniyan. They plainly saw the jar go through a hole in the rock which is a cave, and there it was cornered so that they captured the pretty jar which is Magsawi, which I inherited.

(Told by Cabildo, of Patok, the owner of the famous talking jar, Magsawi.)


73

Once then sun and moon fought. The sun said, "You are moon, not so good; if I give you no light, you are no good." The moon answered,
"You are sun and very hot. I am moon and am better. The women like me very much, and when I shine they go out doors to spin." Then the sun was very angry and took some sand and threw it on the moon, and that
is why there are dark places on the moon now.


74

In the old time, a man went with others to get heads. They were gone very, very long, and the man's daughter, who was little when he went away, was grown up and beautiful when he returned. When he got to the gate of the town, his daughter went to hold the ladder for him to
come in. [375] The man did not recognize his daughter, and when he saw her holding the ladder for him, he threw his arms around the ladder
and seized and kissed her. The girl was very sorrowful because her father had not recognized her and had misunderstood her intentions; so she went home and said to her mother, "It is better now that I become a coconut tree, to stand close by our house." In the morning the man and his wife missed the girl, and when they looked out doors, there stood a fine coconut tree close to the house; so they knew that she had changed to the tree.


75

In the old times there were two flying snakes in the gap of the Abra river. [376] Many men had been killed by them. So the head man of Abra invited Malona and Biwag, two very brave men from Cagayan, to come and help him kill the snakes. They came at once with big bolos, shields, and the trunk of the banana tree, which they used to fight with. When they arrived, they were taken to the gap, and the snakes

attacked them. The men fought with the trunk of the banana tree, and the wings of the snakes stuck to the trunk; so they killed them easily. When they had killed them, they came back to the leader and
showed him, and he asked what should be their pay. They did not ask any reward, but the leader gave them gold in the form of deer and horses. Then they went home, and after that the people of Abra could pass through the gap.


76

Hundreds of years ago there were two people who were husband and wife. Their names were Tagapen and Giaben, and they had only one son whose name was Soliben. Those people came from Ilocos Norte; they came down to Vigan to pass a while, then came into the Abra river. When they were in Banoang, they sailed on a raft in the
Abra river to come up to Langiden. When they reached that town, they stopped there to stay a short time, because Tagapen went to the town to give thoughts to the people there and to give a nice face to the girls. When Tagapen was in the town, in Langiden, his son Soliben was weeping on the raft by his mother. "Sleep, sleep, sleep, my dear son, because your father is not here yet; it-to-tes,
it-to-tes, so sleep my son, do not weep," said his mother, whose name
is Giaben. When Tagapen came back from the town of Langiden, they began to sail again until they came to Pidigan. When they reached the town
of Pidigan, they stopped there because Tagapen went to the town to give a nice face to the ladies and girls. Then his son wept again, "Oh, dear son, sleep, sleep, sleep; oh, dear son, sleep, sleep,
sleep, for your father is not here yet. When he comes back, he will get bananas for you to eat. It-to-tes, it-to-tes, it-to-tes, sleep,
Soliben, sleep, my son; do not weep; your father will give you to eat," said the mother. In a short time Tagapen came back from the town and they sailed to come up. When they reached the mouth of the Sinalang river, they came up in the river; they sailed up here; this is the
river of Sinalang town (Patok). "We go there to give the people some nice face and good thoughts, so they will be very wise." When they arrived in Sinalang town, they left their raft in the river and went
up in the town. When they reached the town, every person went to them to give their regards. Tagapen and his wife with her son stayed in a
little house we call _balaua_; they lived there teaching many _dalengs_
[377] and _bagayos_ of the Tinguian people.


Fables

77 The Turtle and the Monkey

There was once a turtle and a monkey who went to make a clearing. The monkey did not work, but the turtle was the one which cleared the
land. When one day passed, "Let us go to plant," said the turtle. They went, and banana was what they went to plant. The turtle planted his in the clearing, but the monkey hung his in a tree when he went to climb. Five days passed. "Let us go to see our planting," said the turtle. When they arrived where they had planted, the monkey saw that his banana was dry, but that which the turtle had planted bore ripe fruit. When the monkey reached the place where the turtle sat, "I am waiting for you, monkey, for I cannot climb my banana tree." "Give me fruit, and I will go to climb. My banana which I hung in the tree did
not bear fruit," said the monkey. The turtle laughed and agreed, but when the monkey climbed in the tree he only ate and did not throw down any fruit. "Give me, monkey," said the turtle. "The thumb still eats," replied the monkey. Then he pushed a banana up his anus and after that threw it down. The turtle ate it and again asked for fruit. "The little
finger still eats," said the monkey. Then he finished eating the fruit and he slept on the banana tree. The turtle went to search for long sharp shells, and when he had secured them he planted them upright around the tree, and cried, "Bad in the east. Bad in the west." Then the monkey jumped, and the shells pierced his side so that he died.

The turtle dried his meat and sold it to the other monkeys, and when he had finished selling he went under the house and hid beneath
a coconut shell. When all the monkeys had eaten the turtle cried, "They eat their relative." Then the monkeys heard, but could not see. The turtle called many times until at last they found him beneath the coconut shell. They agreed to kill him with the axe, but the turtle laughed and pointed to the marks on his back. [378]
The monkeys believed him when he said he had often been cut by his father and grandfather; so they did not cut, but went to get fire. "You cannot kill me with that. Do you not see that my back is almost black from burning." "Ay-ay," said the monkeys, "let us tie a stone to his waist and drown him in the lake." The turtle cried and begged them to spare him, but the monkeys did not know that the water was the cause of his living, for it was his home. They threw him in the lake and
when they had watched a long time, they saw him float on the water and he was holding a large fish. Then all the monkeys tied stones to their waists and dived in the lake to catch fish. They did not
float in the lake, but they died. Only a pregnant monkey was left, but the turtle came and drowned her also. [379]


78

A turtle and a big lizard went to the field of Gotgotapa to steal ginger. When they got there the turtle told the lizard he must be very still; but when the lizard tasted the ginger, he exclaimed, "The ginger of Gotgotapa is very good." "Be still," said the turtle;
but again the lizard shouted louder than before. Then the man heard and came out of his house to catch the robbers. The turtle could
not run fast, so he lay very still, and the man did not see him;
but the lizard ran and the man chased him. When they were very far, the turtle went into the house. Now, the man had a coconut shell which he used to sit on, and the turtle hid under it.

The man could not catch the lizard, so in a while he came back to his house and sat on the shell. Bye and bye, the turtle called
"Kook." Then the man jumped up and looked all around to find where the noise came from, but he could not find. The turtle called "Kook" again and the man tried very hard to find what made the noise. The turtle called a third time more loudly and then the man thought it was his testicles which made the noise, so he took a stone and hit them; then he died and the turtle ran away.

When the turtle got a long way, he met the lizard again and they saw some honey on the branch of a tree. "I run first to get,"
said the turtle; but the big lizard ran fast and seized the honey; then the bees stung him and he ran back to the turtle. On their road they saw a bird snare. The turtle said, "That is the _paliget_
[380] of my grandfather." Then the lizard ran very fast to get it,
but it caught his neck and held him until the man who owned it came and killed him. Then the turtle went away.



79

The _polo_ [381] said to a boy named Ilonen, "Tik-tik-loden, come and catch me," many times. Then the boy answered, "I am making a snare for you." The bird called again, "Tik-tik-loden." "I am almost finished,"
said Ilonen. Then the bird called again and the boy came and put the snare over the bird and caught it. He took it home and put it in a
jar and then went with the other boys to swim. While he was gone, his grandmother ate the bird. Ilonen came back and went to the jar to see the bird, but no bird. "Where is my bird?" he said. "I do not know," said his grandmother. "Let me see your anus," said the boy. Then he saw his grandmother's anus and he saw feathers there and was very angry. "It is better I get lost," he said and went away. He came to a big stone called _balintogan_ and said, "Stone, open your mouth and
eat me." Then the stone opened his mouth and swallowed the boy. His

grandmother went to find him and looked very much. When she came to the stone, it said, "Here is." She called the horses to come to the
stone. They kicked it, but could not break. She called the carabao and they hooked it, but only broke their horns; then she called the chickens and they pecked it, but could not open. Then she called thunder, but it could not help. Then her friends came to open the stone, but could not, so she went home without the boy.


80

A frog was fastened to a fish hook in the water. A fish came and said, "What are you doing?" "I am swinging," said the frog, "come and try if you wish." But the fish was angry with the frog. "You can not catch me," said the frog. Then the fish jumped up to catch him, but the frog pushed his anus upon the stick and left the hook so the fish was caught.


81

The five fingers were brothers. The other four sent the little thumb to get _posel_. [382] He went to get, but when he got there, the _posel_ said, "Kiss me, for I have a good odor to you." So the thumb kissed him, and his nose stuck to the bamboo. The others could not wait so long, so they sent the first finger to get. When he got there, he
saw the thumb, and said, "What are you doing?" "I am smelling this
_posel_, for it has a good smell." Then the first finger smelled and
his nose was caught. The others could not wait, so they sent the second finger and it happened the same. Also the third, and he also became fast. Then little finger went and when he saw the others, he said,
"You are very crazy," and he cut them loose.


82 [383]

Carabao met _loson_ [384] in the river. "You are very slow," said the carabao. "No, I can beat you in a race," said _loson_. "Let us try," said the carabao. So they started to run. When the carabao reached a long distance, he called, "Shell," and another shell lying by the river
answered, "Yes." He ran again and again, and every time he stopped to call, another shell answered. At least the carabao ran until he died.

83

A crab and _kool_ [385] went to the forest to get wood for fuel. The crab cut his wood and the shell went to cut his. "Tie very good your wood which you get," said _kool_ to the crab. The crab pulled the ropes so tightly that he broke his big legs and died. When the shell went to see where the crab was, he found him dead, and he begun to cry until he belched; then his meat came out of his shell and he was dead also.


84 [386]

A mosquito came to bite a man. The man said, "You are very little and can do nothing to me." The mosquito answered, "If you had no ears,
I would eat you."


85

A boy's parents sent a man to carry gifts to the girl's house, and
see if they would agree to a marriage. When he got to the door of the house, the people were all eating _kool_, and when they sucked the meat out of the shell, they nodded their heads. The man saw them nod, so did not state his errand, but returned and said that the people in
the house all desired the union. Then the boy's people got ready the things for _pakalon_ [387] and went to the girl's house. The girl's parents were very much surprised.


86

A man went to the other town. When he got there, the people were eating
_labon_. [388] He asked them what they ate, and they said _pangaldanen_ (the bamboo ladder is called "_aldan_".) He went home and had nothing
to eat but rice, so he cut his ladder into small pieces and cooked all day, but the bamboo was still very hard. He could not wait longer, so called his friends and asked why he could not make it like the people had in the other town. Then his friends laughed and told him his mistake.


87

A man went to get coconuts and loaded his horse heavily. He met a boy

and asked how long to his house. "If you go slowly, very soon; if you go fast, all day," said the boy. The man did not believe, so hurried his horse and the coconuts fell off, so he had to stop and pick them up. He did this many times and it was night before he got home.


88

Two women went to get _atimon_ [389] which belonged to the crocodile. "You must not throw the rind with your teeth marks where the crocodile can see it," said the first woman. Then they ate; but the other woman threw a rind with her teeth marks in the river, and
the crocodile saw it and knew who the woman was. He was very angry and went to her house and called the people to send out the woman so he could eat her, for she had eaten his _atimon_. "Yes," they said,
"but sit down and wait a while." Then they put the iron soil turner in the fire until it was red hot. "Eat this first," they said to the
crocodile, and when he opened his mouth, they threw it very far into his body and he died.


89 [390]

There was a man named Dogidog who was very lazy and very poor. His house was small and had no floor, only the boards to put the floor
on. He went to the forest to cut bamboo with which to make a floor, and he carried cooked rice with him. When he got there he hung the rice in a tree and went to cut the bamboo. While he was gone, a cat came and ate the rice, so when the man got hungry and came to eat, he had no rice, so he went home. The next day he went to cut again, and when he had hung the rice in the tree, the cat came to eat it. The third day he went again and hung the rice in the tree, but fixed it
in a trap; then he hid in some brush and did not cut bamboo. The cat came to eat the rice and was caught. Then the man said, "I will kill you." "No," said the cat, "do not kill me." "Alright, then I take you home to watch my house," said the man. Then he took the cat home, and tied it near the door of his house and went away. When he came back, the cat had become a cock.

"Now I go to the cock fight at Magsingal," [391] said Dogidog, and he put his rooster under his arm and started for the place. He was crossing a river when he met a crocodile. "Where are you going, Dogidog?" said the crocodile. "To the cock fight at Magsingal," said the man. "Wait, I go with you," said the crocodile. Then they
went. Soon they met a deer. "Where are you going, Dogidog?" said the deer. "To the cock fight at Magsingal," said the man. "Wait, I go

with you," said the deer. Then they went again. In the way they met Bunton. [392] "Where are you going?" said it. "To Magsingal to the cock fight," said the man. "Wait, I go with you," said the mound. Then they went again and soon they met a monkey. "Where are you going, Dogidog?" said the monkey. "To the cock fight at Magsingal," said the man. "Wait, I go with you," said the monkey. Then they went until they reached the place where was the fight in Magsingal.

The crocodile said to Dogidog, "If any man wants to sink in the water, I can beat him." The deer said, "If any man wants to run, I am very fast." Then the earth said, "If any man wants to wrestle, I know very well how to do." The monkey said, "If any man wants to climb, I can go higher." Then they took the rooster to the place of the fighting, and Dogidog had him fight the other rooster. But the rooster had been a cat before, and he seized the other rooster in his claws, as
a cat does, and killed it. Then the people brought many roosters and bet much money and the rooster of Dogidog, which was a cat before, killed them all, so there were no more roosters in Magsingal, and Dogidog won much money.

The people wanted some other sport, so they brought a man who could stay very long under water, and Dogidog had him try with the crocodile. After more than two hours, the man had to come up
first. Then the people brought a man who runs very fast, and the deer raced with him, and the man could not beat the deer for he was very fast. Then they brought a very big man, but he could not throw the earth. Last, the people brought a man who climbs very well and the monkey climbed with him, and went much higher than the man.

Dogidog had very much money and he bought two horses to carry the sacks of silver to his house. When he got near to the town, he tied
his horses and went to tell his mother to go and ask to buy the
good house from the rich man. "How can you buy?" said the rich man, "when you have no money?" Then his mother went home and the man went to get two sacks of money to send to the rich man. When the rich man
saw so much money, he said, "Yes," for the money was in sacks and was not counted. Then Dogidog went to live in the good house and the rich man still had no house, so he had no where to go when the rain came.


90

A wood-chopper went to the woods. When he passed where the brook ran, "Go away, go away," he said to Banbantay, the spirit of the brook. He heard a voice in the thicket. The voice said, "I should think he
would see me." The man answered, "Yes, I see you." The spirit said, "Where am I now?" The man answered, "You are in the thicket." The

spirit came down and said, "Put my _poncho_ on you." When he has it on, no one can see him. [393] "See if I really can see you in my
_poncho_." The man took the _poncho_ and put it on, then the spirit could not see him any more, because the cloth made him invisible. Then the man went home. When he reached there, he said to his wife, "Wife, where am I now?" She cried because she thought him dead. He said, "Do not cry, for I am not dead, but I have received a _poncho_ which makes me invisible." The man took off his _poncho_ and embraced his wife, which made his wife laugh at him, for she knew then that her husband was powerful.


91

A fisherman went to catch fish with his throw net. While he was fishing, a big bird, Banog, saw him. It seized the man, put him on its back and flew away. It lighted on a very big tree in the forest. In
the thicket there was a nest with two small Banog in it.

After the bird had put the man near the nest, it flew away again, and the nestlings wished to eat the man, but he defended himself so they could not eat him. He took one in each hand and jumped from the tree, and the young birds broke his fall so that he was not hurt. The man was much frightened by the things which had happened to him, and  he ran to his home. When he arrived home, he told with tears what had happened to him. His family were very happy over his return,
and made him promise not to go alone again to fish.


Abstracts

I 1

Two women are gathering greens when a vine wraps around one and carries her to the sky. She is placed near to spring, the sands of which are rare beads. Small house near by proves to be home of the sun. Woman hides until owner goes into sky to shine, then goes to
house and prepares food. Breaks up fish stick and cooks it. It becomes fish. Single grain of rice cooked in pot the size of a "rooster's egg" becomes sufficient for her meal. Goes to sleep in house. Sun returns and sees house which appears to be burning. Investigates and finds

appearance of flames comes from beautiful woman. Starts to prepare food, but awakens visitor. She vanishes. Each day sun finds food cooked for him. Gets big star to take his place in sky; returns home unexpectedly and surprises woman. They chew betel-nut together and tell their names. The quids turn to agate beads, showing them to be related, and thus suitable for marriage. Each night sun catches fish, but woman refuses it, and furnishes meat by cooking fish stick.

Woman decides to go with husband on daily journey through sky. When in middle of heavens she turns to oil. Husband puts her in a bottle
and drops it to earth. Bottle falls in woman's own town, where she resumes old form and tells false tale of her absence. She becomes ill, asks mother to prick her little finger. Mother does so and
child pops out. Child grows each time it is bathed. Girl refuses to divulge name of child's father. Parents decide to celebrate _balaua_ and invite all people. Send out oiled betel-nuts covered with gold to invite guests. When one refuses, nut begins to grow on his knee or prized animal until invitation is accepted. Child is placed by gate
of town in hopes it will recognize its father. Gives no sign until sun appears, then goes to it. Sun appears as round stone. Girl's
parents are angry because of her choice of a husband and send her away without good clothes or ornaments.

Sun, wife and child return home. Sun assumes form of man. They celebrate _balaua_ and invite all their relatives. Guests chew
betel-nuts and the quid of the sun goes to that of Pagbokasan, so it is known that the latter is his father. Parents of sun pay marriage price to girl's people.


2

Aponibolinayen who is very ill expresses a desire for mangoes which belong to Algaba of Dalaga. Her brother dispatches two men with presents to secure them. One carries an earring, the other an
egg. On way egg hatches and soon becomes a rooster which crows. They spread a belt on the water and ride across the river. When they bathe,
the drops of water from their bodies turn to agate beads. Find way
to Algaba's house by following the row of headbaskets, which reaches from the river to his dwelling. Defensive fence around the town is made up of boa constrictors, which sleep as they pass. Algaba seizes his spear and headaxe intending to kill the visitors, but weapons shed tears of oil. He takes other weapons, but they weep tears of blood. He then makes friends of the intruders. Learning their mission he refuses their gifts, but gets fruit and returns with them to their town. On
way he uses magic and causes the death of Aponibolinayen. He takes her in his arms and restores her to life. While she rests in his arms,

their rings exchange themselves. They chew betel-nuts and tell their names. The quids turn to agate beads and lie in rows. This is good sign. They marry and go to Algaba's town. They celebrate _Sayang_ and send betel-nuts to invite their relatives. When the guests cross the river, the drops of water which run from their bodies are agate beads and stones of the river are of gold. Guests all chew betel-nut and lay down their quids. By arrangement of quids they learn the true parents of Algaba. His brother-in-law wishes to marry his new found sister and offers an engagement present. An earring is put in a jar and it is at once filled with gold, but Algaba lifts his eyebrows and half of the gold vanishes. Another earring is put in jar, and it is
again full. Marriage price is paid later.


3

Aponitolau falls in love with girl he meets at the spring. They chew betel-nuts and tell their names. Girl gives false name and
vanishes. Aponitolau sends his mother to arrange for his marriage with the girl. She wears a hat which is like a bird, and it gives
her a bad sign, but she goes on. She crosses river by using her belt as a raft. The girl's parents agree to the match and price
to be paid. Girl accepts a little jar and agate beads as engagement present. When Aponitolau goes to claim bride, he finds he is betrothed to wrong girl. His parents celebrate _Sayang_ and invite many people, hoping to learn identity of girl at spring. She does not attend,
but Aponitolau finds her among betel-nuts brought him by the spirit helpers. They chew betel-nuts and learn they are related and that both possess magical power.

After their marriage Aponitolau goes to his field. There he keeps many kinds of jars which act like cattle. He feeds them with _lawed_ leaves and salt. While he is gone, the woman to whom he was first betrothed kills his new wife. He restores her to life. Takes her and her parents to the field to see him feed his jars.


4

A bird directs Aponitolau in his search for the maiden Asibowan. Girl furnishes him with food by cooking a fish stick. They have a daughter who grows one span each time she is bathed. Aponitolau discovers that his parents are searching for him, and determines to go home. Asibowan refuses to accompany him, but uses magic and transfers him and child to his town.

Aponitolau falls in love with girl he sees bathing, and his mother goes to consult her parents. She crosses river by using her belt as a

raft; when she bathes, the drops of water from her body become agate beads. The girl's people agree to the marriage and accept payment
for her.

Aponitolau and his bride celebrate _Sayang_ and send out betel-nuts to invite the guests. Asibowan refuses to attend, but a betel-nut grows on her pig until, out of pity, she consents.

After the ceremony the brother of the bride turns himself into a firefly and follows her new sister-in-law. Later he again assumes human form and secures her as his wife.


5

The mother of Gawigawen is well received when she goes to seek a wife for her son. The girl's mother furnishes fish by breaking and cooking the fish stick. A day is set for payment of the marriage
price. Guests assemble and dance. When bride dances she is so beautiful that sunshine vanishes, water from the river comes up into the town
and fish bite her heels. When she arrives at her husband's home, she finds sands and grass of spring are made up of beads, and the walk and place to set jars are large plates. Her husband cuts off head of
an old man and a new spring appears; his blood becomes beads and his body a great shade tree. Bride who has not yet seen the face of her husband is misled by evil tales of jealous women, and believes him
to be a monster. During night she turns to oil, slips through floor
and escapes. In jungle she meets rooster and monkey, who tell her she is mistaken and advise her to return home. She continues her way and finally reaches ocean. Is carried across by a carabao which at once informs its master of the girl's presence.

The master comes and meets girl. They chew betel-nut, and the quids turn to agate beads, so they marry.

They make _Sayang_ and send betel-nuts to summon relatives. Nuts grow on pet pigs of those who refuse to go.

Guests are carried across river by betel-nuts. During dance Gawigawen recognizes his lost wife and seizes her. Is speared to death by the
new husband, but is later brought back to life. In meantime the _alan_ (spirits) inform the parents of the new groom that he is their child (from menstrual blood). Parents repay Gawigawen for his lost bride, and also make payment to the girl's family.


6

The enemies of Aponibolinayen, thinking her without the protection of a brother, go to fight her. She glances off their spears with
her elbows. Her weapons kill all but Ginambo, who agrees to continue fight in one month.

Aponigawani has a similar experience with her enemies. A month later the two women meet as they go to continue the fight against their foes. They chew betel-nut, and quid of Aponibolinayen is covered with
gold and that of her companion becomes an agate bead. They agree to aid each other. Go to fight and are hard pressed by foes. Spirit helpers
go to summon aid of two men who turn out to be their brothers--were miscarriage children who had been raised by the _alan_. They go to aid sisters and kill so many people that pig troughs are floating in blood. One puts girls inside belt. They kill all the enemies and send their heads and plunder to the girls' homes. Brothers take girls to
their parents. Father and mother of Aponigawani celebrate _balaua_ and summon guests by means of oiled betel-nuts covered with gold. Guests chew betel-nut and spittle of children goes to that of parents,
so relationship is established. _Alan_ explain how they raised the miscarriage children. Heads of enemies are placed around the town and people dance for one month. Aponibolinayen marries brother of Aponigawani, who in turn marries the brother of her friend. Usual celebration and payments made. Relatives receive part of price paid for brides.


7

Aponitolau dons his best garments, takes his headaxe and spear, and goes to fight. When he reaches the spring which belongs to the ten-headed giant Giambolan, he kills all the girls, who are there getting water, and takes their heads. The giant in vain tries to
injure him. Spear and headaxe of Aponitolau kill the giant and all the people of his town and cut off their heads. Heads are sent in order to hero's town--giants' heads first, then men's, and finally women's. On return journey Aponitolau is followed by enemies. He commands his flint and steel to become a high bank which prevents his foes from following. Upon his arrival home a great celebration
is held; people dance, and skulls are placed around the town.


8

Aponitolau and his wife decide to celebrate _Sayang_, but he goes first to take the head of old man Ta-odan. He uses magic and arrives at once where foe lives. They fight and Ta-odan is beheaded. While Aponitolau is gone, an Ilocano comes to town and tries to visit
his wife. She at first refuses to see him, but when he returns a

needle she has dropped he puts a love charm on it. She then receives him into house. He remains until Aponitolau returns, then leaves so hastily he forgets his belt of gold. Woman hides belt in rice granary, but it reveals self by shining like fire. Aponitolau is suspicious
and determines to find owner. As guests arrive for the celebration, he tries belt on each until he finds right one. He cuts off his head and it flies at once to his wife's breasts and hangs there. She flees with her children. They reach town, which is guarded by two kinds of lightning, but they are asleep and let them pass. They sleep in the
_balaua_ and are discovered by the owner of the place, who turns out to be an afterbirth brother of the woman. He removes the head of the dead Ilocano from her breasts. Betel-nuts are sent to summon their father and mother, who are surprised to learn of their afterbirth
son. He returns home with them. Aponitolau fails to be reconciled to his faithless wife.


9

Ayo is hidden by her brother, but meets Dagdagalisit, who is fishing, and becomes pregnant. Child pops out between third and fourth fingers when Ayo has her hand pricked. Baby objects to first name; so is called Kanag. Milk from Ayo's breasts falls on her brother's legs while
she is lousing him, and he thus learns of the child. He determines to build a _balaua_ and invite all people, so he may learn who the father is. Sends out oiled betel-nuts to invite the guests and when one refuses to attend they grow on him or his pet pig. Dagdagalisit attends wearing only a clout of dried banana leaves. Brother of Ayo
is enraged at her match and sends her and the baby away with her poor husband. When they arrive at her new home, Ayo finds her husband
a handsome man who lives in a golden house, and whose spring has gravel of gold and agates. They summon their relatives to celebrate
_balaua_ with them. While Ayo's brother is dancing, her husband cuts off his head, but he is brought back to life. Ayo's husband pays her parents for her, but half the payment vanishes when her mother raises eyebrows. Husband again completes payment. They chew betel-nut and the quids of the children go to those of their parents. Dagdagalisit's parents learn he is a miscarriage child who was cared for by the _alan_ (spirits).


10

Aponibalagen uses magic to create a residence in the ocean for his sister. Takes her and companions there on backs of crocodiles. Returns home.

Ingiwan who is walking is confronted by high bank and is forced to

cross the ocean. Rides on his headaxe past the sleeping crocodiles which guard the maiden. Turns self into firefly and reaches
girl. Assumes own form and chews betel-nut with her. Omens are good. He returns home and soon maiden is troubled with intense itching between  her last fingers. She has place pricked, and baby boy pops out. Child grows one span at each bath. Aponibalagen learns of child when milk
from sister's breasts falls on him. He takes her home and prepares to celebrate _balaua_. Oiled betel-nuts are sent to summon guests. They grow on knees of those who refuse to attend. Ingiwan, poorly clad, appears at the ceremony and is recognized by the child but not by its mother. Girl's brother, in rage, sends her away with the stranger. He assumes own form and proves to be handsome and wealthy. When they celebrate _balaua_, they chew betel-nut and thus learn who are his
true parents.


11

When Aponitolau goes to visit his cousin, he finds him celebrating
_Sayang_. He is incensed because no invitation has reached him, so sits in shade of tree near the spring instead of going up to
the village. He finds the switch lost by Aponibolinayen. He is induced to attend the ceremony, where he meets with an old enemy, and they fight. The hawk sees the struggle and reports the death
of Aponitolau to his sister. She sends her companions to avenge the death and they kill many people before they learn that the hawk was mistaken. Aponitolau restores the slain to life. He agrees to fight
his enemies in two months. Before he goes to battle he summons the old men and women, and has them examine a pig's liver and gall. The omens are favorable. During the fight he becomes thirsty and his headaxe supplies him with water. He stops the slaughter of his enemies when
they agree to pay him one hundred valuable jars. The jars and heads of the slain take themselves to his home. A celebration is held over the heads, and skulls are exhibited around the town.

Aponitolau goes to return the switch of Aponibolinayen. They chew betel-nuts and tell their names. Their finger rings exchange
themselves, while their betel quids turn to agate beads and arrange themselves in lines--a sign of relationship. He cooks a stick and
it becomes a fish. The girl vanishes, but Aponitolau turns himself into a firefly and finds her. They remain together one night, then
he departs. On his way home he is seized by an immense bird which carries him to an island guarded by crocodiles. He is forced to marry a woman also captured by the bird.

Aponibolinayen gives birth to a child called Kanag. Child is delivered when an itching spot on mother's little finger is pricked. Kanag is kept in ignorance of father's fate until informed by an old woman

whom he has angered. He goes in search of his father. By using power of the betel-nut he is enabled to cross the water on the backs of sleeping crocodiles. He kills gigantic snakes and finally the bird
which had carried away his father. He takes father and the captive woman back home. Both women claim Aponitolau as husband. A test is held and Aponibolinayen wins.


12

Pregnant woman expresses desire for fruit of _bolnay_ tree. Her husband asks what it is she wishes, and she falsely tells him fish roe. He
uses magic to catch all fish in the river, and selects one with roe, releases others. She throws it to the dogs, and tells husband it is the liver of a deer she needs. He secures it, but when it likewise is fed to the dogs, he changes self into an ant and hides near wife until he learns her real wish. He secures the _bolnay_ fruit, but upon his return allows his sweethearts to get all but a small piece of it. His wife eats the bit left and desires more. She quarrels with
husband, who in rage drags her to the _bolnay_ tree and places her in a hole. Her child Kanag is born when an itching spot between her third and fourth fingers is pricked. Child grows with each bath. He agrees to go with other boys to fight. Plants a _lawed_ vine which is to keep his mother informed as to his condition. Child's father is with war party, but does not recognize son. It rains continually so party cannot cook; but the spirit helpers of child's mother feed him, and he shares food
with companions. They plan ambush near enemies' town. Kanag cuts off head of a pretty girl; his companions kill an old man and woman. They return home and hold dance around the heads. When Kanag dances, earth trembles, coconuts fall, water from river enters the town, and the fish
lap his feet. His father is jealous and cuts off his head. His mother sees _lawed_ vine wilt and knows of son's death. Informs her husband he has killed son. She restores Kanag to life and they leave. Husband tries to follow, but magic growth of thorns in trail prevents. He is
finally reconciled to his family and has former sweethearts killed.


13

A pregnant woman desires the fruit of an orange tree which belongs to the six-headed giant Gawigawen. Her husband asks her what it is she desires and she replies falsely; first, that she wishes a
certain fruit, then fish roe, and finally deer liver. He secures each, taking the roe and liver out of the fish and deer without
causing their death. Each of the articles makes the woman vomit, so her husband knows that she is not satisfied. Transforming self into a centipede he hides until he learns her real wish. Arms self and starts on perilous mission, but first plants _lawed_ vine in

house. By condition of vine wife is to know of his safety or death.

On way small dog bites him; he is tested by lightning and by thunder, and in each case gets a bad sign, but continues journey. Sails over ocean on his headaxe. Reaches cliff on which the town of the giant is placed, but is unable to scale it. Chief of spiders spins a web
on which he climbs. Giant promises him the fruit provided he eats whole carabao. Chiefs of ants and flies calls their followers and eat animal for him. Is allowed to pick fruit, but branches of tree are
sharp knives on which he is cut. He puts two of oranges on his spear and it flies away to his home. He dies and _lawed_ vine at his house withers. Giant uses his skin to cover end of drum, puts his hair on roof of house and places his head at gate of town. Wife gives birth to child, which grows one span each time it is bathed. While still very small child angers old woman who tells him of his father's fate. Child determines to go in search of father despite mother's protests. On journey he meets all the tests put to his father, but always receives good signs. Jumps over cliff father had climbed on the spider web. He challenges giant to fight and shows valor by refusing to be the first
to use his weapons. Giant unable to injure him, for he first becomes an ant, then vanishes. He throws his spear and it goes through giant, while his headaxe cuts off five of adversary's heads. Spares last head so it can tell him where to find his father. Collects father's
body together and restores it to life. _Lawed_ vine at their home revives. Father tries to cut off last head of giant, but fails;
son succeeds easily. They send the headaxes to kill all people in town. Slaughter is so great the father swims in blood, but son stands on it. Both return home and hold a great celebration over the heads.

The father's spittle is lapped up by a frog which becomes pregnant. Frog gives birth to baby girl which is carried away by
_anitos_. Girl is taught to make _dawak_ (the duties of a medium). Her half brother hears her, changes self into a bird and visits her in the sky. Is hidden in a caldron to keep _anitos_ from eating him. Tries
to persuade sister to return with him. She promises to go when their father celebrates _balaua_. The ceremony is held and girl attends. Is so beautiful all young men try to obtain her. They are so persistent that brother returns her to sky where she still lives and aids women who make _dawak_.


14

Aponitolau and his wife plant sugar cane, and by use of magic cause it to grow rapidly. The daughter of the big star sees the cane and desires to chew it. She goes with her companions and steals some of the cane, which they chew in the field. Aponitolau hides near by
and sees stars fall into the cane patch. He observes one take off

her dress and become a beautiful woman. He sits on her garment and refuses to give it up until they chew betel-nut together. The star
girl falls in love with him and compels him to return with her to
the sky. Five months later she has a child which comes out from space between her last two fingers. Aponitolau persuades her to allow him
to visit the earth. He fails to return at agreed time, and stars are sent to fetch him. He returns to the sky, but visits the earth again, eight months later. Earth wife bears him a child and they celebrate
_Sayang_. Sky child attends and later marries an earth maiden.


15

The wife of Aponitolau refuses to comb his hair; so he has another woman do it. She, in turn, refuses to cut betel-nut for him to
chew. While doing it for himself he is cut on his headaxe. The blood flows up into the air, and does not cease until he vanishes. Ceremonies made for him are without avail.

Aponitolau finds himself up in the air country. He meets maiden who is real cause of his plight. They live together and have a child which grows every time it is bathed. Aponitolau takes boy down to earth to visit his half brother. While there the tears of the mother above
fall on her son and hurt him. They celebrate _Sayang_ and the sky mother attends. After it is over the half brothers marry earth girls.



16

Ayo gives birth to three little pigs. Husband is ashamed, and while wife is at the spring he places the animals in a basket and hangs it in
a tree. Basket is found by old woman, Alokotan, who takes it home. Pigs soon turn into boys. When grown they go to court the girls while they spin. Ayo hears of their visits and goes where they are. Milk from her breasts goes to their mouths and thus proves her to be their mother.

They celebrate _balaua_. Ayo puts one grain of rice in each of twelve jars and they are at once filled with rice. Betel-nuts summon the
people to attend the ceremony. The old woman Alokotan attends and the whole story of the children's birth and change to human form comes out.


17

Dumalawi makes love to his father's concubines who openly show their preference for the son. The father plans to do away with

the youth. Gets him drunk and has storm carry him away. Dumalawi awakens in center of a large field. He causes betel trees to grow, then cuts the nuts into bits and scatters them on the ground. The pieces of nut become people who are his neighbors. He falls in love with daughter of one of these people and marries her. They celebrate
_Sayang_ and send out oiled betel-nuts to invite the guests. All guests, except Dumalawi's father, are carried across river on the back of a crocodile. Animal at first dives and refuses to carry him, but finally does so. All drink from a small jar which still remains a third full. Parents of Dumalawi pay the usual marriage price for girl,
but her mother insists on more. Has spider spin web around the town, and groom's mother has to cover it with golden beads.


18

While two women are bathing, blood from their bodies is carried
down stream. Two _alan_ secure the drops of blood and place them in dishes. Each drop turns into a baby boy. Boys go to fight and kill many people at the spring. They challenge a ten-headed giant. He is unable to injure them, but their weapons kill him and his neighbors. Heads of the victors take themselves to homes of the boys. A storm transports the giant's house. Boys trample on town of the enemy and it becomes like the ocean. They use magic and reach home in an instant. Hold celebration over the heads. Some guests bring beautiful girls hidden  in their belts. _Alan_ tell history of lads and restore them to their people. One of boys falls in love and his parents negotiate match
for him. The payment for the girl is valuable things sufficient to fill _balaua_ eighteen times, and other gifts in her new home.


19

Kanag is lead by his hunting dog to a small house in the jungle. Girl
who lives there hides, but appears on second day. They chew betel-nuts and tell their names. The quids turn to agate beads and lie in order, showing them to be related and hence suitable for marriage. They remain in forest two years and have children. Kanag uses magical power and transfers their house to his home town during night. Children see sugar cane which they wish to chew. Kanag goes to secure it, and while away his mother visits his wife and abuses her. She becomes ill and dies. Kanag tries to kill his mother, but fails. Puts body of wife
on a golden raft, places golden rooster on it and sets afloat on the river. Rooster crows and proclaims ownership whenever raft passes a village. Old woman Alokotan secures raft before it vanishes into the
hole where river ends. Revives the girl. Kanag and children reach home of Alokotan, and girl is restored to them. They celebrate _balaua_
and send betel-nuts covered with gold to invite relatives. When guests

arrive, they chew betel-nut and learn that Kanag and his wife are cousins. Kanag's parents pay marriage price, which is the _balaua_ filled nine times with jars. Girl's mother raises eyebrows and half
of jars vanish. _Balaua_ is again filled. Guests dance and feast. Part of marriage price given to guests.


20

Kanag's sweetheart desires the perfume of Baliwan and promises to fulfill his desires if he secures it for her. Gives him arm beads
from left arm in token of her sincerity.

Kanag and a companion set out on mission but are warned, first by a jar and later by a frog, not to continue. They disregard the advice and go
on. They reach the tree on which perfume grows, and Kanag climbs up and breaks off a branch. He turns into a great snake, and his companion
flees. Snake appears to Langa-ayan and proves its identity by the arm beads around its neck. She takes it to a magic well, the waters of which cause the snake skin to peel off, and the boy is restored
to his own form. Kanag marries Amau, and when they celebrate _balaua_ he returns the bracelet to his former sweetheart. His parents fill the
_balaua_ nine times with valuable articles, in payment for his bride.


21

Kanag is sent to watch the mountain rice, although it is well protected from wild pigs. Thinks parents do not care for him, is
despondent. Changes self into an omen bird and accompanies his father when he goes to fight. Father obeys signs and secures many heads from his enemies. He holds a great celebration over the heads, but Kanag refuses to attend. Decides to go down to earth to eat certain fruits. Parents order their spirit helpers to accompany him and
dissuade him if possible. They show him a beautiful girl with whom he
falls in love. He assumes human form and meets her. They chew betel-nut and tell their names. Signs are favorable for their marriage. His
parents agree to fill the _balaua_ nine times with various kinds of jars. They do so, but mother of girl raises eyebrows and half of jars vanish and have to be replaced. Girl's mother demands that golden beads be strung on a spider web which surrounds the town. This is done, but web does not break. Girl's mother hangs on thread which still holds. She then agrees to the marriage. Guests dance and then return home, each carrying some of the jars.


22

While Ligi is bathing in river his headband flies away and alights
on the skirt of a maiden who is bathing further down stream. The girl carries the headband home and soon finds herself pregnant. The child is born when she has the space between her third and fourth fingers pricked. With each bath the child grows a span and soon becomes so active that he hinders mother at her work. She decides to put him
with his father during daytime. Uses magic and causes people of the town to sleep while she places child beside father. Ligi awakes and finds child and his headband beside him. Child refuses to answer questions. Mother secures child at nightfall and repeats acts next day. Child is hidden, so she fails to get him. Ligi determines to
learn who mother of child is; sends out oiled betel-nuts covered with gold to invite all people to a _Sayang_. When summoned, the
mother refuses to go until a betel-nut grows on her knee and compels her. She goes disguised as a Negrito, but is recognized by the child who nurses from her while she is drunk. Ligi suspects her, and with
a knife cuts off her black skin. Learns she is child's mother and
marries her. He divorces his wife Aponibolinayen, who marries husband of Gimbagonan. The latter poisons her rival, but later restores her, when threatened by her husband.


23

A flock of birds offer to cut rice for Ligi. He agrees, and goes
home with a headache. Birds use magic so that the rice cutters work alone, and the tying bands tie themselves around the bundles. The birds each take one grain of rice in payment. They use magic again so that bundles of rice take themselves to the town. Ligi invites
them to a ceremony, and then follows them home. He sees them remove their feathers and become one girl. They go back to the celebration, where all chew betel-nut. Girl's quid goes to those of her parents,
from whom she had been stolen by the spirit Kaboniyan. The parents of Ligi pay the usual marriage price for the girl.


24

When the husband of Dolimaman pricks an itching spot between her third and fourth fingers, a baby boy pops out. Child who is called Kanag
grows each time he is bathed. While his wife is away the father puts child on a raft and sets it afloat on the river. Child is rescued by
old woman Alokotan, who is making a pool in which sick and dead are restored to health. Boy plays on nose flute which tells him about
his mother, but he does not understand. Plays on _bunkaka_ with same result. Mother who is searching her child passes by while he is

playing. Milk from her breasts goes to his mouth, and she recognizes him. They stay with old woman despite pleading of husband.


25

Awig sends his daughter to watch the mountain rice. She stays in a high watch house, but is found by tattooed Igorot, who cut her body in two and take her head. Father goes to seek her murderers, but first plants a _lawed_ vine in the house; by its condition his wife
is to know of his safety or death. He climbs high tree and looks in all directions. Sees Igorot, who are dancing around the head of his
daughter. He takes juice from the poison tree and goes to the dance, where he is mistaken for a companion. He serves liquor to others and poisons them. Takes daughter's head and starts home. Is followed by four enemies. Uses magic and causes _cogon_ field to burn, so foes are delayed. Repeats this several times and finally escapes. He joins head and body of his daughter, and old woman Alokotan puts saliva on cuts and revives her. Old woman places four sticks in the ground and they become a _balaua_. Betel-nuts are sent out to invite guests and many come. When the girl dances with her lover, the water comes up knee deep into the town and they have to stop. She is engaged and her lover's parents fill the _balaua_ three times with valuable gifts,
in payment for her. Half of gifts vanish, when her mother raises her eyebrows, and are replaced.

Her husband discovers the scar on her body where Igorot had cut her. Takes her to magic well where she bathes. Scars vanish.


26

The mother of Dumanagan negotiates marriage for her son with Aponibolinayen. Brother of girl puts her in his belt and carries
her to place where agreement is made. When they reach gate of town, young girls offer them cakes, in order to take away bad signs seen on road. Boy's parents pay for girl and they marry. She gives birth to son named Asbinan. He marries Asigowan, but his jealous concubines cause her to cut her finger and she dies. Her body is placed in a _tabalang_
on which a rooster sits, and is set afloat on the river. Crowing of the cock causes old woman Alokotan to rescue the corpse. She places it in her magic well and the girl is again alive and beautiful. She returns
to her husband as a bird; is caught by him and then resumes own form.


27

Baby of four months hears his father tell of his youthful

exploits. Decides to go on head hunt despite protests of parents. Is detained on his trip by young _alan_ girls. Finally reaches Igorot town and by means of magic kills all the people and takes their heads. Heads take themselves to his home. On way back he plays bamboo jew's harp and it summons his brothers to come and see him. They chew betel-nut and make sure of relationship. Continuing his journey, he is twice
lost. Finds an unknown sister hiding among _lawed_ vines. Puts her in his belt and carries her home. Upon his arrival a celebration is held and the new found brothers and sister, who had been stolen by _alan_, are restored to parents.


28

The mother and caretaker of Asbinan try to arrange for him to marry Dawinisan, but are refused. Asbinan goes to the girl's home and feigns sickness. Is cared for by the girl, who becomes infatuated with him and accepts his suit. His parents pay jars and gold--in the shape of deer--for her.


29

Asbinan refuses to eat until his father secures fish roe. He then demands Chinese dishes from the coast town of Vigan. When these are supplied, he eats, and then demands the love charm which his father used when a young man. He goes to the place where the maidens are spinning, and when one offers to give him a light for his pipe,
he blows smoke in her face. The charm acts and she becomes ill. He convinces her people that the only way she can be cured is by marrying him. Her parents accept payment for the girl.


30

Tolagan decides to visit certain places in Pangasinan. He rides on a pinto pony and carries rice cakes as provisions. At the spring in
Kaodanan he meets a beautiful maiden who warns him to return home, because the birds have given him a bad sign. He returns only to find that his wife has been stolen by the spirit Kaboniyan. He fails to
find her, but is comforted by winning a new bride (probably the girl of Kaodanan).


31

Two girls are adopted by a rich man, who treats them as his daughters, except that he does not offer them bracelets or rings. They dress as

men and go to see a jeweler. Two young men suspect and follow them, but they succeed in escaping and return home.

The spirit helpers of the youths take the forms of hawks and finally locate the maidens, whom they carry away. The youths plan to marry the girls and invite many friends to the celebration. Kanag and
his companion attend, become enamored with the brides and steal them. Upon chewing betel-nuts they learn that they are related,
so they are married.

II 32

The Ipogau who are trying to celebrate _Sayang_ make errors. The spirit Kadaklan and his wife instruct them to go and watch the _Sayang_ at Sayau. They do as bidden and after learning all the details return
home and perform the ceremony. The chief spirits are pleased and cause the lesser spirits to attend the ceremony when summoned by the medium. The sick improve.


33

The people who are conducting the _Dawak_ ceremony fail to do it properly. Kaboniyan (a spirit) goes down and instructs them. After that they are able to cure the sick.


34

The spirits of Dadaya notice that their feather headdresses have
lost their lustre. They place them on the house of some mortals, who at once become ill. The spirit Kaboniyan instructs them to make the
_Pala-an_ ceremony. They obey, the feathers regain their brightness and the people recover.


35

The father who is starting for a head-dance agrees to meet his wife
and baby at sun down. When he reaches the agreed spot, he finds only their hats; he looks down and sees them in the ground. He tries in
vain to get them out. The spirit Kaboniyan instructs him to perform

the _Ibal_ ceremony. He does so and receives his wife and child.


36

The spirit Inawen, who lives in the sea, sends her servants to spread sickness. They kill many people who fail to make the _Sangasang_ ceremony. A man is disturbed at night by barking of dogs, goes to door and meets a big spirit which has nine heads. Spirit tells him how to make the offering in _Sangasang_. He follows directions and spirits carry gift to their mistress. She mistakes the blood of a
rooster for that of human beings. Is displeased with the taste and orders spirits to stop killing.


37

The spirit Maganawan sends his servants to secure the blood of
a rooster mixed with rice. People see many snakes and birds near
gate of town. They make the ceremony _Sangasang_ and offer blood and rice. The servants of Maganawan carry the offering to him. He takes
it in his mouth and spits it out, and in the same way the sickness is removed from the mortals.


38

The people who are digging holes for house poles get a bad sign from the omen bird. They abandon the place and dig again. The deer gives a bad sign, then the snake, then different birds. They change locations many times, but at last ignore the signs and complete the house. The family are continually in trouble and are ill.

The spirit Kaboniyan goes to see the sick persons; he lets his spear drop through the house, and then tells them the cause of the trouble is that they have failed to make _Sangasang_. He instructs them what to do, and when they obey all become well.


39

The different parts of the house quarrel and each insists on its importance. At last they recognize how necessary each one is for the other and cease their wrangling; then the people who live in the house are again in good health.

40

The great spirit sees the people of Bisau celebrating the _Ubaya_ ceremony, and determines to reward them by increasing their worldly goods. He appears as a man and rewards them.


41

Dayapan, who has been ill for seven years, goes to bathe. The spirit Kaboniyan enters her body and instructs her how to perform healing ceremonies. He also teaches her how to plant and reap, and she in turn teaches the Tinguian. While she is bathing she ties a cock and dog by the water side. The dog eats the cock, and thus death comes into the world.


42

Girl who lacks certain organs is ashamed to marry. She is sent by her mother to cause lameness to people who pass. A man who falls victim to her magic is only cured when the girl instructs him how to make
the _Bawi_ ceremony.


43

The spirit Kaboniyan instructs a sick man to make offerings at the guardian stones. He does as bidden and becomes well. They perform ceremonies near the stones when they go to fight or celebrate _balaua_, and sometimes the spirit of the stones appears as a wild rooster, a
white cock, or a white dog. A man who defiles the stones becomes crazy.


44

Man sees a woman walking at night near the guardian stones. She refuses to talk and he cuts her in the thigh. She vanishes into the stones. Next day it is seen that one of the stones is cut. Man dies.


45

The old men of Lagayan see peculiarly shaped stones traveling down the river, accompanied by a band of blackbirds. They catch the stones and carry them to the gate of the village, where they have since remained
as guardians.

46

The spirit Ibwa visits a funeral and is given some of the juices,
coming from the dead body, to drink. Since then he always tries to eat the body of the dead unless prevented. He is accompanied by another evil spirit whose embrace causes the living to die.


47

A widow leaves the town before the period of mourning for her husband is past. The spirit appears first to the daughter-in-law and is fed
by her, then asks for his wife. He goes to the place where she is
watching the corn and sleeps with her. She apparently becomes pregnant, but fails to be delivered, and dies.


48

Two men agree to hunt carabao the following morning. In the night one dies, but the other not knowing this leaves the town and goes to the appointed place. He meets the spirit of the dead man, and only saves his life by running his horse all the way home.


49

A man and his wife are living near to their field when the husband dies. An evil spirit comes to the door, but is driven away by the wife with a headaxe. Several evil spirits attempt to gain entrance;
then the chief comes. He breaks down the door; he cuts off the dead man's ears and makes the woman chew them with him--like betel-nut. The signs are propitious. He changes the woman's two breasts into one,
in the center of her chest, and takes her home.


50

A man, whose brother has just died, goes to hunt. He begins to cut up the game when his brother's spirit appears. He feeds it, but food comes out of its anus as fast as it eats. He flees and is pursued
by the spirit until, by chance, he runs among _alangtin_ bushes. The spirit dislikes the bush and leaves.


51

The people fail to put the _banal_ vine and iron on the grave. An evil spirit notices the omission and steals the body.


52

A man goes to hunt his carabao in the mountains. He fails to plant branches at his head before he sleeps. A spirit expectorates on him, and he soon dies.


53

Two men who have to sleep in the mountains make beds of _sobosob_ leaves. In the night they hear the evil spirits come and express
a desire to get them. Spirits dislike the leaves, so do not molest the men.


54

Three hunters spend the night in the open. One covers himself with a red and yellow striped blanket. In the night two spirits come and think he is a little wild pig, and decide to eat him. The hunter
hears them and exchanges blankets with one of his companions. The companion is eaten, and hence the _kambaya_, or striped blanket,
is no longer used on the trail.


55

The spirit Bayon steals a beautiful girl and carries her to the sky,
where he changes her breasts into one and marries her. She drops her rice pounder to the earth, and thus her people learn of her fate. Both she and her husband still attend certain ceremonies.


56

A hunter is carried away by a great bird. He is placed in the nest with its young and aids in feeding them. When they are large, he holds on to them, and jumps safely to the ground. He goes to fight against his enemies. While he is gone his wife dies. Upon his return he sees her spirit driving a cow and two pigs. He follows her to the spirit's town and is hidden in a rice bin. When spirits try to get
him during the night, he repels them by throwing feathers. Feathers

become exhausted, and he is forced to return home.


57

A man encounters a large being, which, from its odor, he recognizes as the spirit of a dead man. He runs to get his friends, and they
find the spot trampled like a carabao wallow.


58

The dead wife of Baluga harvests his rice during the nighttime. He hides and captures her. They go together to the spirit town, in the ground, and secure her spirit which is kept in a green bamboo cup. As they are returning to the ground they are pursued, but Baluga cuts
the vine on which their pursuers are climbing. When they reach home, they hold a great celebration.


59

An _alan_ takes the afterbirth and causes it to become a real child named Sayen. Afterbirth child marries a servant, thinking he has married her mistress. Learns he is deceived, and causes death of his wife; then kills many people in the town of the girl who has deceived him. She gets him to desist, and after he revives some of the slain marries him. People of neighboring town are troubled by the _komau_, an evil spirit, who always causes the death of as many people as the hunters have secured deer. Sayen kills the _komau_. He fights with the great spirit Kaboniyan. Neither is able to overcome the other, so they become friends. They fight together against their enemies. Sayen often changes himself into a fish or chicken, and hides after a fight. This
is observed by people who set a trap and capture him. He is killed.


60

A man while in the woods hears the _alan_ near him. He feigns death and the spirits weep for him. They put gold and beads on the body. He springs up and seizes the offerings. They demand the return of one bead; he refuses, and the spirits burn his house.


61

Two men who have killed a wild pig desire fire. One goes to house of

an _alan_ and tries to secure it while the spirit sleeps. She awakes and goes with the man to the pig. Man carries liver of the animal back to the baby _alan_. He eats the liver and then throws the child into a
caldron of hot water. He tells his companion what he has done, and they climb a tree near the water. The _alan_ discovers their hiding place by seeing their reflection in the water. She climbs up, feet first, but
they cut the vine on which she is ascending, and she is killed. They go to her house and secure a jar of beads and a jar of gold.


62

The flat earth is made by the spirit Kadaklan. He also makes the moon and sun, which chase each other through the sky. The moon sometimes nearly catches the sun, but becomes weary too soon. The stars are stones, the lightning a dog.


63

A flood covers the land. Fire has no place to go, so enters bamboo, stones and iron. It still lives there and can be driven out by those who know how.



64

A man finds his rice field disturbed even though well fenced in. He hides and in middle of night sees some big animals fly into it. He seizes one and cuts off its wings. The animal turns out to be a mare which is pregnant and soon has male offspring. The place where the wings once grew are still to be seen on the legs of all horses.


65

A lazy man, who is planting corn, constantly leans on his planting stick. It becomes a tail and he turns into a monkey.


66

A boy is too lazy to strip sugar cane for himself. His mother in anger tells him to stick it up his anus. He does so and becomes a monkey.

67

A lazy girl pretends she does not know how to spin. Her companions, in disgust, tell her to stick the spinning stick up her anus. She
does so and at once changes into a monkey.


68

A war party are unable to cross a swollen river. They wish to become birds. Their wish is granted and they are changed to _kalau_, but
they are not able to resume the human forms. Those who wore the white mourning bands, now have white heads.


69

A mother puts a basket over her lazy son. When she raises it a bird flies away crying "sigakok" (lazy).


70

A young man who owns a rice field gets a new wife. He leaves her to harvest the crop. She is discouraged over the prospect and wishes to become a bird. Her wish is fulfilled, and she becomes a _kakok_.


71

The dog of Ganoway chases a deer into a cave. The hunter follows and in the darkness brushes against shrubs which tinkle. He breaks off some branches. Cave opens again on the river bank, and he finds his dog and the dead deer at the entrance. He sees that fruits on
the branches he carries are agate beads. Returns, but fails to find more. His townspeople go with him to seek the wonderful tree, but part of the cave is closed by the spirit Kaboniyan who owns it.


72

The jar Magsawi formerly talked softly, but now is cracked and cannot be understood. In the first times the dogs of some hunters chased the jar and the men followed, thinking it to be a deer. The jar eluded
them until a voice from the sky informed the pursuers how it might be caught. The blood of a pig was offered, as the voice directed, and the jar was captured.

73

The sun and moon fight. Sun throws sand in moon's face and makes the dark spots which are still visible.


74

A man who went with a war party is away so long that he does not recognize his daughter when he returns. He embraces her when she meets him at the town gate. In shame she changes herself into a coconut tree.


75

Two flying snakes once guarded the gap in the mountains by which the Abra river reaches the sea. Two brave men attack them with banana trunks. Their wings stick in the banana trees and they are easily
killed. The men are rewarded with gold made in the shape of deer and horses.


76

A man named Tagapen, of Ilocos Norte, with his wife and child goes up the Abra river on a raft. They stop at various towns and Tagapen goes up to each while his wife comforts the child. They finally reached Patok where they go to live in the _balaua_. They remain there teaching the people many songs.

III 77

A turtle and a monkey go to plant bananas. The turtle places his in the ground, but the monkey hangs his in a tree. Soon the tree of the turtle has ripe fruit, but the monkey has none. Turtle asks monkey to climb and secure the fruit. Monkey eats all but one banana, then sleeps in the tree. Turtle plants sharp shells around the tree and then frightens monkey which falls and is killed. Turtle sells his
flesh to other monkey and then chides them because they eat their kind. Monkeys catch turtle and threaten first to cut and then to
burn him. He deceives them by showing them marks on his body. They tie weight to him and throw him into the water. He reappears with a

fish. Monkeys try to imitate him and are drowned.


78

A turtle and lizard go to steal ginger. The lizard talks so loudly he attracts the attention of the owner. The turtle hides, but the
lizard runs and is pursued by the man. The turtle enters the house and hides under a coconut shell. When the man sits on the shell the turtle calls. He cannot discover source of noise and thinks it comes from his testicles. He strikes these with a stone and dies. The turtle and the lizard see a bees' nest. The lizard hastens to get it and is stung. They see a bird snare and turtle claims it as the necklace of his father. Lizard runs to get it but is caught and killed.


79

A little bird calls many times for a boy to catch it. He snares it and places it in a jar. Lad's grandmother eats the bird. He discovers the
theft, leaves home and gets a big stone to swallow him. The grandmother gets horses to kick the stone, carabao to hook it, and chickens to
peck it, but without result. When thunder and her friends also fail, she goes home without her grandson.


80

A frog, which is attached to a hook, lures a fish so that it is caught.


81

The five fingers are brothers. The thumb goes to get bamboo. He tries to kiss the bamboo and his nose sticks. One by one the others go in search of the missing but are captured in the same manner. The little finger, which alone remains free, releases the others.


82

A carabao and a shell agree to race along the river. The carabao runs swiftly, then pauses to call "shell." Another shell replies and the carabao continues running. This is repeated many times until at last the carabao falls dead.

83

A crab and a shell go to get wood. The crab pulls the rope on his load so tightly that he breaks his big legs and dies. The shell finds his friend dead and cries until he belches his own body out of the shell and he dies.


84

A mosquito tells a man he would eat him were it not for his ears.


85

A messenger goes to negotiate a marriage. When he arrives he sees the people nodding their heads as they suck meat out of shells. He returns home without stating his mission, but reports an acceptance. Girl's people are surprised when people come for _pakalon_.


86

A man sees people eating bamboo shoots, and is told they are eating
_pagaldanen_. He understands them to say _aldan_--"ladder," so he goes home and cooks his bamboo ladder. Is ridiculed by his friends.


87

A man with heavily laden horse asks the length of a certain trip. Boy replies, "If you go slowly, very soon; if you go fast, all day." The man hurries so that coconuts keep falling off the load and have to be replaced. It is dark when he arrives.


88

A woman eats the fruit belonging to crocodile and throws away the rind. Crocodile sees her tooth marks and recognizes the offender. He demands that she be given him to eat. Her people agree, but first feed him a hot iron. He swallows it and dies.


89

A lazy man goes to cut bamboo, and a cat steals his cooked rice. He catches the cat in a trap and takes it home. It becomes a fighting

cock. The man starts for a cock fight, and on the way is joined by a crocodile, a deer, a mound of earth and a monkey. The rooster kills all the other birds at the fight, then the crocodile wins a diving contest, the deer a race, the mound of earth a wrestling match, and
the monkey excels all in climbing. The man wins much money in wagers and buys a good house.


90

A spirit lets a man take his _poncho_ which makes him invisible. He goes to his wife who recognizes his voice and thinks him dead. He takes off _poncho_ and appears before her.


91

A fisherman is seized by a big bird which carries him to its nest. The small birds try to eat him, but he seizes one in each hand and jumps from the tree. He reaches the ground unhurt and returns home.






PH I LIPPI NE (TAGALOG) SUPERSTITIONS.

I.	ANCIENT SUPE RSTITI ONS.
(THE following account is from " La Practica del Ministerio,” by Padre Tomas Ortiz, Order of Augustinians, Manila, I y*3 Literal quotation  by  W.  E.  Retana,  in  appendix  to  " Estadismo   de  las Islas
Filipinas.”  The  original  work is very rare, only one  copy  known  to  be in existence.)
Op. cit. chap. i, sec. iv, pp. i i—i $, NO. 3 I. * Because many natives, and especially those of the provinces distant from Manila, are much inclined to the nonos (literally, grandparents or ancestors, fi  U.), or genii, maganitos (literally, idols, fi C. ), superstitions, spells, incan- tations, and witchcraft, which have, as also the witches, m uch  diver-  sity ; and on that  account  they  are  called  oy  diverse  names,  which are according to the diverse offices attributed to them.
“ It is necessary that the Fathers should not only preach, argue, reprove, and make hideous such pestilential abuses, but that they should be very assiduous, solicitous, and careful to discover the per- sons infected with this mortal venom, and use against them the neces- sary remedy.”
TO. §2. “There are many abuses, or, as they call them, ugales, to which the natives are habituated, contrary to our  Holy  Faith  and  to good  order, and  among others the following.	The first is the worship of nonos, concerning which it should be stated that the term  ‘ nono means not only ' grandparent ' but also serves  as a term  of  respect  to old  people  and  genii.	These the Indians have under the  name  of nono  as   the   Chinese   have  the   same  under   the name  of	spirits,’ and as the Romans had them  under  the  name of  gods,  which  others call   Lares  and  Penates.		In   honor  of  the		said genii, or  nonos, the  Indians  execute  many  and   frequent   idolatries,   as  for  instance to beg for license, mercy, aid, that they  should  do  no  harm  to  them nor   be   their enemies,  etc.		They do this on many occasions and among   others  the  following.	When  they  wish  to  take  a  flower, or fruit of a tree, they ask permission of the nono or  genius  to  be allowed  to  take it.	When they pass by any field, stream, slough or creek, great trees, thickets,  or  other  parts,  they  ask  passage  and license  from the  nonos.		When they are obliged to cut a tree, or to disregard the things or  ceremonies  which  they  imagine  are agreeable to the nonos, they beg pardon of them,  and  excuse  themselves  by saying the priest ordered it, and that it is not voluntary with  them  to want  in  respect,  or  to  go  against   the  wishes  of the   nonos.		When they  fall   sick   with   the    disease  which they  call	pamawe,		which they attribute to the genii or nonos, they petition for health and

I 2	four rat of H mexican F'olk-Lore.
offer food, which on this occasion, as well as many others, they place in the fields, thickets, creeks, at the foot of a large tree, etc., though they endeavor to hide their actions by saying that they are trying the land. This species of idolatry is very fixed, extended, and  ancient with the I ndians, and for this reason it is very necessary that the ministering priests should give much care and force to extirpate it, neither lacking cliligence nor labor till it is annihilated.”
No. 33. ' The second  is  very  ordinarily  believed  by  the  Indians, that the souls of the  dead  return  to the  house  the  third  day  to  visit the family or to assist  at  the  feast, and  by  consequence  to assist  at  the ceremony of ’ tibao,’ which they hide and cover by saying that they are gathered in the house of the  dead  to  recite  the  Rosary ;  and  if they are told that  they  can  recite  it in  the  church, they clo  not  wish  to do it, because what they do is not what  they  pretend  to  do.  Be- cause of this, the funeral being finished, the minister should  prevent their gathering in the house of the dead, and least of  all on  the  third  day on any pretext.
On the fourth day, in consequence of the said ceremony of  tibao or of their own evil inclinations, they light candles, awaiting the appear- ance of the soul of the dead ; they  spread  a  mat  and  scatter  ashes upon it, that upon it may be printed the footsteps or marks of the soul, that by them they may know whether or not the soul came. They place also a basin of water at the door, where at the  coming of  the  soul, it may wash  its feet.  It  does not appear, though the  knowledge is much  to be desired, whcther these things of the  genii,  or  nonos,  and  the dead, are taken from the Chinese or not, or they are make up of  this thing and that thing, but it requires an efficacious remedy.” '
NO. 34 “ The Tig balang, which some call phantasm and others goblin, seems to be a genius or devil, which appears to  them  in  the form of a negro, or of an old man, or  as  they say  in  the  form  of  a very little old man, or in the form of a horse, a monster, etc. And
they hold him in so much fear that they come to form  friendships with him, and they give the rosary to him and receive of him super- stitious things, such as hair, herbs, stones, and other things for the accomplishment of prodigious things, and they are guided by him in certain of their operations.”
No. 3 $. “ The patianak, which some call goblin (if it be not fiction, dream, or their imagination), is the genius or  devil  who  is  accus- tomed to annoy them and also with many others, who, losing the faith, are approached by him, and either troubled or put into subjection.
' The custom of placing  a clean  vessel  of  water for  the  use  of  the  soul  on  the third day after death is nct yet  entirely  obsolete  in  NJ indoro.  Votive  offerings  of food, such as boiled  rice,  are  made  on  All  Souls’  Day  in  at  least  one  church  in  that province, in the absence of the curate.

Pñil@pine ( Fagalog) Sn;ferstlftOn-s	93
"	To him they attribute the ill result  of  childbirth,  and  say  that  to  do them damage, or  to  cause  them  to go astray,  he  places  himself  in a tree, or hides in any place near the house of the woman who is in childbirth, and there sings after the manner of  those who  go  wander- ing, etc. To hinder the evil work of the patianak,  they  make  them- selves naked,  and  arm  themselves  with  cuirass,  bolo,  lance,  and  other arms, and in this  manner  place  themselves  on  the  ridgepole of the roof, and also under the house, where they give many blows and thrusts with the bolo, and make many gestures and motions ordered  to the  same  intent.  Others  are  accustomed  to  change  the  woman  who is in labor to another house, in order to impede the  said  damage,  because they say her house has a patianak.”
NO. 36. " They attribute among other things the deaths of children to the patianak, as also to the usanga (asuang).  They  say  that  the bird called tictic is the procuress of the witch called asuang, which, flying, passes by the houses of  those who  are in childbirth, and  that it places itself on the roof of a neighboring house, and from thence extends its tongue in the form of  a thread  that  passes into the body  of the child, and that with it he draws out the  bowels  of  the  child and kills it. At other  times they say that  it  assumes  the form of  a bog or cat or of a cockroach, which places itself under the sleeping mat and executes the said manmuvre.
“ They also attribute losing their way to the patianak, and to find it they strip off their clothes, and with this incantation they say that the road may be found because the patianak is afraid and can no longer lead them astray.”

II.	THE ASUAN G.
The asuang is often confounded by Europeans  with  ghosts  and devils. It is neither devil nor ghost, but human, and is possessed  of certain miraculous powers acquired by eating human liver. In certain ways it is a compound of both vampire and  ghoul, for  it  may fly like the vampire and live on human  flesh  drawn  from  the living,  and  on the other hand it may feast on the  flesh  of  those  who  have  died natural deaths, like the ghoul. It  has  the  power  to  change  its  cor- poral form from human to bat-like by  a  process  of  division  at  the waist line, the lower limbs and lower part  of  the  trunk  remaining behind while the upper part grows wings and flies away.
It may also take the form  of  a dog,  cat, cayman,  or other  animal, and in any form possesses the power  of  causing  sickness  or death by its spells. In one of the stories of the asuang of Baco,  the asuang compels the change of his food into a shape less  abhorrent to others. The   defences   against   asuangs  are  several.	Garlic held in the hand is an effectual shield against their malign power. Ashes placed
VOL.  XIX.  — NO. }4.	* 3



Pñili’ppine (Fagalog) SupersIiIions.	i g3
The tianak or patianak is another dreaded and malevolent being cognate to the asuang, which is said to be the soul of an  unbaptized child, living again in a new body in the forest,  sucking  the  blood  of any unfortunate woman whom it may find asleep, or who, in compas- sion, may give it suck.  By  Padre  Ortiz, the  Spanish  word  “duende,” or  goblin,  is  used  as  a  synonym   for  patianak.   The  whole  subject is confused and needs further elucidation. It is likely that a  more  detailed study would  find  the fundamental  idea overlaid  with  a mass of local tradition.

I.	THE CAYMAN ASUANG.
A boat loaded with rattan was once passing  down  the  Malaylay River going to Baco, on the island of Mindoro. The crew was com- posed of a father and  three sons.  As  they  proceeded  on  their  way they were hailed by a stranger on the  bank,  who desired  to go into  Bacñ with them, but they told him,  “ No,  it cannot  be,  because the  boat is so full already  that  it  is  almost  sinking.”  After  some  little talk the stranger and the boat passed on in the direction of Baco.
but just beyond the next bend  a cayman  swam  out  to the boat and with a blow of his tail knocked the father out into the water, where  he  disappeared.  The stranger  was also seen no more.   One of the sons wished to go in pursuit of  his father, but was restrained by the others, who said that their father’s life was lost and that it would do no good to risk or lose others in finding his body.
After a while they went into Bacñ and  entered  a  house,  which turned out to be the house of  the  stranger  who  had  preceded  them into  the  village.  There  they  saw  their  father’s  bolo   which   had been tied to his waist when the  cayman  knocked  him  overboard. Seeing this, they glanced quietly at each other,  and  as soon  as pos- sible left Bacñ, for certainly this stranger was asuang, and BacS is a village of asuangs.

2. THE BABY TORMENTED BY ASUANG.'
“ My baby was about eighteen months old, and we lived up in the other end of town in a house close to the woods. The  poor  little thiny was taken sick and we suspected it was the work of an asuang, so we set a watch outside. My  brother-in-law went  out  into  the yard, armed with the tail of a sting-ray and a heavy rattan cane.
"	He watched for some time  until it became quite dark, although he could see. Suddenly an old woman with a shawl over her head flew over the fence, and while he looked at her she changed into a large cat, a  pig, and  finally a  turkey.  The  turkey reached its head up between the bamboo slats and began to eat.
' This story was related by a young Tagalog woman of her living child.

iQ6 journal of H mexican Fold-Lore.
"	The guard called to us, but we could not hear, and the  asuang finding herself discovered, flew away, but to this day the  child  bears  the scar of the asuang's bite.”
(As it is almost impossible under severe penalties to keep Tagalog soldiers on post awake at night, a natural explanation of  the  story readily presents itself.)

j. CAPTURE OF ASUANGS.
There was once a very brave man who was not afraid of asuangs, and as there were many bewitched by them  in  the  pueblo,  he determined  to save  them.  So he went  into a house alone,  and  taking a bolo and  the whip-like tail of the stin g-ray and some garlic and ashes,  he wrapped himself up in a sleeping mat as though  dead, and  lay  very still. The virtue  of  these  weapons  is  this,  that  with  the  bolo  one may slay, with the sting-ray’s tail one may whip  most  terribly,  and with the ashes one may do mischief to the asuang, while  it is power-  less to harm one who carries garlic or has ashes in his hand.
Soon the asuangs came to the house, and after a discussion two of them carried the man wrapped in the mat through the air  to  the beach, and there laid him down. Then the man came out of his wrappings and stood up. He took his whip and began to beat them, driving them into the  water.  He  caught  one of  them, and  taking her forefinger in his mouth, bit it through the nail.  Now this  is  a very terrible thing to do to an asuang, and she surrendered. He likewise caught the other and took them before the alcalde. The alcalde examined them, and they confessed that they were asuangs, and told the names of those whom they had bewitched.
The alcalde then compelled them to cure all those wh om they had bewitched, and told them that if they ever did  ill  to any  one again,  they would be put to death.
Ever afterward they led most exemplary lives and became famous for their skilful care of the sick.

4- ASUANGS AS FISHERMEN.
A poor married couple were bewailing the fact  that  they  had  no meat to eat with their  boiled  rice, and  could  neither  buy  nor  find  any.
As they talked a fine piece  of  meat  came  flying  through  the  air and stopped just between them. " Ah, thanks be to God,” said the woman,  “ we  shall  have  meat  for  our  suppers.”   So they  ate freely of it, and only when they finished did  they  see  that  with  the  meat they had also swallowed strony cords,  like fi shin g lines.  Then  they felt themselves caught up and flying through  the  air.  thither  they were being carried they had no idea, but at last they passed under a

Philifipine   (  Tagalog)   Suf›erslitions.	I /
bridge, and the man, by catching hold  of  the  woman  and  of  the bridge, managed to resist the asuang  till  the  lines  pulled  loose and they were saved, but the woman lost an arm, eaten off by the asuang while they were being carried through the air.

$. THE ASUANG WHO DIED OF SHAME.
There was once a poor widow who had two children.  She  used always to tell them never to forget to pray for the repose of her soul  when she should die. At last she  died,  and  the  oldest  girl,  then verging on womanhood, tried to get the  money  to  bury  her,  but  no one helped her, till a young man came and  said  that  if  she  would marry him  he  would  bury  her  mother.  She  consented  to  this  and the woman was buried, and although she did not know it,  the  young man wished the body for himself, for he was asuang.
After a suitable time they were  married,  but  the  young  wife was not happy, however, for  her  husband  was  never  at  home at  night. One  night  she   watched   him   and   he flew  away.	She was greatly frightened   and  resolved   to  eat   nothing  more  in the  house.	When the morning came the  young  man  returned  carrying much  meat, which he said came from a wild boar  he  had  killed  in  the  woods. This he prepared and told her to eat, but she begged not  to be com- pelled to eat, because she was sick. “ Vou must  eat,” said the young man, “ or  I  will eat you.”	So she pretended to eat, but dropped  the bits of meat through the floor. This the asuang  saw, and threatened again  with  being  eaten  herself,  through  fear  she  ate the  meat.		She did not become asuang, however, as she did not eat any of the liver.
The next  night  when  the  asuang  went  away,  she  went  to a chief of the village and begged  to  be  protected  from  her  husband.  The chief promised to keep her from  harm,  and  she  remained  in  his  house. The next morning her  husband  came in  search  of  her  and found her in the house of the chief, who said to  him, “ Your wife has  left you because of your wickedness, and will never live with  you as long as you continue your evil ways.”
The asuang raised his downcast eyes for a moment, looked  at  his wife, and fell down dead.

6. THE FOUR ASUANGS OF CAPIZ.
There was once a commandant who made a voyage to Capiz in a little boat having six sailors and a captain.  When they arrived at Capiz the commandant was put to lodge in one house, and the boat- men in another.   Now the  house where the sailors were  lodged was a very grand one, beautifully furnished, and large. The commandant was invited there for the evening meal, by the owner of the house, who was a widow with three lovely daughters. The commandant,



                '99

J. THE WOMAN WHO BECAME AN ASU AN G.
There was once a man who was an asuang, who married  a woman who was not. The two  lived  in  a  house  with  the  woman’s  mother and their own child, a baby g’izI. The man was absent from  home a  great deal, and the woman grew jealous lest she had  a rival.  So one  day, leaving the baby with her mother,  she went  out  to  the  farm  in  the country to look for the man.
When she came to the house she could not find the man,  but within, swung from the rafters, z'as a great deal of meat. Being hungry, she was tempted to try the  meat, and  finding it savory, ate on. After a while she ate a piece of the liver, and her nature chan ged at once and she became an asuang. After waiting a while she re- turned home, and finding her mother gone about her work, she took her own child and began to eat the flesh of its arm.  The grand- mother heard the child’s  cries, and  for a while paid no attention  to it, but finally returned just in time to see its mother  running away, and the child with its arm eaten off.
The poor old woman could think of nothing else than that her daughter had gone mad, but she buried the child and went to the chiefs of the village for protection.  The  asuang went  to the forest and joined her husband, and together they went to another village.
In this village they did very well for a while, till the neighbors began to notice that they never slept, but in and out, up and down, night and day, they were always stirring. So one of the neighbors learned in the ways of the asuangs went to the house one night and there found the bodies perfect below the waist, but with all above missing, a condition which betokens the asuang. So he changed the one for the other, and placed ashes on the surface where the missing parts should join, and set himself to watch. Soon they returned, but because of what had been done, were not able to resume their normal state. They flew about within and without  the  house crying,  “ Woe is me, z oe is thee, if the dawn find us thus.” Then they flew away again, and as soon as they were gone the  man undid  his work.  Just as dawn was breaking, they came again, and finding all straight and ready, they became human again ; but they were so  ashamed  at being found out that they went away and never again troubled that village.
.  THE  ASUANG   OF   BAC  .
I once knew a woman of Calapan who was married to a man of Baco. They had one child, but when it reached the age of two  or three years it died. The grandmother of the  child  went  to  the funeral and remained afterwards.
That night the father said he would go fishing, and took his line as


if he were going fishing, but instead  he  went  to  the  cemetery,  and dug up the body of the child, which he carried down to the seashore. There in the dark he began to wash it with sea water, saying as he washed   “ fish.”   Washing  and   repeating   the  word  over  and  over, at last it became a great fish z hich he carried home. But his mo- ther-in-law had been a spectator of all his movements,  and  when  he laid the fish on the table she  took  up a  sharp  knife  and  threatene‹l him with death unlcss he  buried  it  again,  telling  him  that  she knew he was an asuang. After he had placed the child again in  its  dese-  crated grave, he was driven from the village, and his wife returned to  her father, and the asuang was heard of no more.

.    THE     T I ANAK.
There lived once upon a time a young couple who  had  been  mar- ried only a  month.  Said  the  husband,  “ Let  us go and  plant  palay '  in the country so  that  we shall  have  plenty  to eat.”  So they  started for the palay field and the road ran through the forest.
There they saw a baby sitting on the root of a tree and crying piteously. The soft-hearted woman said to her husband, ' Can’t we take the poor little thing? Perhaps it will  live, and  it is so pretty.”  So the husband agreed and they went on. The3 stopped to rest, and the woman said to her husband, “ There is no milk in my breast, but perhaps it will quiet the child if I give it suck.”
She nestled the little thing close up to her bosom and gave it the breast, but as soon as the baby’s lips touched her, she cried out,
A i-nJ rump fi ioi, 2 it is biting me,” but her  husband  thought  it  only a jest, for  how could  such  a  thing  bite ?  After  a  few  minutes  she lay very still, and her husband  thought  her  asleep, and  went  away for a short time. When  he  returned  he  saw  that  she  was  dead,  and flying through  the  forest,  he  could  see  the  baby !  Then  he  was sorry that he had not killed the  baby instead  of  showing it  kindness, for surely it was a tianak.

II I.   THE   TIK-BALAN.'
The belief in a monster called the tik-baIan is quite widely dis- seminated in  the  Philippines,  notably among Tagalogs  and  Bisayans. It is not found among  the  primitive  Man gyans  of  Mindoro,  prob- ably because living in the dense forests said to be  his  haunts,  they know that no such thing is to be found there.
la Gironiere speaks of one of  his Tagalog  companions  on a  hunt- ing expedition having been afraid both to enter a cave, and  to sleep under a balete tree. He defines the tik-balan as an evil spirit, and!
'   Palay, rice.	• “ O my God ! ”
^ Also written ldc-bulan, UA-balang, ti’g-balang.

Phillf›pine (Eagalog) Superstitions.	201
mentions the fact that  in  passing  a  balete  tree,  a Tagalog  always says, “ )“abi, po, Nono,” as though  requesting  permission  of a supe- rior to pass.	This custom is still kept  up,  though  it  is probable that the address is now directed to an  anito  rather  than  to the tik-balan. The tik-bulan is variously described, usually as  being of  super- human  stature,  at  least  twelve  feet,  and  that  it  has  horse's hoofs on a manlike body.	It is said by some to  have  great saucer-like  eyes, and  by others  to  have  a long face  like a horse.	It has long stream- ing hair, and the best way  to  catch  it  is  to  drive  heavy  nails into a tree  which  it  visits,  and  thus  entangle  its hair.		The tik-balan lives in caves in the densest forest, whence it makes forays for  the  pro- curing  of  human  flesh.	It is malevolent, and is often said to be possessed of magical  powers,  but  is  apparently  very stupid  and easily  outwitted.		If captured it becomes a faithful and tractable ser- vant  for farm  work,  and  never  permits  stray  animals  nor  wild beasts
to molest the crops.
The tik-bal an has often been seen, according to their own ac- counts, by those who have related these stories.
Akin to the tik-balan is the oko.  It  is  man like  in shape, but has an immensely long upper lip that may be made to cover the entire face. It associates with the tik-balan, but has no such supernatural powers. It is, however, fond of human flesh. The oko is called Maomao by Tagalogs, but as the only tale in the collection which refers to them is of Bisayan origin, the Bisayan name oko has been preferred.
Cognate to the oko superstition is the idea entertained by the Tagalog and Bisayan Christians of southern M indoro, that their Mangyan neighbors rise the third day after death, and in a form like that of the oko haunt the scenes they have known in life. It  is a revived body and not a spirit which walks, and if it can be led to the sea, it dies forever when it touches the water.
Another  monster, but  a benign  one, is  the  kap e.  It  is  gigantic in size, being even larger than the tik-balan, and is perfectly black. The name and description suggest an Arabic  source (from  A‹sJr), and it is possible that further investigation will show that this superstition is derived from the Moros, with whom the writer has no acquaintance. While several natives with whom the writer talked claimed to have seen the kapre, they were unable to give any details that would have thrown light on the subject of the  origin  of  the myth, or accounts of things done by it, beyond the mere fact of its appearance.
I.	THE T I K-BADAN.
A man and his wife wished to  go to visit  the  parents of  the  wife, who  lived   in  the  country  on  the  other side  of the  forest.	They did

2O2	fiourital of American F'olA-Lore.
not  know  the  road  very  well   and  were  soon   lost.   Then  the  woods on  each  side  began  to  crash  and  the  tree-tops  to   move,   although there  was  no  wind.    “ What   is  that  ? ”  asked   the  woman,  trembling. “ Surely  it  is  the  tik-balan,”   answered   the  man.   Drawing   his   bolo, he struck  upon  the  ground,  and  bade  all  evil  spirits  begone  in  the name of God.
A great voice sounded from one site of the road, “ You will never reach your destination,” and from the other side responded another great voice, “ You will die here in the woods.” At  last  night  came on and they were more afraid than ever, but whenever  the  voice came  too  close  they  recited  the   prayer  against  devils  and  three “ Our Fathers,” and the man struck upon the ground with his  bolo and bade the devils begone again.
On the evening of the second day,  having wandered  for two  days and a night on a journey that  should  have  taken  only a few  hours,  they arrived at the farm whit her they were bound. They were  so fatigued that  they were only able to say that  they  had  been followed  by tik-balans, when they fell as dead.
The father of the woman knew what to  do,  however,  and  quickly placed crosses at the corners  of  the  yard  and  in  the  centre,  and sprinkled salt on the roof of the house.
Seeing themselves baffled, the tik-balans crashed off through the woods and troubled them no more, but it was a long time before the man and woman recovered from the fright and fatigue of their ter- rible journey in the forest.

2. THE TIK-BA LAN.
“ When I was a young woman I went  with  the family  to the coun-  try to plant crops.  My father  went  to  town  to get  some  provisions and my mother, myself, and the  little children were left in the  house. We lay down to sleep in the night  without  much  fear,  but  my  mo- ther heard a noise of  scraping on  the  walls of  the  n ipa  house.  Ris- ing quickly she looked out  and  there  saw a gigantic  shape.  H astily she woke the children, and calling  me  and seizing her crucifix,  she went to the window and waved it. I  also  looked  out  and  saw  a hideous shape, as of the body of a man with the  legs and  feet of  a  house and with a horrible  horse-like face.  She  waved  her  cross, and the tik-balan ran  off  in the  moonlight,  taller  than  the  house.  The  next day we found its tracks, close  to the  house,  like horse’s  tracks, and the woods were broken down where it had passed  through,  run- ning away from the blessed crucifix which deprived  it of  all its  power to do harm. Surely if she had  not  waved  the  cross one of  the  chil- dren would have been stolen.”

Philif›pine (Tagalog)  Superstitions.	2O$

3 THE RESCUED WOMAN.
(Tik-balan and okos. A Bisayan tale.)
A man once lived with his wife in a little house in the woods. Their principal crop was maize, and for a long time they prospered. But something began to  take  the maize.  One morning the  farmer found  that five stalks were gone, and to a Bisayan tarmer  it  is  a  serious matter to lose a few stalks of maize.  Then  the next  night  he lost ten  and  another  night  fifty.  So  he  set  a  watch  but  saw  nothing.   He was greatly worried by this, but as he had business in town  he went away.
While he was away a tik-balan came to the house and  took  the woman who was left behind, and  tying  her  into  a  bundle,  threw  her up on his shoulder and carried her away to a cave in the mountains. Th.ere he went down a steep ladder into a large room full of  okos, which, as  soon  as  they  smelled  a  human  being,  cried  aloud  in  joy, " Here is live human flesh.”  They  put  the  woman  into  a  cage  to fatten her till she should be ready to eat.
The husband returned, found his wife gone, and being a brave man followed the trail  of  the  tik-balan  to  his  cave.  Knowing  that  he could do nothing without help, he returned to  his  house  and  there found two nephews, both brave men, who had just returned from a voy- age. These three procured all the alak 1 they could, and fastening the bottles around their  waists  and  tying  on  their  bolos,  they  went  to  the cave.
Down the ladder  they climbed,  into  the dark.  When  they reached the bottom, all the okos set up the shout, “ Here is live  human  flesh,” but these brave men were not at all discomposed and only said,' Very well, but you won’t eat us until you have tasted our alak.” So the tik-balan and the okos tasted  the alak and smacked their  lips, declaring it was the finest water they ever drank. But soon the  alak  began to  make them drunk, and they sang and talked and finally  fell over and went to sleep.
Then the men went  to  the  cage and  let  the woman out  and started up the long ladders. The okos and the tik-balan by this time were recovering from their drunkenness and started to follow. But the  men and the woman reached the top first, and  the  men  cut  the  ladders  loose and threw them with the okos and the tik-balan to the  bottom where they were all killed. Then they  returned  to  their  homes  and were never troubled again.
* Alak= native rice or palm brandy.

2O4

4 THE \’OUNG MAN \VHO WAS h'OT AFRAID.
A young man who lived in the country once wished  to go to town.  He was a brave fellow and started off clapping  his  hands  and  shout- ing to the tik-balan and the evil spirits that  he was not afraid of  them. As he went on he felt the touch of invisible hands grasping  his cloth- ing. Drawing his bolo  he  struck  out  to  the  sides  and  behind  him, and although he could see  nothing  the  steel  rang  as  though  striking on a rock. At last he came to a brook, and the invisible hands gripped him closer, tearing his clothes  from  his  back.  Looking  up  he  saw also  a  gigantic  tik-balan  towering  above  and  ready  to  grasp  him. He attempted to cross the brook, but could not.
Then he drew his bolo again and struck  it  on  the  ground  three times, at the  same  time  saying a  prayer  against  the  evil spirits, three " Hail Marys ”  and  three “ Our  Fathers.”  With  that  the evil  spirits and  the  tik-balan  gave  back  a  little,  but  the  young  man,  whether by fear or the power of the evil  spirits, was  nearly  crazed.  He  went on, but his path instead of taking him to the village lead into the mountains until he had crossed seven. On  and  on  he  went  never daring to stop till midnight, when the tik-balan drew near to destroy  him.
Without knowing what he did he cut a bamboo and made of  it  a  cross and carrying it he went on. The  tik-balan,  frightened  by  the cross, kept at a greater distance but still followed.
After m uch fatigue and suffering he came to his mother’s house in the country, and she, being skilled in such matters, put crosses about, and put salt on the roof  and on her  son’s body.  But though she was a wise woman and knew much of herbs, it was three days before the young man could remember anything or speak.
Fletcher Gardner.








The aswaiig or witch is one of the givens of the Philippine cultural scene. The witch was very much in evidence in the Philippines past, pre- Hispanic, Hispanic and American. Dr. Maximo Dumlao Ramos and other scholars have made extensive collections and studies of them.'
This note is neither strictly folkloric nor ethnographic. However, it presupposes studies and investigations of tNs nature undenaken by other scholars. The note treats the topic from the perspective of comparative religion. In order to understand the phenomenon of the witch, it is placed side by side with another ancient phenomenon, shamanism. In this way the structure of witchcraft or witchery stands out more clearly.
Thus the witch is understood to be a perverse, isolated being who resolutely refuses to enter into the normal interaction with fellow human beings, with the world of things and animals, and the natural processes of transformation taking place in them—transformation which subser- yes the preservation and growth of life in the cosmos. Yet it is not only with the world of humans, animals and things that the witch refuses to enter into communication. He also refuscs to interact with the wholly otheror the Divine. He renounces obedience to the Transcendent because he wants to be free to immerse himself in his immanence and finitude.



1.	Witness his books like Creatures of Philippine Lower 3fyfnofogy (Quezon City: University of the Philippines Press, 1971), p. 390; Creatures ofldidnighi, k“aded Deities ofLuzon, the Visayas City: Island Publishers, 1967), p. 101; and The Ac*vsng S yncrasy in
with illustrative accounts in vemarcular texts and translations  (Manila:
Philippine Folklom Society, 1971), p. 108. An American scholar, Richard Warren Lieban, has also written on the or wang ‘i n his Malign 3fagic in Southern P* •!•’PR’ • s, Cebuano Sorcery: Mali yn Magic in inr Philippines (Berkeley: University of California l'rcss, 1967). Alfred McCoy in his article ”flaylan,  Animist  Religion  and  I'hilippiuc  1'casant  Ideology,"  Ph!Hippine (uarterly of


SHAMANS Aha WITCHES	373
It is an old paradoK that true freedom and spontaneity can be won by submission to the commands of the divine order which spring from the Otherness of life and which also express that Otherness. To refuse to submit is to remain self-defined and self-determined, locked up in personal and ultimately destructive and obsessive finite systems. It is that very refusal to recognize the controlling power of Otherness which is at one and the same time the extreme of banality and the extreme of demonic evil.

S O M E P R E L I M I N A R Y P R I NC I P L E S

I am convinced that shamanism and witchcraft are two fundamental responses that man can make with regard to the Other or the Holy. Second, as a result of creation, there has been established a sacred order in the cosmos. This sacred order is expressed in cosmic laws and norms such as, for instance, unity in the various levels of existence: spiritual, human, animal, natural or mineral. Third, these various orders are related to one another, and that they are meant to subserve life, not only of the beings beneath man but also of man’s own life. The fourth fundamental truth is that man, despite his personal life is also meant to live in society or community, and that he becomes more human precisely by engaging in dialogue and cooperation with his fellowman under the principle of justice and truth. The fifth important truth is that man interacts with his fellowman most intimately through the exercise of his sexuality which, however, is subject also to the fundamental law prohibiting incest and union among members of the same sex. The sixth fundamental truth is that the other intimate human interaction is through food-taking, and this again is moderated by the law against cannibalism and the norm of feeding on non- human flesh. In the interaction of man with the beings below him, the earth is not only the womb of things, it is also meant to be the tomb. But within this tomb, through normal processes of transfor- mation, life, human and otherwise, is intended to be sustained and increased. The seventh fundamental religious truth is that man is made to worship his creator, that this worship is expressed first and foremost by love and obedience to his laws written in the cosmos, in society, and in man himself, as well as in the natural laws which all things follow.

Culture nztd Society 10 (September 1982): 141 ff., has also touched on the topic. An earlier work and a good one at that was by the laic Frank P. Lynch, S.J., “Ang Mga Aswang, a Bicol llelief, Field Reports and Analyses," Naga City, Atcneo dc Naga Bicol Area Survey. 1963. See also “Visccra Suckers and Pcmalc Sociality: the l•hilippinc Asuang" in Philippine Smites 31 (1953):319-37.


374

THE	SHAMAN

The shaman is a human being, man or woman, whom the spirits call (in a manner that cannot be refused without very tragic results) to become their intermediary with the world of human bcings.' Through his initia- tion the shaman is thereby introduced into the world of spirits, and is gradually familiarized with it so that he can enter into it and get out of it with ease. He becomes endowed with special powers, magical, moral, physical and spiritual wNch we shall discuss in greater detail later.'
The shaman accepts the totality of the sacred order. As elected by the spirits to guard and foster human life, the shaman is present at the most significant events of personal and social life, at initiations (in many traditions, shamans themselves help out in the initiation of future shamans, or at least, serve as master of the apprentice),* in marriage, in
conceptions and pregnancies, at birth, in times of sickness as well as at death.s In marriage, pregnancy and biilh, the shaman’s presence is ncedcd to support and sustain life at its inception. In sickness, when life is threatened, the shaman looks for the soul which has gone astray and
lures it back to the body of the sick one in order to bring back health,• or he goes to consult the supreme being or the Master of animals and things (as in the case of the Palawan shaman) in order to learn the precise medicine or sacrifice to effect curing. In death when life is changed not ended, the shaman escorts the soul of the dead to the land of the dead, so that it can rest in peace and not harm the living, and be ready to be returned to life again when the time for it to be reborn in another body is cOmC.
The shaman is also the repository of the lore and tradition of the tribe. His special gift of mind and heart and body, his special experiences with the world of spirit, animals and plants, his expressiveness in verbal and

2.	Edward P. Dozier, Mowifain Arbiters (A rizona: Tucson Arizona Press, 1966), p. 174; John
M. Garvan, The  fanobos ofMñuianao (Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences, 1929),
p. 200, Hubert Reynolds and Fenn Babcok Grant, The fsneg oflhe Northern Philippines (Dumaguete City: Anthropology Museum, Silliman University, 1973), p. 268; and Alfred McCoy, “Daylan," pp. 144, 161-62.
3. Ibid., pp. 158, 162.
4.	E.P. Dozier, Mountain Arbiters, p. 174; also Raymundo C. Hilot, “The Mandayan Balyan System," Re‹zdings in Philippine Religious Values Part II, ed. Edward Gerlock (Davao City: Pastoral Renewal Center), p. 171
5.	Ibid., p. 172-73; also Pr. Emmanuel Nabayra, “Balilig: A Study of the Religiosity of the Mandaya,” lendings in Philippine Religious Values Part 11, p. 70 ff.; Garvan, The Manobos of Mindanao, p. 122, ff.
6.	Dozicr, Mountain Arbiters, pp. 165-6G, 175-78.


AhD WIJ’CI US	375
nonverbal communication, make the shaman a teacher par excellence in any group. Among thc Palawan of thc Makagwaq and Tamlang valleys, he is also a highly gifted bard and an inspired poet.
How docs a person become a shaman? Through initiation. He falls sick, and the ordinary means for curing fail to cffect a cure.7 This sickness is part of his initiation. The spirits who issue the call are gcncrally his own shaman ancestors, although it could also be that other shaman ancestors not related to him do the inviting. The sickness could be a protracted one. He is usually cured, either at the end or during the process of the initiation. The shaman ancestors provide him with spirit familiars who come in the shape of animals. These become his guides and guardians in his arduous journeys to the spirit world, up to the sky, down to the underworld or any other part of the cosmos where the dead are said to settle.
The initiation of the shaman is equivalent to undergoing the experi- ence of death. He disappears from home and finds himself in the forest, a cave or a mountain, far removed from human society. There in the wilderness hC attains unity with the nonhuman sources of reality. He begins to undcrstand the language of birds and animals, he learns the various kinds of diseases and the spirits that control these diseases.' In the course of initiation the shaman is tom apart, his flesh scraped off and consumed by ancestral shaman spirits or the disease-controlling spirits who thereby become his servants and assistants in his curing activities.' The scraping off of his flesh until he becomes a skeleton, the taking out of his brains and his eyes, the disgorging of his intestines is to assimilate him to the divine or the spirits. He is therefore given a new set of organs, the organs of a spirit. The result of these experiences is the ability“to see spirits,” to become at ease in dealing with them. For what purpose? So that he can serve the community. The shaman is called not for himself but for others. He is truly a man for others. In his initiation he dies to himself, but he returns to life equipped with new powers— clairvoyance (the ability to penetrate the heart and intention of people), prophecy, counsel and healing (of physical and psychical or spiritual) ailment.
A significant characteristic of the shaman then is that he gets sick. But he is also able to cure himself through the help of thc spirits. The shaman


7. Ihid., p. 174.
S. Zuesse, “On the Nature of the l3emonic," h'umen 18 (December 1971): 217. 9. Ibid., p. 217.


375	PI IILIPI•INE STUDIES

tlicrcby serves the divine order on all 1c•vc1s. He promotes goodness, well-being and life, not only for the individual but also for the commu- nity.

T H E W I T C H

The witch is the exact opposite of the shaman. He does not serve the divine order. In fact, his one single aim is to oppose it with all his might. To achieve his intention, he constructs an antitheticalorderand he inverts the normal in order to sustain the abnormality itself."
Like the shaman, the witch is very much in evidence during times of liminality, that is, when the individual or the community is in transition from a lesser to a more heightened stage in the cosmic order. The presence of the witch is to obstruct the workings of the cosmic order. Thus when the grain is ripening he is around, not to bless the harvest, but to blight it with rain or hail. At marriage he is there not to celebrate but to cast an evil eye, especially on the bride." At conception and pregnancy he tries to jeopardize the coming to term of the fetus.
Filipinos have many beliefs and observances prescribed to foil the machinations of the witch. The pregnant mother should not sleep with her back flat on the noor or bed. She should sleep sidewise so that the witch’s elongated tongue which penetrates the thatched roof cannot reach her belly and suck out the fetus. If pregnant women go out at night they should use their long hair to cover their stomachs. If a pregnant woman smells like nangka to a witch, he is liable to molest her." In sickness when life is under a strain, the witch is present as a manunuiigod, a witch who stations himself under the room of a sick person, causing the sick to become restless or ill at ease. The prescribed antidote is to stick a sharp iron bolo through the slits of the bamboo floor and let the blade hang there. Iron comes from the earth, and earth seems to be a hostile element to the witch." At initiation time, the witch tries his best to frustrate the successful integration of the initiates into the divine cosmic order. In times of death, the witch tries to steal the corpse, and substitute a banana stalk for it, so that he can feast on it."

10. Ibid., p. 238.
11. Ibid., p. 226.
12.	Fr. Francisco Dmetrio, S.J. Diciiorrary of Philippine rolk beliefs and Customs B‹xik II
(Cagayan de Oro City: Xavier University, 1970), p. 24.5.
13.	Zucsse, “Gn  the h'aturc of  the Dcmonic," p. 224.
14.	llamos, The Creatures of Midnight, p. 49; also r. Lynch, “Aug Mga Aswang," p. 406.


377
The witch manifests his opposition to the divine order by practising 1) incest and bcstiality and 2)cannibalism and by 3) his penchant for human exuviae.
First, incest. Ordinary human norms of society require that marriage
be cxogamous.' s Marriage between parents and children, between broth- ers and sisters, even between first cousins is tabooed. Incest is almost a universal taboo because its practice is detrimental to health and ulti- mately to the life of thc race. It is also the normal human practice to have sex between persons of opposite sexes, between man and woman, not between man and man or woman and woman. The sexual partner should be of the same species. In other words, sex with animals is also taboo under the norms of the divine order.
On the other hand witches are known to use their own close relations as sexual paf1flCrs.“They are also known to engage in sexual indulgence with animals.'7 Even in European witchcraft, the height of the witches’ coven was reached when the devil in the guise of a goat had intercourse with his devotees.
Witches are also known to have animal familiars like birds (kikik, or wa/orok), dogs, black cats, pigs." In Cagayan de Oro a particular witch is said to transform herself into a sow wearing a pair of balcya (ang anay nga nagbakyaq). This motif underlines the witch as belonging to the wild. Unlike the shaman who is also linked with the wild, the witch does not master the wild. He allows himself to be mastered by it, by succumb- ing to its chaotic nature and lack of order. His lack of discrimination in choosing his sexualpartners is in imitation of the animals and is a protest against ordinary cultural norms of human society.
Second, cannibalism. Man develops his humanity in line with the designs of the divine order by eating nonhuman flesh or animals and fish, as well as the plants and the fruits of grain and tree. The witch in his opposition to the divine cosmic order is not satisfied with these non- human food. One with the animals, he preys on living man himself.' Again, like the brute, the witch devours human carcasses or corpses.^ Ordinarily the dead man is either buried or burned. In this way the dead is made to rccnter the cycle of existence and to undergo the law that the grain must fall to the ground if it must yield a rich harvest of life.

15. Zucssc, “On the h'ature of the Demonic,” p. 22.5. 16. Ibid., p. 228.
17. Ibid., p. 229.
1S. Dcmctrio, l)ictionary of Pliilififiine l'“oIk Beliefs. y. 239.
19.	Zucssc, “On the Nature of the lJcmouic.” p. 229.
20.	Dcmctrio, Uiriionory of Philip line I'olk I.teliefs, p. 250-51.


378	1*1NlJI'l'I%TSTUDIkS

Otherwise it will remain alone, isolated and unproductive.
Third the witch’s penchant for human exuvine. This is closely related to the motif of Cannibalism. Ordinarily blood, especially mcnstnial blood, voided phlegm, haircuttings, nail parings, clothing soaked with human sweat, vomit and excrement are left to fall to the ground and decay. Thus they are all taken up in cosmic processes of transformation, and in turn become sustainers of life. These exuviae, or leavings of ordinary human living, signify man’s historicity, that he is a creature of time, that he is subject to the changes that time brings about. But the witch does not allow these exuviae to return to the ground and be taken up in the cycle of transformation. He gathers these leavings, sometimes including his own excrement, and uses them as powerful medicines to harm the living. He will bury these waste maners in the yard of his intended victim, or will take his vomit or saliva or phlegm, dry it, reduce it to powder, and mix it with the food or drink of the intended victim.2' The witch makes strong medicines out of these exuviae because of the incantations of hatred he employs when preparing them.
Thus, by manipulating human exuviae for purposes of harm, the witch obstructs the natural processes of reciprocity and transformation that should obtain in the cosmos. Both he and the victim are isolated from these reciprocities. But the witch seems to boast of his isolation, and endeavors to render others isolated.° Thus he becomes more and more conrwed in his witchcraft.
How does one become a witch? Like the shaman he too undergoes a kind of initiation. But his initiation does not make him rise higher in the scale of divine order. Rather it imbeds him in his witchcraft more deeply. Because the witch denies transcendence or the beyond quality of reality, he is buried in his own banality and finiteness. He is generally regarded by people as a sick man. Thus when one contracts witchery he is said in the Cebuano Bisayan dialect to be natakdan (from takod which means to contaminate), or“contaminated.”* He becomes a witch by receiving into his mouth the witch-substance which is passed onto him by adying witch relative. This witch-substance (the African call it mnxgu) is imagined by Filipinos to be similar to the yolk of chicken egg." It lodges in the belly of the would-be witch. As it matures and begins to put on wings, the witch becomes more and more established in witchcry. The winged bird within enables him to fly. However, so long as thc witch-substance is still fresh,
2 \. ?’wcssc, “On the h’aturc of the Demonic,” pp. 229-30.
22. IbiJ.., p. 23G.
23.	IJehan, Mali(n Magic, y. 9.
24.	Txic s sO, “Min lhc h’al \irc of the Demonic,” p. 220.


379
it can be cxpclled by rcndcring the witch dizzy by whirling him around in a liiininiock so that ldc can vomit it out.* Then it must bc set on fire, and the person will be frccd from the curse.
Tlic witchcry contagion can also bc caught unwittingly, by drinking from the sainc cup which a witch has used. Hcre it is the saliva of the witch which causes the contamination. Sometimes one becomes a witch by a witCh blowing upon the flapG of his neck.* It seems that this action can induce thc witch-substance to materialize on the inside of the intended victim. In these last two cases, the person unwittingly becomes a witch. In these cases it is much easier to dislodge the witch-substance from the body. Is it possible for a person to catch the contagion without willing it, and cventually acquiesce to his condition?
The shaman in his initiation offers himself to become the victim of the divine beings who devour him alive or of his ancestral shaman ancestors. He is also partakcn of by disease-spirits who thereby become his trusted assistants especially in effecting cures of diseases. Thus the shaman in initiation offers himself in order that he may become useful for others. But the witch in his initiation makes no personal sacrifice. It is an inversion of the shamanic initiation. The witch novice often providcs the victim for his initiation from among his own kinsmen, his own “flesh.” Through this fcast he joins the witch society.'7 His own body is not dismembered. His own body is not slowly devoured by the witches. It is someone else’s, other than the witch.
The witch, therefore, in his initiation is sick, and, after the initiation, remains sick. He is not healed again to be of service to society. He remains isolated, on the periphery of social life. He is confirmed in evil as he continues to practise witchery.

T H E P O W E R T O F L Y

Both the shaman and the witch are credited with the ability to fly, as well as to sustain the extremes of both heat and cold. Shamans among the Bilaans (they arc called almoos) can walk without harm over burning embers. Witchcs were also known evcn in the time of Juan de Plascncia to emit flames front their bodies under the houses of thcir intended victims who were expected to die on the morrow.

25. Dcnictrio, his.mercury o/ N/rim/a/inc hell iie/ic/s, pp. 247-4 S. 2f›. lliid., p. 241.
27.	Zccsse, “£Jn the h aturc of the IRmonic," p. 217.


350	PI l1LII•1•lhT SJ’UDIES
The S1iilHlan’S power to fly either physically or at least spiritually or psychically (through ecstasy or trance) is an act of spirituality. Eliade writes:

Magical flight is the expression both of the soul’s autonomy and ecstasy ... It is also related to the symbolism of ascension. This myth of the soul contains in embryo a whole metaphysics of man’s spiritual autonomy and freedom; it is here that we must seek the point of departure for the earliest speculations concerning voluntary abandonment of the body, the omnipotence of intelli- gence, the immortality of the human soul. An analysis of the imagination of motion will show how essential the nostalgia for flightisto the human psyche. The point of primary importance here is that the mythology and the rites of magical flight peculiar to shamans and sorcerers confirm and proclaim their transccndence in respect to the human condition; by flying into the air, in bird form or in their normal human shape, shamans as it were proclaim the degeneration of humanity. For as we have seen, a number of myths refer to a primordial time when all humanbeings could ascend to heaven by climbing a mountnin, a tree, or a ladder, or flying by their own power, or being carried by birds. The degeneration of humanity henceforth forbids the mass of mankind to fly to heaven, only death restores men (and not all of them!) to their primordial condition. Only then can they ascend to heaven, fly like birds, and so forth.*

It is while in ecstasy that the shaman is enabled to do much good to the community. But witchery is the meditation of the demonic and negative side of the nostalgia for absolute freedom.2' The witch’s ability to fly (physical or psychic) is not freedom from the shackles of space and time. For the aim of the witch in his flight is never spiritual. It is either incestuous or cannibalistic.Thus the witch is buried in the material, in the finite. And this seems to be his imprisonment and condemnation in this world.
The witch then is a person who out of selfishness, and utter self- will, has inured himself in evil, isolating himself from the normal run of human interaction with fellowmen, and aims only at doing what is destructive of life and moral and natural goodness. He is indeed without God. For he refuses to submit his life to the oiher. Like Lucifer he worships his own finite will which he staunchly scts up in opposition to the divinc.^

28.	Mircea Eliadc, Shamanism: Arr.hate Terhni‹furs of Mr.siasy, Bollingcn Series 7G (New York: I'antheon D‹xiks, 19f›4), pp. 479-80.
29.	Zucsse, “On the Nature of thc Demonic." p. 217.
30. lhi‹l., p. 237.


MANGYAN FOLKLORE
Author(s): Antoon Postma
Source: Philippine Quarterly of Culture and Society , MARCH - JUNE 1977, Vol. 5, No. 1/2, Philippine Cultural Minorities - II (MARCH - JUNE 1977), pp. 38-53
Published by: University of San Carlos Publications Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/29791310



MANGYAN FOLKLORE

Auto on Postma, SVD
Mangyan Center, Or. Mindoro

During the summer periods of 1975 and 1976, a research project was undertaken among the Mangyans in the mountain area between Mansalay and Bulalakaw in Southern Mindoro. It was supported by a grant from the Ford Founda- tion. The aim of the project was to get a compre- hensive idea of the extent of Mangyan literature in its broadest sense by collecting the various types of literary material still available and taking note of the circumstances in which they are being used. It was hoped that a substantial number of folklore samples would be collected in the course of the research.
One reason for starting the project was the fact that there has been so far no adequate description of the various literary forms of one particular Mangyan group, known to the scientific world as Hanunoo-Mangyans. Another com- pelling incentive for undertaking this enormous task came from the awareness that the traditional folklore of the 6tangyans is  becoming  scarce owing to the tendency of the younger generation to absorb the ways and thinking of modem civilization, meanwhile neglecting and forgetting to keep alive the natural features of their own traditions. The fear that an important portion of this literary heritage may thus  disappear  in  the near future did not seem to be altogether un- founded. It was hoped that through the eventual publication of an anthology of the materials gathered in their original version, accompanied by English translations, a sense of pride in their own traditions could be engendered among the younger 6Jangyans.
Throughout the project, in its various stages of collection, transcription, translation, and evaluation, the expert assistance of certain Mangyan students proved to be invaluable since they  constituted  an  important  link,  especially at the start, between the researchers and the

Philippine Quarterly of Culture and Society 5 (1977) 38 -53



Mangyan informants, and afterwards, as aids in the interpretation of the collected materials.

Collection of 8taterials.
I\Mangyan literature has been handed down through generations both orally and in writing. All the different types of literature that are available have been orally passed on with the exception of some of their poetry which are pre- served in syllabic Indic writing (similar to Indian and Indonesian scripts) inscribed on bamboo or some other soft material with a knife.
The song-poems are mainly transmitted by means of the pre-Spanish Mangyan script, which is still in frequent use among the 6langyans of Southern Mindoro. Ultimately derived from the Indian writing systems,  it  was  introduced  into  the   Mangyan   culture via Indonesian influences probably around the 12th or 13th centuries. The syllabic characters are inscribed with a  sharp-pointed  knife  on the smooth surface of a bamboo-joint.
It is not unusual for a Mangyan to carry in his  bag a small bamboo container covered with  finely inscribed ambâhan - or ur kay - poems. The script, in fact, seems to owe its survival to the ambâhan for most of the latter  appears  in  this form of writing. On the other hand, the  role of the Mangyan script in the preservation and trans- mission of folk poetry should not be under- estimated.
During this first phase of the project, many bamboo “manuscripts” were gathered or copied, and stored away for later transcription. The samples of purely oral literature were  recorded on cassettes.
Starting from the neighboring areas, such as Kagankan, Hawili and Amaga, we gradually worked our way to the farther settlements, among them Wasig, Malan-og, and upper Kaguray.

Postma / MANGYAN FOLKLORE	39



Twice we vis’ited the reportedly wild and fierce Gubatiion-Mangyans of the lower Kaguray areas, who turned out to be the most amiable and hospitable people we encountered. In various places we formed lasting contacts. It was stimula- ting and refreshing to experience the genuine warmth and hospitality of these simple people. They considered it almost an offense when we offered them money for the many hours they spent in sharing with us their folklore materials.
We had to observe certain taboos and these gave rise to interesting and amusing situations. For instance, Mangyans are absolutely forbidden to relate the suyot type of folk-tale, or any riddle, before the sun goes down.

Suyot is the term for an old, traditional story. It is a combination of legend, fable and fairy-tale.

Non observance of this taboo, i.e., relating such stories and riddles during daylight hours, would cause toothache and subsequent tooth decay on the part of the narrator. We had to comply with this belief. As a consequence the story telling often continued until the small hours of the morning, accompanied by the sputtering and crackling of the resin-torch lights. The cassette recorder proved invaluable. It also caused a lot of merriment among the natives whenever they heard their own voices as the recordings were played back to them.
During the day, when only poems and songs could be collected, we often assisted the Mangyans in their various activities such as help- ing them clear their kaingins of weeds, or joining them in honey-gathering expeditions. We found the  latter  a  quite  exciting  experience  even at the cost of some painful stings from the en- raged insects whose privacy we disturbed.
This collecting phase, which continued on and off until the end of the research work, will always be remembered as a time of happy relaxation with the friendly Mangyans in their own surroundings. Together with the materials gathered on earlier occasions, we brought together



some 6000 items, all of which have been tran- scribed in typewritten form. Most of them have not yet been translated into English. Tentatively, they have been grouped as follows:
1.	Song poems
2.	Folk beliefs and customs
3.	Riddles
4.	Folk tales
5.	Others

I. Song Poems.
The song poem is a literary form having the following characteristics: 1) it has meter and rhyme; 2) it is usually sung but in a style and tune that varies with the person delivering it; and
3) it is recited with or without musical accompa- niment. There are three distinct types of song- poems: ambâhan, urâkay, and adâhiyo.
Ambâhan: This is a poem with 7 syllables per line, the final syllable of every line rhyming with all the others. Extensive use is made of archaic words which have dropped out of conversational usage.

The origin of the ambâhan is unknown al- though the word occurs in some Bisayan dialects with the meaning of “song” or “poem” and may be derived from the word amba (Hiligaynon) which means “to sing”.  Alzina, in his “Historic de las Islas, e Indios  de Bisayas . .. 1668” also mentions the ambâhan but his definition of the term does not fit the 6langyan ambâhan.

Composed anonymously, ambâhans are  still very popular among today’s Mangyans. They are poetic descriptions of varying lengths and their subjects range widely over the world of the Mangyan: man, animals, plants, natural pheno- mena. The Mangyan uses these subjects for a symbolic expression of his personal thoughts, feelings and desires. Thus it is used in the courting ceremonial and whenever something of an embarrassing nature has to be expressed. Al- though other classifications are possible, the following is probably the most obvious: a) old type, b) recent or modern type.

PHILIPPINE QUARTERLY


a)	Old type amb’ahan: The old ambâhan is usually of substantial length and contains many archaic words. With the exception of the fim line, all the final syllables rhyme on “-an”. The adults, who are the primary users of this type, employ it to express their more serious thoughts.


1.	Magkunkuno ti tawo
2.	Tabi tawad kang sangdan
3.	Ubli uli kang duyan
4.	Barang sinmalinduan
5.	Ati kang inagwadan
6.	No bilang di masungnan
7.	No bilang di malut-an
8.	Palbada di kang sud-an
9.	Abiton di nga ginan

OF CULTURE AND SOCIETY


In the example below, the Mangyan poet expresses in a rather elaborate way his regrets and justifications for having said something that may have offended his companion(s). It may also be a roundabout way of uttering a request, e g., for food.


Says the man feeling ashamed: “Excuse me for saying this.
I am taking back my words, They may be misunderstood. The way I expressed myself, if it doesn’t sound so nice,
if someone’s feelings are hurt, really, I apologize!
You know how it is sometimes,

10.

Kitam ti tawo ngaran

we are human beings, all,

11.	May pamalbad tauban
12.	Inmariw ak madiman
13.	Padi may pagdulungan
14.	Padi may pagtungpanan
I $. Sa masigkatupungan

but we know how to forgive.
Actually the words I use do not refer to anyone, having in mind no one
of the people here around,

16.

Sa sikon sa nagwal-an

whether on the right or left,

17.	Ud sa tagpuon gus-an
18.	Kang pagliyuhun duyan
19.	Kang di dili unayan

least of all the gracious host.
What I just wanted to say
had some reference to myself,

20.

No dili di unayan

to my own experience.

21.	Kang paghandumon sungnan
22.	Kang paghalawon malngan

I was kind of carried away making me feel quite upset.

23.

No kanta di saayan

If we would just stick it out

24.	Tann di nag-asumay wan
25.	Tann ugali ti uman

together, it would be fine. That is the way we behave,

26.

May pandangya danglugan

using sometimes foolish words,

27.	May panaghaya lan-gan
28.	Kita paman kumaban
29.	Sa ariw ud may apwan

having fun along the way,
but without being serious then. All these silly expressions,

30.

Kita sab no kumaban

let’s not take them literally.

31.	Sa ariw ud may apwan
32.	Tann salagan yr naw-an

b)	Recent or modem type: This ambéfinri is usually short, uses current conversational terns (Bisayan words included), and the lines, perhaps with the exception of the first, have the same

If we believe crazy words we’re behaving childishly.”

rhyme which, however, need not be “-an”. It is much used by children in their games, but adults employ it just as often.

Postma / MANGYAN FOLKLORE	41


The composer of this modem ambññaii ex-
presses his amazement as to how an airplane can


1.	Magkunkuno ti ruplano
2.	Padi unay magbay-an
3.	No ga halaw di way man
4.	Yami pangalayawan
5.	Padi sa dagaynaan
6.	Hayon yi lugayawan
7.	Payi may lindo amyan
8.	Ud may sugali kunman
9.	Ud may tukod bat-angan

Modem ambâhans deal with everyday subjects and frequently have humorous or even bawdy undertones. They often appear in doublets or triplets i.e., the same idea is expressed in two

1.	Magkunkuno ti amo
2.	Magkasakit kay ulo
3.	Babaw purantok bato
4.	Ido ido anito
5.	No ga bumalyan kawo
6.	Danga sa barubago
7.	Sa balyanan matuo
8.	Hampay ti sakit ulo
9.	Ud yi waydi misalyo
10.	Sakit bago misalyo
11.	Mangabukay kang ulo
The same theme reappears with a different rhyme and a change of symbols in the following song:


remain up in the air without visible support.



Says the airplane
It’s not a question of bragging, but, since a long time ago,
our method of flying
has had no relation to the earth. It is rooted in heaven itself, where there are no typhoons
or anything like that.
Nor are we supported by any posts (as in the case of a houae).

or three different versions. Below are two examples representing a doublet. They are used to convey the idea that one is in need of a square med.
Says the monkey having a head-ache
sitting on top of a stone: Grandmother dear!
If you will call for a doctor, don’t get an inexperienced one.
I need a very good doctor so that my headache
will not come back.
Or let it come back eventually, when I have grey hairs already.

1.	Kang manok si bidlawan
2.	Magkasakit kay tiyan
3.	Babaw bato atagan
4.	Ido ido tawagan
5.	Kawo no ga bumalyan
6.	Dag balyan sa alangan
7.	Sa balyanan batingan
8.	Hampay ti sakit tiyan
9.	Ud yr waydi misayan
10.	Sakit bag-o misayan
11.	Maqgabukay ti Mangyan

Says the f›idWax-bird having a stomach-ache sitting on a stone at Atagan.
Grandmother I’m asking you if you get a doctor for me, let it not be a poor one.
I need the best you can get so that my stomach-ache
will not come back anymore,
or if it has to come back sometime, let it wait until the Mangyan’s hair will be grey.

42	PHILIPPINE QUARTERLY OF CULTURE AND SOCIETY


Ambâhans ate recited during large gatherings. On such occasions there is no musical accompani- ment. The thoughts expressed are often highly poetic and extremely beautiful. Another occasion for the recitation of ombiJtnzt is the traditiond courting ceremony. With great skill the boy and gid, meeting in her house, exchange poems made up on the spot. Finally, poems are also recited quite informally whenever the people are in the

f/rtiñoy: This poetic form, of indeterminate length, consists of lines of eight syllables and uniform end-rhyme throughout.

1.	Ako’y kapira magkuon
2.	Kanimo magsugidanon
3.	Kon nangindi nangindi ron
4.	Kon sayod ikaw nga miron
5.	Ako’y sa buot duraon
6.	Sa panumduman lipaton
7.	Panagyap ibang dikilon
8.	Sa liwan pangita karon

In the neighboring island of Panay, the word wtik‹;y means “merrymaking", a joyful social gathering w’rth singing and dancing, etc. The language used in the Mangyan iinitqy is archaic Hiligaynon-Bisaya, which often is no longer undemood by the Mangyan singers. The urâkay is also interspersed with comipted  Spanish words, as well as terms reminiscent of Catholic religious influences. This type of poetry was probably picked up by the Mangyan in their

mood for it or upon special request.
There are possibly tens of thousands of amb“ahans circulating among the Mangyans, but, as is to be expected, certain standard structures and forms appear over and over again. For the purposes of our project, the vocabulary of the collected poems was alphabetically indexed for easier reference but it still awaits tsandation.


The example given here is a love song from a disappointed suitor, which needs no further explanation.

How often have I listened to your lengthy explanations!
If you don’t like me, it’s all right, Knowing that you have another friend, Remove me from your thoughts, Forget about me forever.
Go and look for someone else; Look for him in another place.

earlier contacts with Bisayans. Its use is limited to the older generation and not widely known. Hence, it is less popular than the amb’ahan.
Like the ambâhan, the urâkay appears also in doublets. Since the unay has all the indi- cations of being a remnant of the past, it is very doubtful whether any are still composed today. The urñkay is mostly sung to the accompani- ment of the homemade guitar.

Postma J MANGYAN FOLKLORE	43



The following doublets of four lines each, are distinguishable by their end•rhyme. The thought

1.	Ara kaw bala kasapo
2.	Ga buyong-buyong ang barko
3.	Nagapangita rikudo
4.	Yadtong punduhan maayo
5.	Ara kaw bala kamaan
6.	Ga buyong-buyong ang sakyan
7.	Nagapangita punduhan
8.	Sa maayo nga tugbungan

Adâhiyo: The term is derived from the Spanish ndagio, a “proverb” or “adage”. The Mangyan adâhiyo is a song-poem, usually with six syllables to the line, but without a fixed final rhyme. Sometimes, however, dtemate lines may rhyme, which may indicate an origind metrical

1.	May isang bastri
2.	Sumabat sa arar
3.	Duon mitigruran
4.	Sa pubring bangkiro
5.	At ang abang bastri
6.	Nang siya’y tinanong
7.	May ilan pa kaya
8.	Ang hampas uang sagwan
9.	Magmula sa laot
10.	Hanggang sa punduhan
11.	Di ako’y nag-arar
12.	Salaying isturya
13.	Aug pinagkasagwan
14.	At ang aking puluma
15.	Ang pinagkabarko
16.	At ang aking bastirya

The language of the adâhiyo is archaic Tagalog, but still undemandable to a large extent. Some samples with Bisayan words were collected. The



expressed stands for a  person’s  behaviour  when he is trying to come to a decision .

Did you ever notice,
That a boat is turning left and right, Looking for a landing place
Where it can anchor safely! Are you not aware of it,
That a ship goes here and there
Looking for an anchorage,
For a good place to land!

scheme of twelve syllables to the line.

This is zn example o an adâhiyo. Although the meaning of certain words are obscure, the message seems clear: each man is at home in his own field.

A certain learned man
Was answering questions When he happened to meet A simple boatman.
And this poor wise man Was asked the question:
“How many times you think, will the oar hit the water From the middle of the sea, Till it reaches the shore?” (Answer) “I didn’t study That kind of wisdom.
The oar
And my writing-pen Are as the boat
And my learning (respectively)”.

form is reminiscent of old Tagalog corridor or “narrative poems”.



or: The oar is to the boat as my writing pen is to my learning.

PHILIPPINE QUARTERLY OF CULTURE AND SOCIETY

Below  is another example  of an odâhiyo with its	the mixture of Tagalog and Hiligaynon.
translation which is somewhat tentative. Note



1.	Ginoong tagbalay

2.	Kami paakyatin
3.	Hindi lang malaon
4.	Naga-intay lamang
5.	Sikat nang bituin
6.	Sagot mga pagbo*
7.	Sindihi kandila
8.	Ilisi pabilo

1.	Mr. Host
(Respected owner of the house)
2.	Allow us to come up
3.	It won’t be for long
4.	We are just waiting
5.	For the stars to shine
6.	Answer, household!
7.	Light the candle
8.	Change the wick
(Probably referring to an oil lamp)

9.	Agod mahayagan
10.	Ang pubring lawas ko
11.	Nariyan din naman

9.
10.
1 i.

So that the light will shine on My poor self
Also there akeady

12.	Si kastilang Pablo
13.	May dalang bawila••
14.	Tinugtug uang yano•••

15.	Pinagsasayawan

12.	Is the Spaniard Pablo
13.	Carrying a bawila
14.	Which he is playing with ease
(Or: On which he plays a simple tune)
15.	It is being danced to

16.	Kampana gularo

16.

Bell, ring out,

17.	Pamuyasin tawo	17. Call the people!

•	po$bo, which can mean part of the roof-const ruction in a house , or a post; here it piob ably stands for the whole, pars pm toto. *•bawila, perhaps a comiption for “viola” ••*ponn means easy or simple.

In  small  towns  and  barrios,  even  today,  dances       rations   probably    acquired   this   type   of   poetry are  common,  especially  in  the  days  or  weeks  through  contacts  with  Tagalogs   who  settled  in preceding   a   fiesta.   These   small   affairs   are    Mindoro.  There  seems  to  be  no  demand  for  the usually  held in  fenced vacant  lots. One imagines         ad“ahi yo   i:n  Mangyan  society  other  than  that  of a  house   near  the  lot  where  the   dance  is  to  be    being  exhibited   as  a   piece  of  literary  curiosity  held. The poet  and  his  companions  arrive  early  during  an ambâhan  session.  As with  the  urti£ay, (before  the stars are out), and  ask to be allowed       the   adâhiyo   makes   liberal   use   of   corrupted to  come up the house where they will watch and  SpaniSh  words  and   religious  terms  which   the  wait till the people and the dance can begin.	Mangyans   recite   without   understanding  their
meaning.   Unlike   the   urâkay,   the   adâhiyo is
The adahiyo is not  widely  in  use  and  is  recited without musical  accompaniment.  known only to a few Mangyans. The older gene-

Postma / MANGYAN FOLKLORE	45


O. Polk beliefs and customs.
From a total of over  1100 items collected, by far the biggest portion consists of short des- scriptions of taboos, beliefs and superstitions. The rest are stories describing the ways of living typical of the Mangyans énce the old  days. A few examples are given here.
Concerning the bringing of food to the grave: It is our custom to bring food to the grave of a relative who just recently died so that the soul of the deceased will not go without food. We believe that the soul will visit its former body occasionally, even in the grave. We bring to the grave: meat, fuh, rice-the sort of food we know the soul likes best.
The hrst moon in the New Year. To us Mangyans, it is important to observe the shape of the moon at the beginning of a New Year. When the points of the moon sickle appear to be directed towards the earth, it will be a prosperous year -- the harvest will be bounti- ful and no sickness will afflict the people. If the points of the moon sickle point upwards, it will mean a bad year marked by hunger and sickness among the Mangyans.
About having two wives. We Mangyans are allowed to have more than one wife. For instance, I am married and would like another wife. I ask permission from my first wife. If she consents, I can bring my second wife to the house. If my first wife refuses, I gjve her several strings of beads worth about eight pesos in payment for my transgression. If still my wife does not consent after she  has been paid by me, I’ll make a separate house nearby for the second wife so they will be under separate roofs at night. They will, however, eat together in the main house at all times. They will also share the work in and around the house. My attention may go mostly to my second wife.

III.	Riddles.
Patigmahon (cf. Hiligaynon: tugma —— riddle; Cebuano: Demo = id.). The entertaining art of


riddle-telling is a favorite pastime among the Mangyans. Anyone can participate. As a rule, it is done in the evenings, since riddling during the day would cause one’s teeth to rot away.
Mangyan riddles usually consist of two lines of seven syllables each, often with end-rhymes similar to those of the ambâhan. The subjects dealt with are persons, animals, plants, or any- thing else forming a part of Mangyan life.
Some riddles offer a hint by using a sort of pun on the correct answer. Here follows an example of this kind:
Tawo sa Kabantudan A mon com the
Mountains
Lima lima kay ngaran	iVith five names.
The answer is: Limatok “leech”. The  first portion of the answer (lima), is contained in the riddle. However, since lima means “five”, the guesser can be misled. The clue is given in the fast line, “man from the mountains”, which indicates that the leech is found in the mountain forests of 6lindoro. Here are other samples:
Kan binayi sukluban	Grandmother’s
basket
Puno puno bulawan	ñ	filled with gold.
Answer: Papaya
Lalaki diing diing	It’s a small guy
No pinmagrit mataning   But it gives a
strident roar.
Answer: Pasyanit (small cicada) Nanhampang
Kasimangan		Talking, it’s heard everywhere
Nanalikod Kasungnan	Put aside, it’s kind
of md.
Answer: Salong (resin used  in the resin-torch). It sputters when lighted and can be heard throughout the house.
Karasyaw sa Atagan There is a deer at
Atagan

PHILIPPINE QUARTERLY

Magtiranghag maniwang  with  craning neck
and skinny legs.
Answer: Sag-angan (resin-torch holder). This is usually a branch of a tree, with side branches that serve as legs. It somewhat resembles a deer.


IV.	Folk-Lfes.
The number collected (153), though not large, includes, we believe, the most common tales now circulating among the Mangyans. The Mangyans distinguish three types of folk-tales:
I.	Suyot: As has already been stated, the suyot is a combination of legend, fable and fairy- tale. It is the oldest type of story.
2.	Su idanon: A folk-tale acquired through Bisayan influences.
3.	Tultulanon: Tales dealing with reputed historical events.

1.	Suyot. There are severd distinct cycles of Suyot. Among them are: the Amalahi<ycle, the Daldali-cycle, the Juan Pusong<ycle, the animal- story-cycle, to name a few.
The Amalahi-cycle concerns a legendary couple, Amalahi and Inabay, their son Palyos and their daughter Daga-daga, who are very clever and are endowed with supematurd powers which see them through various dangerous and trying situations.

INABAY WHO BECAME A GHOUL
A long time ago, there lived a couple. The husband’s name was Amalahi, and his wife was named Inabay. They had two children: Daga- daga, and her younger brother Palyos.

One day, Inabay went to the well with her bamboo oontainer to fetch drinking water. On the way she met a ghoul. She did not realize the evil nature of this creature. As is customary when meeting someone along the trail, she asked for a betelnut chew. She received one, and ‘d had a special sweet flavor. Inabay did not know that by

OF CULTURE AND SOCIETY

accepting the chew she would beoome a ghoul herself. When she had finished the first betel quid, she asked for another one as tasty as the rwst.
Contented, Inabay went home, unaware of the change in her nature that had taken place. On arriving home, she told her children: “Your father and I will go to the rice field to weed. You two stay here and go there only when you hear beating on the butt of a tree. That is the signal that lunch is ready.” Off they went to the field. Daga-daga stayed behind to take care of Palyos, who was still small.
At noon, Inabay started preparing porridge in an earthenware pot for the midday meal. The porridge was still boiling when she took it from the fire. She ladled a good portion of it into a coconut-shell dish for Amalahi. Amalahi said: “It is still quite hot.” Inabay answered: “Oh, never mind, better eat it hot.”
So Amalahi put the shell-dish to his mouth and started swallowing the hot contents slowly. All of a sudden, Inabay was possessed by her ghoulish nature. She threw the hot porridge in the face of Amalahi and started to choke him, her razor-sharp nails cutting his throat. When Amalahi was dead she cut up his body and hacked away at the bones with her bolo.
Daga-daga, who was in. the house, heard the thudding sound made by Inabay and thought that it was the knocking signal on the butt of the tree indicating that the noon meal was ready. She took Palyos along and went to the field, but when she was near enough, she saw what had happened.
Daga•daga ran back to the house and bolted the door from the inside. Then she asked the elves to help them, saying: “Zimmra, fim«wa, make us strong children, and let Inabay find just ants in the house when she comes.”
Inabay arrived, dragging the cut-up portions of her late husband behind her. Inabay shouted: ‘Ripen the door.” The fireplace and the pounding-block answered: “Just a minute, we

Postma / MANGYAN FOLKLORE	47


are busy right now.” Inabay made an opening at the side of the house and climbed inside. But Daga-daga and Palyos could not be found. They were hiding inside a bamboo post that had many tiny holes made by the weevils.
Inabay began cooking her abominable meal, and the two children kept very quiet. But Daga- daga was afraid that Palyos would cry and betray their hiding place. So she asked the elves again to help them: “Timawa, tima›ra, please see to it that when Palyos starts crying, only the squeak- ing of rats wiil be heard.” And so it happened. Inabay wondered where her children were, and she called their names, but there was no answer.
Next morning, Inabay was sitting on the veranda in front of the house, enjoying the early morning sun. She saw a long row of ants climbing down from the house along a vine that was stretched out as a clothesline, and disappearing in the forest. Thinking that maybe her children were among them, she again called their names but there was no answer.
Once in the forest, Daga-daga and her little brother resumed their human shape and con- tinued walking, Daga-daga holding Palyos by the hand. After a while they saw the young of a wild chicken and Palyos cried to Daga-daga: “Catch it for me, please.” After a difficult chase, Daga- daga caught the chicken and gave it to Palyos who happily cuddled it. After they had walked for quite a distance without seeing any house, Daga-daga again asked the elves to help them: “Timawa, Tima›ra, grant us a house here in the forest.” In a flash it was there and they lived in it. A garden was set up and Palyos, who was a big boy by now, helped everyday in cleaning the field. He never failed to bring his pet chicken along. But one day he forgot to bring it home. He went back to the field, to the tree to which he had tied it, but all that he could find were its two wings.
Palyos took the wings home and planted them at the side of the house, because both he and Daga-daga believed that the Jul of their


father would give life to the wings. Soon they started sprouting int9 beautiful plants that greW bigger every day. After some time the two plants reached the window and bore many fruits. Again Daga-daga and Palyos asked the elves to help them: “Timmva, Timawa, grant that these fruits contain everything inside: rice, clothing, beads, etc.” They could not pick all the fruits, so they asked their neighbors to help, and they also shared in their good luck. From that moment on Daga«tag and Palyos led carefree and happy lives.
AMALAHI AND THE GIANT
You must have heard about Amamangan, the giant. He and his kind were as tall as trees, but he was easy to fool. Amamangan had a craving for human flesh. Many people wanted to get rid of him, but they did not dare. Only Amalahi was clever enough to scare him, once and forever. It happened this way.
One night, Amamangan could not get the food he craved above all else, so he decided to go fishing in the river with a huge torch made out of a whole bamboo bush. One of his many sons was with him, and together they collected a large amount of crabs, shrimps and eels.
After fishing for hours, the son suddenly said: “Father, somebody is grinning at us and baring his teeth.” “Hush! Don’t pay any at- tention,” said Amamangan. He knew for sure that it was Amalahi who was trying to scare them but he thought that by not minding him, they might be left unharmed.
They continued to gather shrimps and fuh and frogs, and in the end they made a big fire at the side of the river. There they started roasting their catch. Soon there was Amalahi again (for he was indeed the one who had earlier scared the giant’s son). He curled his lips in a frightful way, showing his teeth. “Father, someone is grinning at us” said the son. “Be quiet, and don’t mind him,” the father replied. But when Amalahi tried to take away a choice piece of frog’s head, Amamangan looked Amalahi straight in the face.

48	PHILIPPINE QUARTERLY

What he saw made his giant’s heart melt like wax in the sun. There was Amalahi, baring his teeth, curling his upper lip and pulling it back over his head, so that a skull-like mask was grinning at him. That was too much for Ama- mangan, and he ran with his son to their house as fast as they could. “Amalahi is there,” he told his wife and children, pointing to where they came Rom, “we have to go to the cave and deep there.
They hurried to the cave, bringing along all the food they could carry. Once there, Ama- mangan placed, concealed among the brush that grew in front of the cave entrance, plenty of bamboo stakes and speartraps, meaning to kill anyone who tried to enter the area. Unfortu- nately, in his hurry, he did not realize that his traps pointed in the opposite direction.
Amamangan and his family now relaxed a bit, feeling safe inside, protected by high rock walls. They did not know that Amalahi had been ahead of them and was already hiding inside the cave. As they started to eat their bountiful and delicious meal, one of the children was still looking around inside. He yelled: “Father someone is grinning at us.” “Leave it,” said Amamangan, not understanding what the child was saying. But the latter cried again: “Father, somebody there is baring his teeth.” Amamangan, himself, now looked and saw Amalahi, his upper lip curled upwards, exposing grinning teeth and skull bones.
“Run for your life,” shouted Amamangan, and he stormed out of the cave, running straight into the pointed stakes and spears he had con- cealed there earlier. His stampeding brood following on his heels trampled to death his pregnant wife. Outside the cave, the children all met the same fate on the traps their father had laid.

Amalahi roared with laughter at having scared to death the stupid giant and his family. Hungrily, he devoured the rice, crabs, shrimps, frogs and eels that were now all his.

OF CULTURE AND SOCIETY

The Daldali-cycle is about Daldali (the fast one) and his foil, Malway (the slow one). Malway behaves the proper and normal way, whereas Daldali always desires to have things done in a hurry, with deplorable results. Everything Daldali does goes wrong because of his impatience. Whenever things are difficult or impossible to get people say that is due to Daldali’s hastiness. The story given below is taken from the Daldali- cyde.
WHY CHICKEN EGGS ARE HARD TO GET
A long, long time ago, there lived two cousins. One was named Malway-malway because he was never in a hurry. Whatever he did, he did with understanding and patience, The other cousin, Daldali, did everythin8 a hurried and sloppy way, and the result was always deplorable.
One day, Malway-malway went to the forest to look for eggs. He had a large basket on his back to put the eggs in. On the way he met Wild Chicken. “Where are you going, Malway- malway?” “Oh, nowhere in particular; I am looking for eggs. Maybe you can help me,” replied Malway-malway. “Sure,” Wild Chicken said, “put your basket down and I’ll see what I can do for you.” However, before getting into the basket, Wild Chicken told Malway-malway to stay away a short distance and close his eyes, keeping them shut until he would hear her first cackling. When that came, Malway-malway opened his eyes. Wilfi Chicken told him to come closer and he did. What did he see? A basket full of eggs! At least a hundred of them! Malway- malway thanked Wild Chicken heartily and went home happy. Orr the way he met Daldali.
“Where did you get that basket filled with eggs?” inquired Daldali.
“They were given to me by Wild Chicken,” Malway-malway answered.
“Wow,” said Daldali, “I will go to her and ask for some.” He looked around for a huge basket, then went to the forest and called out:

Postma / MANGYAN FOLKLO RE	49



“Wild Chicken, where are you? I’d like to have a basketful of eggs.”
After some time which seemed too long for Daldali, the Wild Chicken answered. Daldali repeated his request and Wild Chicken told him to put the basket down. But before she settled down in the basket, she said: “Now stay away, close your eyes, and don’t open them until you hear me cackling.”
“All right, all right, Wild Chicken, but make it fast, will you?” Daldali closed his eyes, but after a few minutes, he became impatient. He called out loud: “Wild Chicken, aren’t you finished yet?” But no sound could be heard. He opened his eyes and went to the place where the basket and Wild Chicken were He scared Wild Chicken and she flew away. The impatient Daldali found only one egg in his big basket.
This explains why eggs are difficult to get nowadays, let alone a wild chicken, unless you mare one or shoot one with a bow and arrow.

The Juan Pusong-cycle, which is common tlimughout the Philippines relates adventures of the trickster type, found in many folk-tales the world over. Juan Pusong does not appear to be very intelligent, but he has more than his share of brazen courage and sheer luck. Things often aceidently happen to hit advantage and the highest rewards become his prize. The cycle ie a favorite with the Mangyans. &k›w is an account of one of his adventures.

JUAN PUSONG AND THE JUMPING FROG
Pusong was feeling very hungry one day, so he decided to slaughter his pig, prepare the meat and cook a lot of rice. After he had eaten enough to his satisfaction, there was still plenty of food left for he had cooked without thinking of how ir.uch he could consume.
Pusong went to the beach and buried his food in the sand: seven big cooking pots full of rice and seven full of port. After this tiresome



task was done, he decided to relax and tried to amuse himself with a frog he had caught.
After a while a big boat arrived to load food from the shore. The ship’s captain saw Pusong running around with his frog. He asked Pusong what he was doing. Pusong told him: ‘this is a miraculous frog. Wherever it jumps, you will find food under.”
The Captain could not believe what he had heard, so he challenged Pusong to prove it. Pusong let his frog jump a few times along the beach.
“Okay,” said Pusong, “now you start digging there, there, there,” as he pointed to different spots, “and you’ll find food for sure.”
Indeed, it was as Pusong had said. The Captain and his crew were greatly surprised. After a few more jumps of the frog, the rest of the food was “discovered”. The ship’s crew, together with the Captain, ate to their hearts’ content.
“Pusong,” the Captain said, “I want to buy your frog, at any price.” So the deal was made, and Pusong received everything the boat was ca.rrying: money, clothes and other things as weh. The boat left with the frog, and Pusong went home carrying all of his new treasures.
When the boat landed at another island and the crew feh they needed food again, the Captain eagerly tried out the miraculous frog. Wherever it jumped along the beach, they dug and kept digging untii the openings of the holes they made were above their heads, but no food was to be found. It did not take them long to realize that they had been fooled.
One month later the boat anchored once again at the place of Pusong. The crew saw Pusong walking along the beach but they were not completely sure that he was the one who had tricked them.
“Hey, what’s your name?” they shouted. “Ha? I am Pusong,” he said.

50	PHILIPPINE QUARTERLY OF CULTURE AND SOCIETY



“Ah, you are the one who tricked us!” and they tried to grab Pusong.
“Wait a minute,” Pusong told them. “There is another Pusong living farther up and I am sure that he must be the scoundrel you are looking for!” In this way he esé ped his pursuers.

The Animal-Story-Cycle. This type can be compared with the fables of the classical age. The animals which appear most frequently are the monkey, the turtle and the deer. Some of the stories are part of the people’s store of folktales throughout the Philippines and even in Indonesia. The recurrence offers evidence of a close link between the Mangyans and other groups in and outside the Philippines.

THE MONKEY AND THE CROCODILE
Monkey was upset. No more food could be found in the forest of the little island of Buyayaw, and he was very hungry. Of course, he could go to the mainland where there was plenty of food but there was one problem: how was he to cross the channel which was infested with voracious crocodiles?
“Well, let’s find out from the water,” Monkey said.
He spoke to the water: ‘Water, if it is dangerous for me to cross, turn cold.”
He dipped his hand into the water and cold it was indeed! But to die from hunger was no fun, either: so he would try to cross the channel, whatever the outcome might be!
So Monkey started to swim across the channel. Somewhere midway, Crocodile was waiting.
“What do you want of me, Crocodile?” Monkey asked.
‘Well,” said Crocodile, “I’ll just have your liver. That is what I like best.”
“My liver!” exclaimed Monkey, "that’s just too bad. I left it on the shore because if I had


taken it along, I would surely get drowned. But as a good friend, I am willing to get it for you. Maybe you could give me a ride on your back?”

Together they went to the opposite shore, Monkey riding on the  crocodile’s  back. With a great leap Monkey jumped onto solid land and turned around at a safe distance.
“You stupid Crocodile,” he shouted, “have you ever heard of anyone leaving his liver behind!” After that he disappeared into the forest, leaving an angry crocodile behind.

But Crocodile planned to take revenge, and one day he hid himself in the house of Monkey, while Monkey was out. But Monkey was suspi- cious, and decided to make sure whether Croco- dile was inside the house or not.

“If somebody is in the house, let him keep silent,” Monkey shouted, “but if nobody is inside, he should give a yell.”

And sure enough, Crocodile gave a terrific yell! Said Monkey, “You stupid Crocodile, have you ever heard a house yell, when nobody is inside?”

Still, Crocodile did not give up. One day, he was wallowing in the mud giving off an awful stench. Flies were settling on his body, as if he had already died. At this moment, 8Ionkey came up, so Crocodile acted as if he were really dead. Monkey came nearer. Crocodile looked dead all right, but one couldn’t be sure. “You, cadaver, if you are alive, don’t make a sound. But if you are really dead, let me hear it.” Crocodile gave a thundering roar.

“You stupid Crocodile!” Monkey laughed from a safe distance, “ever heard of a dead crocodile that can roar?”

Because of his smartness, Monkey always managed to escape the traps of Crooodile.

Postma / MANGYAN FOLKLORE	51


2.	Sugidanon. The second category of Mangyan fok tales is understood by the Mangyans to have reached them through Bisayan contacts, although the dialect used is Mangyan throughout. The Bisayan word sugl means “to tell” or “relate”.
The s aitox is a legend and deals with heroes and their opponents, with kings and queens and princesses. The personal names em- ployed are usually Spanish, as are some of the places referred to. This may be an indication that there is considerable Spanish cultural influence surrounding the origin of these stories.

As with the riddles, the siiyof and stijiidanon can be told only at night because telling these stories during the day will cause the teeth of the story-teller to decay.

KING FERNANDO AND PRINCE FELIPE
King Fernando was old and very lonely since his wife, the Queen, had died many yean before. One day, he called his cousin, Prince Felipe, and told him: “I had a dream last night in which 1 saw a beautiful woman. Her name was Doña Maria, and she was staying in the seventh gallery of Heaven. Prince Felipe, I want you to bring her to me.”
Prince Felipe said he would, but at the same time, he wondered how he was going to perform the task set to him. He did not know where to go to find Doña Maria.
Later, while walking with no particular aim in mind, he saw a young eagle that had fallen from its nest. He placed it back in the nest, and the mother eagle thanked him for his kindness. She said, “If I can ever be of help, just let me know.”

‘tell,” Prince Felipe answered, “it so happens that I am ordered by the King to get Doña Maria from the seventh gallery of Heaven, but I don’t know where it is.”


“Don’t yc i worry about that,” the eagle said, ‘just holi tight to my wings and I’ll bring you there.”
Up they w !nt, and the whole day they were Oying. Finally, in the late afternoon, they reached the place of Doña Maria. The eagle waited outside while Prince Felipe talked to Doña Maria. He explained that he had been sent by King Fernando to fetch her, because the King wanted her to be his wife.
But Doña Maria refused to become the wife of old King Fernando. Prince Felipe, however, convinced her to come along; otherwise, the King would be angry with him.

So she went along, both of them riding on the eagle. But instead of going straight to the King, they went to the parents of Prince Felipe.

Once they were there, Doña Maria said: “Prince Felipe, pound plenty of rice grain into a fne flour.” And that’s what he did. Doña Maria then made a lifesize rice-doll, with her features copied as closely as possible, and she dressed it with a set of her own clothes. It really looked as if it were her twin.!

She then instnicted the rice-doll: “If the King asks you something, just answer him, and eat what he offers you.”

Prince Felipe carried the rice-doll to the palace of King Fernando, who was extremely pleased. The King talked to the doll and gave it something to eat, and in his excitement, he did not notice anything wrong. But after three days, the King noticed that his idol ate very little and on the fifth day, the rice-doll died. This was too much for King Fernando, and he died of heart- break soon after.

Prince Felipe and Doña Maria got married after the King’s death and since he had left no heirs, the couple were placed in charge of the Kingdom.

52	PHILIPPINE QUARTERLY OF CULTURE AND SOCIETY


3.	Tultulanon. The word means “related hap- pening.” In Bisaya, tultul means  “to  indicate” “to show the way.” A tultulanon usually deals with something that is supposed to have really happened in the past. Examples of such accounts are the “origin” stories of the names of islands, rivers, mountains and other geographical features. No matter how fantastic the history of a certain place may appear to be, it is still believed to have happened at sometime in the remote past. An example of a place with such a fantastic origin is Mount Naapog near Mansalay, Or. Mindoro.
It is interesting  to  note that  the tultulanon is not included in the time taboo of  the  suyot and sugidanon.

THE ORIGIN OF MOUNT NAAPOG
In the beginning of time, before the great flood covered the earth, our world was flat and without mountains.

One day, the sea rose and spread out  over the whole earth. Everybody drowned with the exception of two persons, Anay and Apog. The house in which they lived was not  reached  by the water, which  stopped  just  outside  their yard.

When finally the waters gradually began to recede, the whole world was found to be dif- ferent. In some parts the ground had sunk; in others mountains appeared. The land of  Anay and Apog was now very high, and was in fact, the highest place on earth. To this day,  one  still finds on Mount Naapog the remains of small sea shells and the ampipisik tree which is found only in swampy areas. Moreover, the water on Mount Naapog has a salty taste.

By way of an interesting footnote to this story, it may be mentioned that the lime powder used as an ingredient for betelnut chewing is called apog, and is obtained by firing sea shells. The  leaves   of  the  Ampipisik  tree	uium memillii Dubard) of Mount Naapog  are similar to those of the Ampipisik {Avicennia marina

Forsk.) along the seashore although botanically they belong to different species. However, during a climbing expedition to the 924-meter high peak of Mount Naapog, no water at all was found, let done salty water!
V.	Others.
The last group of folklore items collected do not fit properly into any of the first four cate- gories explained above, so it was decided to deal with them as a separate group. The materials in this group include the following:
1)	125 items in folk-medicine
2)	57 descriptive items on rice-varieties.

1)	Folk-medicine. The items belonging to this group consist mainly of brief references to the different plants that abound in  the  mountain areas inhabited by the Mangyans. There are 125 common medicinal plants discussed. In each case, there is a description of the  plant, the sickness for which it is used and methods of preparation and application. Viewed as a whole, the instruc- tions give an interesting insight into the practical skill the Mangyans have acquired in dealing with disease. A few examples are given below:
a)	Newifi (Ficus Hauili Blanco)
The nnwifi tree is used to  cure  ring-  wo rrn {bun-i). However it can only be used as long as the skin disease has not yet spread to an area wider than a hand. Beyond that size, the hawili will no longer be effective.
A cut is made in  the trunk of the tree and the sap collected. Then the affected area on  the  body  is  thoroughly  cleaned  and the sticky sap of the hawili rubbed on it. Powdered lime is then sprinkled on the treated skin.
This medicine should be applied daily until the skin disease has disappeared.
The leaves of the h‹nvili tree may also be effective against headache. The leaves are pressed against the spot that is painful and tied in place with a piece of cloth. They are to be changed mo ming, noon and evening.

Postma / MANGYAN FOLKLORE	53



b)	Legtang (Anamirta coceulus Linn., W.
and A.)
The lagtang vine is used in treating boils.
The young leaves are removed from the middle portion of the vine. After that, this portion is burned, and the ashes are sprinkled on the boil. After the ashes have been evenly spread on  the  affected  area,  the  young leaves of the lagtang  are  placed  on  top  of the boil and tied in place.
This treatment should be repeated twice a day, and continued for at least four days.
2)	Rice-varieties. Rice cultivation occupies a central place in the life of the Mangyans. It is central to many of their daily activities. Through- out the year the Mangyans are engaged in one phase or another cf rice-cultivation. It is no wonder then that so many upland rice varieties are known, all having their own individual characteristics and proper names.  Descriptions of 57 known varieties have been collected. According to Mangyan informants, more may be available in other areas.
a)	The  Mitaw  is  an  upland  variety  of white rice. The leaves are small but  the  stem is rather tall. The spikes are long, as is the shape of the rice grain, which has white skin and is rather fine . It is easy to thresh and pound. When cooked it has a fragrant smell and is delicious to eat, even without any sidedish.
This variety of rice can usually be harvested after about three months.



b)	The Tipuko y is dso an upland rice variety. The spikes of the plant are short , but the rice grain is rather large, like the Kamuros variety. The skin is reddish,  but the pounded rice is quite white. The un- husked rice is soft and easy to thresh or pound. The cooked rice has a nice aroma and tastes very good.
This variety takes approximately six months to mature.


Altogether, this first intensive effort towards compiling the literature of the Hanunoo- Mangyans in Southern Mindoro has been quite successful. The quantity of literary materials collected within a rather limited period of time greatly surpassed our original expectations. The number of folklore samples included could easily have been increased, but it is believed that those shown here are sufficient to show the rich and interesting variety of the folklore materials obtained from the Mangyans of Southeastern Mindoro.

A closer study of the different items and a com.parison with the related published materials on other ethnic groups within and outside the Plulippines, will certainly reveal many parallels, but will undoubtedly also bring out some unique features in the field of Mangyan folklore and literature. It may also help to  throw some light on the rather unknown past of Mangyan history.





Philippine Folklore among
the Ilocanos
I S I D O RA B LA N C A F L O R


THE HOME OF THE ILOcANos is that section of the Philippines immediately south of Formosa, three hours by plane from Taipeh. Those who speak the dialect, however, do not live in Northern Luzon only; they are found prac- tically everywhere in the archipelago. And quite a number have established themselves abroad, so that as a group they are considered the most adven- turous of the Filipinos. President Magsaysay happens to be an Ilocano and so was his predecessor.
I spent the first twelve years of my life in the Ilocano region. Memory often goes back to childhood days. Recollections of friends and relatives coming to the house in the evening, usually ending up with a story for us children about kings and queens in distant lands, are still vivid. But those interesting stories are now beyond recall; others have crowded them out. The proverbs, riddles, and songs, however, have stayed with me all these years; and these I have translated into English, putting in parentheses the occasions for their use.

PROVERBS AND PROVERBIA EXPRESSIONS
Household and Sim ple Events oJ Li fe
i. Perdicion bagas agraman tu yo.
Rice wasted including the bran. (Rice is the  staple  food  of  the  Filipinos;  the bran is fed to hogs. A disappointed parent says this when a child fails to pass in the finals, meaning that the expense incurred was a total loss.)
z. Uma naata ta y tungo no maisongrod sum gedto.
Firewood, though green, when put into the fire will eventually burn. (The con- stant and close association of  a  young man  and  a young woman  will attract  them to each other.)
3	Ura isubsuborn on mate ppay to pa laeng.
You may be in the act of putting it into your mouth, it’s still likely to go amiss.
(“There’s many a slip ’twixt the cup and the lip.”)
4	No awan ft ax us atrax ti lamut.
No patience, no eats. (If one endures hardships, he will benefit.)
g. Agincocoa sa fiay no di.
Pretends not to but he really is. (An innocent look is a favorite cloak.)
6. fahtag ti calcalzada matay ti coscosina.
Captivating in the street, dead in the kitchen. (This is said in describing a young lady who dresses beyond her means.)


i6o	WES T E RN F O LK LO RE
J. Ti mangan ma bsug.
He who eats gets full. (Certain acts mean sure results.)
8. ii macaturog macamucat ngem ti nasalucag agbiag.
He who sleeps misses, but he who is watchful  lives. (In  the  Philippines,  where the climate is warm and humid, it is customary to get  up  early  and  start working,  so that by breakfast most of the household work is out of the way. By four o’clock, the menfolk are out in the field or garden working, then come home for breakfast.)
g. No adda mâcan may no saan a magaw-at umatiddag ti ima.
When there’s something to eat although out of reach, the hand becomes longer. (When it comes to material advantage, we leave no stone  unturned  in order  to get it.)
i o. ii na pungtot agsebba iti pagpeggadan a cas la sim utsimut.
The hot-tempered jump into danger like winged ants. (One  way of  saying:  “It pays to keep a cool head.”)
11. SOOTm o ti agd i ldi flaw no cndduam ti agtactacaw.
’Tis of no use complaining when the robber is of your group. (There’s no use talking when the culprit is one of your men.)
i z. ii nagsida ti sili isu ti magasangan.
His mouth burns who has eaten chili. (This is aptly quoted when an individual takes offense at statements indirectly made.)
i 3. Di pa f na lut o ni paria sim magpaw ni cora hosa.
Before the amargoso was cooked the squash  jumped  in. (“Who rang your belly”)  i q. Sasaor banbannog no sa bali ti aglam lamut.
Useless labor if it’s someone else that’s eating. (The loser says this upon discover- ing that another has reaped the benefit of his efforts.)
Metaphorical
•s Ti asideg ti dalican isu ti ma pudotan.
He who is nearest the stove gets the heat. (Pull. Friends of a governing party get
the promotions.)
i6. Matay ti tocac a baddek enna.
A frog he steps on dies. (Describes a person who is naturally slow in  all  he  does.) i 2. Agriingcan, Ramon, sindada tab sidamon.
Wake up, Raymond, they have eaten your viand. (This is quoted when a lover’s sweetheart or a husband’s wife is slipping away, in an effort to awaken the lover or husband to the sad situation.)
i8. Agur-ura ti manab toog.
Waiting for something to drop from heaven. (Good for a man too lazy to work and just waiting for luck.)
i g. A wan libeg a di aglitnaw.
No muddy water that doesn’t clear up. (One can always turn a new leaf.)
Peasants, Farm, Countryside
zo. Purawto ti waken, nangisit to dray cannawa en.
The crow will turn white, and the long-legged white bird black. (To show the practical impossibility of high-sounding speeches or promises.)
e i. A nianto pay semi dray root no natal to met dial caballon?
Of what use is the grass when the horse is dead? (Give help before it’s too late. Young men often say this when ardently courting a seemingly indifferent girl.)

P H I LI P P I N E F O LK LO RE	i6i
9 z. Awan tarong nga agbunga ti paria.
There’s no eggplant that bears amargoso. (“A tree is known by its fruit.”)
23. Cogtar ni ca bayan, ilot ni calantangan.
The kick of a female carabao, massage of the male. (Those of the fair sex are so
much inferior in physical strength that  their blows cannot hurt  the menfolks.)  zd. Na 1 pas ti arii awan ti ga rami.
After the harvest there’s no hay. (After a deed has been done, it can’t be undone.)
•s ii cuton uray ipataynan agbatuc idia taga pu lot.
The ant, although fully aware of certain death, dives into molasses. (People dig
their graves with their teeth.)
u6. Ti agm u/mtt/a manginanama ti pagimbaganna.
He who sows hopes for something good in return. (Some people do favors, fully expecting to be favored later on.)
z . Ti ogcutar isu ti nagitlog.
Whoever cackles has laid the egg. (Yt'hoever talks first and loudest  about  an  event or story—usually unwholesome—is often the guilty one.)
e8. No adda taga pulot agaarac dagiti cuton.
Where there is sugar ants are attracted. (Some folks come around only when they can take an advantage.)
zg. No adda sugat pagaaracan ti ngilaw.
Where there’s an open sore, the flies go. (A bad situation is made worse by the deeds or presence of some people.)
Narrative
$o. No agtudo matudoan amin a tao.
When it rains it rains on everybody. (A relative giving gifts to the children is expected to give to all and is not to slight any one child. When the giving is started, this is quoted.)
3i. Sacay la ammo ti ag-Maria Jose p no agcanalboongen.
You only know how to call on Mary and Joseph when guns are already roaring. (Often given as a rebuke when necessary precautions have not been taken, and fireworks have started.)
3z. Ti caririga tan a riingen lay siririing.
The hardest to awaken is he who is awake. (“None so deaf as he who will not hear.”)
33. Ti tao vga agtactacaw cancana on nga a ggaw-awat.
A person who habitually steals is always reaching for something. (Do not touch
anything  that does not  belong  to you.)
34 <!’	a pasagidan  isut  nagaram id.
He who takes offense is the guilty. (Indirect statements hurt only those who are
guilty.)
33. No masoir toy puris sumak it a sumak it.
The more a thorn in the flesh is touched, the more it hurts. (People get  hurt or angry when their sore spots are touched.)
36. ii cucua masa pulan, ngem ti pintas saan.
Wealth can be acquired, but beauty cannot. (Often quoted by poor but good- looking girls.)
$ . ii ca ba llo no bu I bu loden ti ngipenna dt k itk itaen.
\Vhen a horse is borrowed its teeth should not be looked at. (Do not criticize

i6z	WES T E RN F O LKLO RE
anything you borrow,  no matter  how old  or  out-of-date  it  might  be. “Don't  look a gift horse in the mouth.”)
3 . Dagiti lugcac no aguornongda casda la nadanuman a lucac.
The vain when together are like frogs in water. (“An empty wagon rattles the
mOSt.”)
39 No adda a puy o iifotr agaarac dagiti simutsimut.
When there is a fire or light, winged ants are attracted.
to adda sabsabong agaarac dagiti culibangbang.
Where there are flowers, butterflies go.
Dagit i babbalasang awaken dagiti babbaro.
Young women attract young men. (The old folks are fond of saying  these  in social gatherings as they notice the behavior of the young people.)
Fold
4° S• a rt mo a ma podara ti awan darana.
You cannot squeeze blood from the bloodless. (A debtor says this to show his
inability to pay on a debt.)
4•. Na pudot ti pirac.
Money is hot. (It’s hard to save.)
4z. Nokia pay ta cara an ta matam bacan ngem ti ngiwat ti tao.
A river may be stopped, but the mouth of man never. (People will talk.)
43 Timma JOb nga awan §ayo#ria.
He flew without wings. (Speaking of a person quickly disappearing from a place
because of fright or embarrassment.)
q . A yus na amin nga a)us.
Wherever the stream goes he goes. (A yes-yes man.) 4$. A listo no data, canaat no obra.
Quick to eat, slow to work. (Children usually have good appetites and readily respond to the call to eat but would rather play than work. And older people have a knack of avoiding real work.)
46. A wan ti nacaa -a -ay a cas ti namnama a mo§aoy.
There’s nothing more pitiful than a blasted hope. (A disappointed lover, an abandoned sweetheart is pictured thus.)
q . Aganusca bagi ta dica met nagpadi.
Have patience, body, since you didn’t choose the priesthood. (Men engaged in manual labor say this to comfort themselves.)
4	<!’ agtangtanQad  macatangad barsanga.
He who looks up sees only withered branches. (Looking up is a sign of helpless-
ness. Nothing is gained.)
qg. Wen fo no saan a lumagto.
It will be yes if it doesn’t jump out. (Said when pressed  upon to make a promise so as to be absolved if it should miscarry.)
3o. No nagsombrero ti lalak i, lalaki manen.
When  a man  dons his hat, he is a man  again. (A moral  fall cannot  hurt a man.)  s i. Ti utang mabayadan, ngem ti naimbag a nakem saan.
A debt can be paid, but a kind act never. (Appreciation for a kind act can be
expressed only in kind.)
s•. Bagim ita, bagicto no maminsan.
Now is yours, mine will be next time. (You win, 1 will next time.)

P H I LI P PI N E  F O LKLO RE	i6g
33. No ‹igbiagcorni ogtiiagro met.
If we live, you will live also. (An expression of willingness to share the necessities of life with another. Often said during the war.)
54- Mucho habla no ha) obra.
Much talk, no work. (A hang-over of the Spanish rule. When a fellow talks and
boasts of what he can and will do, this is quoted within his hearing.)
g$. MataJ ni ‹igtir-tiray, mabtag ni paur-ura .
He who is waiting dies; he who is waited on lives. (The former is at a decided disadvantage, while the latter takes his time, being sure of his ground.)
$6. No saan nga agpa so saan a dumbet.
If a thing is not true it  won’t  stick. (No matter  what  is said a guiltless  person will not feel hurt.)

Love is a comfort.
38. Ti napili macapili Ii cuggangi.
He who is choosy is likely to make a poor choice. (Used especially in connection with a young man who does not seem to be able to find a girl to suit his fancy, and  of a young woman who finds faults with admirers.)
so. A wan ti pisos no awan ti centavo.
There is no peso without a centavo. (Little things go to make up big ones. If
you want to save, watch the pennies.)
6o. to umolog ti novio ken novia ti pagsangpetanda boda.
When a groom and a bride go out they arrive at a wedding. (One step leads to another. It is understood that a lover and a sweetheart will get married some day.)
6i. bairn-inn bag ti mata la mali patanen ngem ti agbiag a maibabain.
It's better to die, for you will be forgotten, than to live in shame. (Death is preferable to a life of shame.)
6z. bairn-innbug ti agtura iti bassit nga ili ngem iti maicadduaca nga agtura iti dackel a ciudad.
It’s better to be the chief in a small town than to be an assistant chief  in  a  big city. (“I’d rather be a little king in my domain.”)
63.	* i agim-imun agat-a tap.
He who is jealous is alway suspicious. (Used in discounting stories imagined  by   a jealous lover or husband, sweetheart or wife.)
64.	Uray ania n dalan agturong iti Qogagdoitari.
Any path leads to a stairway. (There are evidences that are alway sure.)
Weather
6s No bumangcag ti tucac uma) Ii layus.
When frogs go ashore, a flood is coming. (By instinct  or  foresight,  some  know where to place themselves to save themselves.)
66. No aguli dagiti cuton agtudo.
When ants go up the house it’s going to rain. (This is a sure sign.  Black  ants going up the house mean rain for several days, at least. The women folk do their utmost to get all the cleaning and washing done.)
Medical
6.	No mal pas ti caan
A laen ti pungan
la sangailien ft k in nan.

i6	W ES T E RN F O LK LO RE
After eating let’s get the pillow and entertain what's been eaten. (Said after  a  hearty meal, usually at noon, during the hottest time of the day.)
68.	Aggortgor a di og§iidof,
Agasak it ti ulona a di agut-uI.
Having a fever without  rise in  temperature;  a headache  that  doesn’t  hurt. (Said of a young man when badly struck by one of the opposite sex; and of  a young  woman when losing out.)
6g. Awan sabali nga agas ti sak it tt §ttso no saan met la tay capuspusona.
No other cure for heartache except which has caused it. (Only a reconciliation can effect the cure of a heartbreak.)
Universally Acce pted Truths
o. Uray bassit no sagat, ma dackel no bagbag.
Although small if it’s hard wood, even though large if it be  soft  wood.  (It’s quality that counts, not size. A man of small stature is respected if he has brains.)
y i. No adda aldao adda met rahii.
If there’s day there’s also night. (A situation may exist now, later  the opposite will.)
z. A wan ti ngomato a din to bornaba.
Nothing goes up that won’t come down. (“Fortune’s wheel  keeps  turning round.”)
i3	madi a pabagbagaan agturong iti pagrigatan.
He who refuses to be advised is headed toward difhculty. (Parents often say this
to the young, especially after they have gotten into trouble.)
24. No nanny ti pagimbagan adu doglti utifng.
When prosperity is just around the corner, there are many objections. (The envious try to picture a dark outlook when they fear their friends or neighbors  will get ahead.)
g. Ti Dios cunana, Agannadca ta isalacanca.
God says, “Be careful and I will save you.” (He who is not careful cannot expect God’s protection.)
26. ri agsa psa pul macasa pul.
He who is seeking finds. (An earnest seeker is eventually rewarded.)

He who sows reaps. (If parents are good to their children, they will be good  to them especially when they are old.)
28. Tt macautang agbayad.
He who has a debt pays. (It is a common belief that wrongs done by a father, for instance, will be done, if not to him, to his children.)
›9 Awan ti di agpu llo.
Nothing is without end or limit. (A bad character will some day meet his doom.)
8o. Ti tao a mayanac matay.
A person that is born will die. (Good luck may be the portion of some people all the time, but such a situation won’t last forever.)
8 i. Ti init a ru mm uar lum nec.
The sun that rises sets. (“It’s their day now.”) 8z. No adda ubing adda met laca .
If there’s a child there’s also an old man. (There’s always an opposite of every- thing. One may be young now but he’s sure to be old some day.)

P H I LI P P I NE  F O LKLO RE	›6s
83.	No odde babai ndda met lalak i.
If there’s a woman there’s also a man. (The finding of a certain species or evi- dence proves the existence of another that usually goes with it.)
84.	Uma y ma fat amin a sangcaili  no  madi  ti agaddani.
Even if the whole town should approve if the two parties concerned do  not. (People may try to match this man with that woman, but if the two do not like each other no power on earth can make them.)
s Uray madi amin ti 5axgcai/t no mayat ti agaddani.
Even if a whole town should not approve if the two most concerned agree. (Just
the reverse of No. 8q.)
Personification
86. Ti tangsit agal-lalangit.
Pride soars as high as the sky. (There’s no limit to what  pride may lead  a person to do.)
82. Ti alap sal putenna ti langit.
Suspicion penetrates the sky. (This is usually said after a suspicious person has narrated stories.)
88.	Aguanla, Palad, umay to iii Gasat.
Keep on the good work, Palm, Fortune will come. (Said as a jest, within the hearing of folks who believe in palmistry and luck.)
Biblical
89.	Ti tao a mairurumen ni A§o Duos ti manaraken.
He who is unjustly treated God sustains. (The poor,  widows,  and  orphans  say this when unjustly treated.)
9o. ii rucod a pangrucodmo isunto met Ii pacarucodam. “With what measure ye mete it shall be measured unto you.” gi. Aramidem ti padam a tao ft cayatmo a tnaorarnid kenca. “Do unto others as you would have others do unto you.”
gz. Saanmo nga araramiden iti padam a tao ti saanmo a canal a maaramid k enca.
Do not do to others what you do not wish done to you.
Figurative Expressions
93. Casla naulaw iti birabid awan joy agsusurot uray 6aisif.
Everything in a whirl, not the slightest semblance of  order. (A certain  kind of clam when eaten causes dizziness, a similar effect caused by a home where every- thing is topsy-turvy.)
94 Casla nadanuman a tocac.
Like watered frogs. (To describe a place where everybody is talking all at once.) g5. Singpet Ii biteb.
Good behavior like a bedbug’s. (Seemingly innocent and harmless but stings on
the sly.)
g6. Agsebba a casla simu tsimut.
Jumps into the fire like a winged ant. (Some people do not use their sense; they run into difficult situations, when the sensible thing to do would be to keep out.)
97 COSIO Ogdurduri a nuang.
Having a backbone like that of a carabao. (A fit description of people who can
no longer blush or be sensitive to unwholesome remarks made to them.)

i66	W ES T E RN F O LK LO RE
9 . Casla nacangngeg a tu leng.
Like a deaf person hearing for the first time. (Overjoyed on hearing good news,
he seems to be beside himself.)
gg. Utangna amin a binggas ti dutdutna.
His debts are as numerous as the pores of his skin. (A fit description of one  who  is in the habit of borrowing money.)
ioo. Casla na palec a piec.
Like a chick hit on the  head. (A young person  too shy  to speak or move.) io i. Casla agm pm pa a cuarta.
He has a face like a centavo. (A lover of money who wants to get every cent possible.)
ioz. Casla naca pet pet sarifisirno.
As if holding the supreme saint—small crucifix. (Said of  one  holding something so tight he won’t let go.)
io3. Casla nacagun-od langit.
As if he had reached heaven. (Describes one who is perfectly  happy  and  con-  tented.)


RinDLES
1	4 Bu Iong ti atis rtagtafficud nag paris.
Leaves of the atis tree, back to back exactly alike.
io$. No bassit Jay candela, no dackelen bandera.
When young, a candle; when big, a flag.
io6. Aso a hurt man ngttttugnw iti casiitan.
A long-haired dog seated among thorns. io2. Dtto cogs-it dumanon langit.
Two slits that reach the sky.
io8. No um olog ti senora agucrad ding sam paga. When a lady goes downstairs the big flower opens. iog. Maysa ti usokem duo ti cautem.




(Ears) (Bananaleaj (Bamboo  shoot)
(Eyes)

(UmbeMa)

You stick your head through one, you put both hands through two.	(Dress) i i o. No umolog a pan cum utcut no umuli cumaga t.

Going down  it  buries  itself;  going  up  it  bites. i i i. Bassit nga rn$erZio nacab fed tt esttfo.
A little bit of a hell that gives beauty.
i i z. No a ldaw dariwangwang no rahii tacu p.
In the daytime it’s all open, at night closed tight.
i 13. Bala) ni Sta. Ana na pnot bangbanga.
House of Saint Anna full of round jars.
i i 4. Babu y n i San Juan ngurirts n mangan.
The pig of St. John squeaks when eating.
i i§. Sino tt Qorsua a maymoyso ti la payagna?
What's a created thing that has only one earn
i i6. Sino ti mu la nga may agtudo ti napigsa saan a mabasa.!
What plant is there that stays dry in spite of a downpour?

(Pos)
(Flat iron) (Window) (Coconut tree) (Sugar mill)
(Sheath)

(“Aba,”  a  plant  of  the tapioca  family  that  has rubberlike leaves) i i 2. SiZio tt §orsun nga agca lca1-lugong ift ftZiorig.*
Who    keeps a hat  on  in the shade?	(A jar of water)

P H IU  P P INE	FO LK LO RE
i i8. Agbit bit in sinan puzo.
It is hanging, shaped like a heart.
2	19. Uk isnan bagasnan, lazona tf›ogorn. Its skin is its meat.
i zo. Srno tt bunga nga ak in mar t i buk elna?
What fruit has its seed on the outsides
i z i. No moli§otom tnanfatn; no saan mo o ma lt pa tan saanmo a moafo. If you forget you’ll get it; if you do not forget you won’t get it.




(tango) (Onion) (Kasuey)

(Spike of plantain or amor seco) i zz. Langit ngato /nngtf 6o6a, danum ft nagtengtengnga.
Sky  above sky  below, water  between the two.	(Coconut) i zJ. Astn asino ngata ti bimmaba a senora nala bit ammoyo ngata ta naI pasco

Who  is the  white lady  that came down?	(Salt) i zJ. No unn a tern agcucut, no cucutem agunnat.
If  you stretch  it, it will contract; if  you contract it, it will stretch. (Elbow or knee) i z 3. fi dda rnnysn o Craig napnot betc bucaig.

A little brook filled with white pebbles.
i z6. Ulonan nuang, bagina cayo, ipusna tao.
Its head is a carabao, its body wood, its tail man.
i z2.	Ni nalabaga tudtudokenna ni nangisit,
Agsalsala ni purao, nagca llogong ti bassit.
The red is  poking  the  black, Dancing is the white with a tiny hat.

(Teeth)

(A man plowing)

(A pot of boiling rice)
i r8. Imma ac bala yo naca pacleb cay amin a nadanunco.
I came to your house and  found all of you lying on your stomach. (Bamboo floor)  i zg. Bassit a baket maisalsa lu ket.

A little old woman on the wall.

Universit of Arizona

(Cockroach)







The Lumawig Bontoc  Myths Author(s): Joy Christine O. Bacwaden
Source: Philippine Studies , First Quarter 1997, Vol. 45, No. 1 (First Quarter 1997), pp. 3-
49
Published by: Ateneo de Manila University
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/42634212


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms





























Ateneo de Manila University is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Philippine Studies





This content downloaded from
195.176.29.132 on Fri, 16 Sep 2022 16:19:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms




The Lumawig Bontoc Myths
Joy Christine 0. Bacwaden




Religion is a mapr part of Bontoc-Igorot culture. Igorot religion pen- etrates every aspect of Igorot life, and actual prayers, rites and reli- gious songs accompany every phase or step of life considered significant. There is no social event which does not center on some religious ceremony. Worship is therefore inseparably tied into the structure of society (Scott 1969, 148). The Bontocs profess belief in the presence of an over-all deity oftenames referred to only as the intutungcho (the one above). When pressed for a specific name, he is vaguely referred to as Kafunian. It was Kafunian’s son,  Lumawig, who came down to earth, married a girl from  the town  of  )iontoc, and showed the people all the arts and skills they now know. Their knowledge of irrigation, sighting and destroying  the  enemy,  and other skills are attributed to Lumawig. The taboos and religious be- liefs, rituals, and places revered are all part of this heritage from him (Botengan 1976, 21). These customs and ceremonies are still scrupu- lously observed to this day through the nt0. The ato is the council house where the elders hold various ceremonies and meetings which may be religious, social, or political in nature.
One prominent activity in the ato is story-telling, a favorite rec- reation whenever a group with some leisure has formed.  It  is  the only means of handing down village traditions, history, science and religion. In Bontoc, there are no individuals  set  apart as story-tell- ers, but old men and women who are no longer able to work in the fields, and who are supposed to know best  what  happened  “long long ago” are most often the center of groups of attentive listeners. Among the favorites are stories of Lumawig and his adventures.


The suggestions given by Fr. Joseph A. Galdon, S.J., of  Ateneo  de Manila  Univer- sity, helped greatly in the editing and translating  of  the  text. The support  is grate- Mly acknowledged.






LUMAWIG 8OMTOC MYTHS

Myths 1 and 2 are the Bontoc creation myths. Myth 3 relates how Lumawig comes down to earth and settles in the town of Bontoc, while Myths 4 and 5 relate his adventures in Bontoc. While still in Bontoc, he also gc›es to Sadanga to visit his  brother.  His  adventures there are related in  Myths  6  and  7.  In  Myth  8,  he  leaves  his  family in Bontoc, and Myth 9 relates the death of his sons.
Meanwhile, he goes to Sabangan in Myth 10, to Sagada in Myth 11, and to Bauko in Myth 12. He then proceeds to Kayan, Tadian in Myth 13, 14, and 15. Myth 15 relates how he leaves the earth for his home in the sky.
Myths 16 and 17 are placed at the end since  the time element  is  not clear, thus; they cannot be placed within the order of the pre- ceding myths. It is also possible that the events related in these myths occurred after Lumawig ascended to the sky because  these  myths most clearly show him in his role as a beneficient god who comes down to bless those who perform the proper rituals.





(This story is told as porf of a prayer durin8 a poafong. Poofong or umafon$ is
a tnomioge rite.)


“Nan Napsongan Nan Fatawa”

Waday san sin-akhi, ay yaket lumaos si ama cha ya kinwani na, ’Vuponen yo angkhay nan aso yo ya ad-iyon iayanap si pamabaliyo sinan an-ak yo.“
Ay yaket pay mawakas ya ipanad cha chad lo. I panad cha pay ya kumiyek nan aso cha. Maid kaised- chanana tay an-anwakag nan fatawa. Yaket pay maschem nan talon ya sacha’t sumaa. Kinwanin ina cha, “Ay way inala yo?”

“How He Flooded The Earth”

There were two brothers’ [sons of Lumawigl. Their father passed by and said, ’You keep gathering those dogs around you. Why don’t you use them to catch something for your children?”
The next day they went down [to earth]. When they descended, their dogs howled. There was nothing to confine (the game] for the earth was too open. Night came and they went home. Their mother asked, “Were you able to catch anything?”


1.	The word sin-ekhi literally means siblings, usually Mo, unlem otherwise specified.


PHILIPPINE STUDIES


“Maid pay." Ya kanan kano nan an-ak nay chey en, ’0ntako’t tut-uyeri nan in-ina’s nan fes-ang nay chey. Mo ipyana ta intako’t lan-an nan wane.”
Umey cha pay ila n tet-ewa, hacha’t pumanad. Pumanad cha pay et umali cha’d Kayafang. Ayaka’t nan umes ka wanga ay ka-unga- ungang-a. Kinwani cha, “Sino ka’y way fotog yo’s nawelwelan ya ta kanan yo’n ken sha ama yo’n  utowen tako’t tay awnit matafog nan fata wa. No wa’y ma nok tak o’s nakilem ya chatako’t utowen tay awnin et ma-amas nan takho.”
Yaket pay, in-usaod cha pay et umey cha’t akhes id Planas. Sachaet intokcho pay ya, ken a’t kin wani sinan ’nochi na en, ’la ta pangasem nan panga’y chey.”
Pinangas na pay nan esang ya khuyochena. Sana t iyarneb isnan wanga’y chey. Saet mangalimayeng. Awni pay ya lumifas, kasin na ket kanan en, ’Tangasem nan chey esang ta iyanod ta kayet.” Yakena’t pinangas pay ya kasin na khuyochen. Chaet tumur-o nan chanom ay chey.

Yakena’t kinwani kasin en, “Kasin mo iyarneb nan sana esang.” Yakena’t pay kasin tetewa iyarneb. Chaet tumur-o nan chanom ay chey ct matafog ct nan fatawa.
Naschem pay nan talon ya, "Chey ya," kena’t kinwani, “Lamag ka’d ta ilaem no na-inek nan apoy.”
Yakena’t kinwani en, “In-asiwawa man nan apoy.”

“None." Then, it is told, her sons said, “Let’s go talk to the old woman on the other side of the mountain. If she’ll agree we will block up the river.”
So they really went to see her, and then they descended. They de- scended a nd reac hed Kayaf ang. Many children were bathing in the river. They [the brothers) announced, ’those of you who have mat ure pigs, tell your fathers to cook them for the world will smn  be flooded. If we have full-grown chickens, let us cmk them for everyone will soon be lost.”
Then they also went down to Planas. They sat down and he (the elder brother) said to his younger brother,   “G o   and	cut off t hat branch.”
He cut off a branch and pulled it down. Then he submerged the  branch in the river. And the sky darkened. Then the water started  to  overflow, and he [the elder brother] said again, “Cut off another (branch] and sub- merge it.” So he [the younger brother] again cut off [a branch) and pulled it down. And the water started to rise.
He (the elder brother] said again, “Submerge another branch again.” And he [the younger brother) really submerged another. The water kept rising and the world was flooded.
When night fell, he [the elder brother] said, “Do climb up and  see if the fires have died out.”
Then he [the younger brother] re- plied, ’here are still fires burning here and there.”


LUMAWtG BONTOC MOTHS


Yakena’t  kinwani  en,  “Pumanad ka ta itukcho ta.” Itukcho cha pay ay chey, yaket pay kasin na tarn-awan ya ket na-iinek nan apoy ay chey. Maid inlanglang si apoy.

Napat-a pay nan talon ay chey hana’t kinwani’n, ”Yarn nan sangi ta’y sana ta kamasen ta nan folifog ay nay. Ta eppey ta’s nan sangi ta.”
Sacha’t tet-ewa kinamakamas ay chey. lyan-anod cha pay et ilaen cha nan fatawa. Ya siya et naerngan nan fatawa’y nay, nachasichasig nan filig ay nay.
’take ababfochagcha-kew." Chey insa-kod-ag cha pay ya yaket nasilem nan kaew ay chey am-in. Am-in ay cha pong, am-in ay fulul ong ya tinmufo cha am-in, ket nasilem.
Sacha’t 1umama g cha pay ya tangachen cha’d Pokis. Yaket idcha- nan cha nan sin-akhi ay chey. Kinwa- nin san fafai, ’la maid tinangad ko’s lalaki yaket ak natad-anan.”
“Siya sa ta way inchasig, siya nan minfin-i sinan nachasichasig ay ili,” kanan kano nan sin-akhi ay chey cha.

Awnin pay yaket umey san ama cha ay chey. Yake na’t kanan en, ”Into pay apoy tako?”
“Maid pay."
Ya kena’t pay chemangen ad Kalawitan ay chey, ”Chey si apoy ad Kalawitan ay chey, mednet nan apoy ay chey.”

Then he {the elder bmther J said, “Come and let’s sit down.” They sat down for awhile, then he looked down again and this time the fires had died out. No fires burned anymore.
When morning came, he {the older brother] said, “Hand me our snngi so we can gather these pine cones.' We’ll place them in our sangi.”
A nd they really gathered [the pine cones]. And they submerged them and they looked at the world. And the world could be seen, and mountains had been formed.
“Why! The sky is clear already,” [they said]. Looking around, they saw that forests  had  grown. All  the t rees, and t he green grass had grown.
They climbed  up  the  mountain and looked up at Pokis. And  they found a brother and sister there. The sister said, “I haven’t  been  with  a man but I’m pregnant.”°
’fat’s good because [the child] will be the ancestor of the people from this mountainous place,“ said the brothers.
Then their father (Lumawigl ar- rived. And he said, "Where’s our fire?"
“[There is] none."
Facing Mt. Kalawitan, ’there’s a fire in Kalawitan, we’ll use that fire.”


2.	A sengi is a bag made of rattan carried at the back.
3.	The word she used is tinongsd meaning “to look up." Presumably the Bontoks are familiar only with the missionary position (a sexual position in which the woman is on her back).

7


PHILIPPINE STUDIES


Yaket pay alana  san  songkhayog na ya posiposena pay ket nin pa- pangali’d Kalawitan ay chey. Chen- ana’t akhes nan st Fanayan ay chey. Yakena’t kinwani’n, “Maid pay tina- ngad ko’s lalaki yaket ak naad-anan.”
“Siya sa ta way menc hasig ya way menfin-i sinan nachasichasig ay ili.”
Aw-awni pay ket umana k st Fanayan, inmanak ya fafai. Yakena’t kinwani, ’take ka pet inmanak. Ya into pay nangyam sinan pama- layana?” Ya sana pay eppey iska fanga nan pamalayana’y sana. Alaen na pay nan pamalayana’y chey, kasin na isawsaw, Set ay lalaki.
“Ay siya sa ta wad-ay menfin-i sinan nachasichasig ay ili.

Ya sana’t kinwani en, “Kecheng ta umaak et st apoy tay maid apoy ad Pokis ay chey.” Ya saet inmaa san apoy et posiposena kasin san song- khayog nay chey, yaket nin pa- panga1i’d Pokis ay chey. Ilaen na pay yaket ninkimen  nan  fafai’d  Pokis ay chey.
Kinwani na en, “Ya into pay nangipayan yo’s nan pamalayana?”
’la sana pay ineppey mi’s nan poon nan kaew ay sana.”
Alaen na pay akhes ya isawsaw na yaket fafai san isawsaw na’y chey. “Siya sa ta way men fin-i’s nan nachasichasig ay ili.” Na-asaswa am- in chachi.

Inila na pay san falay ay chey ya kena’t kinwani, “Sino’n nen falay sina?”

Then he got his staff, twirled it around and immediately found him- self in Kalawitan. He also found Fanayan there. And she said, “I haven’t been with a man but I’m pregnant.”
“That’s good because [the child) will be the ancestor of the people from this mountainous place.”
After a while, Fanayan gave birth. She gave birth to a baby girl. And Luma wig remarked, “Oh, you’ve given birth. Where did you put the placenta?” And he took the placenta and put it in a pot. And he held the placenta, and dipped it again, and it became a baby boy.
‘fat’s good because he will be the ancestor of the people from this mountainous region.”
Then Lumawig said, “I’ll now get some fire, for there is no fire  in Pokis.” Then he got the  fire,  and again twirled his staff, and immedi- ately reached Pokis. He found the woman in Pokis had also given birth.


And he asked her, “Where did you put the placenta?”
’be put it there at the foot of that tree,” she replied.
Lumawig also got the placenta, dipped it [in a pot], and it became a baby girl. ’there, [these two] will be the forebears of the people from this mountainous region.“ All [of these children] eventually got married.
When Lumawig saw some rice plants he asked, “Whose rice plants are these?”





“Falay tako sa.”		’lose areour rice plants,” [the pmple said].
Ya  sana’t  kinwani,  “Kuyochen  yo       And  he  said,  “Uproot   the  plants ed  nan inmey ad  Lakhod.”  Kuyochen  which  are  in  Lagod.”  They  did, and cha  pay  ya  makhuyod.	the rice plants were uprooted.
Yakena’t kasin kanan,  “Nan  pay  Lumawig  said  again,  ’the  ones  inmey ad Appay, khuyochen yo’d no which are in Appay, uproot them if makhuyod.” Khuyochen cha pay ya they can be uprooted.” They pulled makhuyod.	[the rice plants) and they were up-
rooted.
Yakena’t   kinwani’n,   “Nan   et    Then  Lumawig  said,  “Pull  the ones inmali ad Khensachan si  khuyochen  which  come  from  Kensachan  [Bontoc yo.” Khuyochen cha pay ya  adi  lfi].”  And  when  [the  peoplel  pulled, kakhuyod.	[the plants) couldn’t be uprooted.
“Siya  sa  nan  wanchen tako. Siya		“This is what we  will  do.  This na  nan  pakhey yo ay umafong.”	will be your palay, you who are get-
ting married.”


MYTI1 2

IThe Bontoc text, with revisions in spelling, is mhm com Carl Seidenadel’s The First Grammar of the Language Spoken by the Bontoc Igorot. It  coincides  in some details with oiher versions of the flood stony and ufso includes other details the researcher wofin’t able lo c0ine across in her research.)

“Nan Napxongan Nan Fatawa”	“How He flooded The Earth”
tsiedenadel version)

Waday  nan sin-akhi  ay manganop      There were two brothers,  the chil- ay an-ak Lumawig. Nan fatawa maid dren of Lumawig who went hunting. filig; chata nan fatawa et mo There were no mountains. The world manganopcha ya maid kaisadtan nan was flat and when they went hunt- laman yanan ogsa.	ing there was nothing to confine the
wild pig and deer.


Isaet kanan nan yon-a en, “Posngentad nan fatawa ta makolod nan filig.” Isachat en posngen ad Mapotpotopot. Kecheng napsong nan fatawa.

Then the eld er brother said, “Let’s flood the world so mountains will be formed.” So they blocked Mapotopotopot, and the world was flooded.


9


PHhJPWNESTUDMS


Isaet kanan nan yon-a en, ’Tntad manalokong." Isachat isalukong nan sangi ad Mapot potopot. Isachat fengaen nan sangi ya angsan nan nakna ay laman yanan ogsa yanan takho.
Kecheng nalufog am-in nan takho. Wad-ay nan sin-aki ay natakho ad Pokis.
Kecheng in-oschong st Lumawig, ya oschonganad Pokis ya kecheng is igay kalineb; et siya nan natakhowan nan sin-aki.

Isaet lumay-og si Lumawig ya kanana en, "Ket chakayo sa!"
Isaet kana n san lal aki en, “Chakami na ya nay naskaw kami!”
Isaet alaen Lumawig nan aso na ad Kalawitan yanan ogsa. Isaet inkyat nan ogsa yanan aso ay umey ad Kalawitan ya umaa cha isnan apoy. Isaet isigchan Lumawig chaicha.
Kanana en, ’Nato adi cha umali!” Isaet umey si Lumawig id Kalawitan. lsanat kanan en, “Na ngke kayo chomongaw is faalen is apoy.” Isanat kanan en, ”Ayed, yey yo nan  apoy  ad Pokis ta iilaek chakayo!”
Kecheng umey chas san kawana nan posong ya matey san apoy ay chey ay inaa cha ad Kalawitan.
lsanat kanan en, “Nangke kayo chomo-ngaw si faalen. Kasin yo’t yey; ta iilaek ed chakayo!” Kecheng iilaena ya matey nan eegnan nan ogsa. Isaet kanan Lumawig en, “At pay akhes matey nan eegnan nan aso’y chey.”


10

Then the elder brother said, ’Set’s go trap {something].” So they left their sangi (rattan backpack] at Mapotpotopot. And [later] when they lifted up their sangi, they found lots of wild pigs, deer and people in it.
All the people on earth were now lost. Only one brother and sister sur- vived on Mt. Pokis.
Lumawig looked down. He looked down on Pokis and it was the only place which was not covered with water. That was where the brother and sister survived.
Then Lumawig came down and said, “Oh, it’s you."
And the brother said, ’Yes, it is we and we’re cold.”
Then Lumawig ordered his dog and deer  to  go to  Kalawitan.  Then t he deer and t he dog swam to Kalawitan to get fire while Lumawig waited for them.
He said, ”What’s taking them so long?“ So Lumawig went to Kalawitan. And he said, ’You can’t be depended on to get fire!” Then he said, “Okay, bring this fire to Pokis and I’ll be watching you.”
When they reached the middle of the pool, the fire they got f rom Kalawitan died out.
Then Lumawig said, 'You can't be depended on to follow orders. Take this fire again and I’ll be watch- ing you.” As he looked at them, the fire held by the deer died out. Then Lumawig said, “Surely the fire that dog is holding will die out too!”





Isaet inkyat si Lumawig umchan ya pinfanes na nan apoy ay eegnan san aso na. lsanat id-an ad  Pokis. lsanat idnet nan apoy ya inchowana ka sin-akhi.

Kecheng maschok nan chanom. Isaet kanan Lumawig en, “Chakayo ay sin-akhi in-asawa kayo.”
Isaet kanan nan fafai en, “Siya mangen; siyat nay kakaiso tay sin- akhi kami!”
Kecheng st Lumawig inasawana chaicha. Ket’ maliton nan fafai. Kecheng makhanak cha.
Isaet potlongen Lumawig nan angsan ay tanob. lsanat kanan isnan tanob, isnan chwa, “Engkali kayo’d ay chwa ay tanob.” Ya inkali cha’s kalin si i-Khinaang.
Inpakaliena chaicha ay chwa is kalin si i -Maligkong. San chwa pakaliena chaicha is kalin si i- Sachanga. lsanat cha inasawwen chaicha. San chwa ay i-Maligkong na khanak cha’d Maligkong; san chwa ay i-Khinaang nakhanakcha ad Khinaang.
Kecheng cha maangsan nan takho. Kecheng chaicha nan umili isnan fatawa.
Kecheng pakaliena san chwa ay tanob akhes si ka lin si i-M init. Kecheng ma khana kcha. Kecheng chaicha nan umili isnan fatawa cha. Isaet waday nan ini-Fewang, ini- Tokokan, ini-Kaneo, ini-Tufeng, ini- Fallig.
Kecheng mawalasan nan fatawa isnan takho. Kecheng cha maangsan nan takho.

Then Lu ma wig swam {in the flood ) and when he reached  [his dog] he snatched the fire the  dog was holding. And he brought it to Pokis. Then he gave the fire to the brother and sister.
The flood water receded. Then Lumawig said, ’You, brother and sis- ter, marry each other.”
But the sister said, “But that would be disgusting for we are brother and sister.”
But Lumawig married them. Then the woman got pregnant. And they
P 'W' -
Then Lumawig cut down a lot of weeds. And he said to two of the weeds, ’talk {to each other], you two weeds.” And they talked [to each other] in the dialect of Guinaang.
He made two I weeds) talk in the dialect of Maligcong. Two (weeds] he made to talk in the d ialect of Sadanga. Then he married them. The two [weeds] from Maligcong pros- pered in Maligcong; the two tweeds] from Guinaang prospered in Guinaang.
Mankind multiplied and (people] populated the earth.

Then Lumawig also made two of the weed s talk in the d ialecl of Mainit. And they prospered. And they settled in their village. Then there were those who settled in Belwang, Tocucan, Can-eo, Talubin, and Barlig.
And the world was filled with people. And mankind multiplied.


11


PHILIPPINE STUDIES


Kecheng isanat patofoen san asin ad Lagkangew. lsanat kanan en, ’5n- uto kayo’t.” Ya na-uto san asin.

lsanat kanan, ’In-ilako kayo’t.” Ya adi cha kekken ay mangilako issan asin tay inchachawes nan kalitako.

lsanat atonen ad Minit ct tumofo nan asin. lsanat kanan en, ’In-i1ako kayo’t.”
lsanat kanan en, ”Nangke kasisia nan engkalianyo; et isna et nan tokchon nan asin ay nay. Chakayo nan minkoa isnan asin tay nannay chay i-Fontok ya inchachawes nan kalicha. La klako nget nan koan chatona.“
Kecheng isanat kanan akhes en, “Engkayot umala ay i-Fontok is pita ta kab-enyo is fanga.” Kecheng kab- en cha ya adi masayog.
lsanat kanan en, ’Nangke faken chakayo is inkaeb si fanga. Laklako nget nan koayo tay adiyo  kekken nan chak ifagfaka ken chakayo.”
lsanat atonen ad Samoki nan fanga. lsanat kanan en, “Engkayo’t umala ay i-Samoki is pita ta kab- enyo is fanga.” Isachat en umala ya kab-encha ya masayog nan fanga.
Isachat kinaeb ya kanan Lumawig en, ’Tnkayod ilako nan kinaebyo ay fanga.” Encha pay ilako ya mal-an.
lsanat kanan isnan i-Samoki, ”Chakayo’s minkoa isnan fanga.” lsanat kanan en, “Chakayo ay i-

Then Luma wig raised sa lt in Lagkangew lpart of Bontoc fi]. And he said, [to the people] "Cook (the salt)!" And the salt was cooked.
Then Lumawig said, “You can now sell {the salt).” But they weren’t able to sell the salt because they spoke very fast.
So Lumawig moved it to  Mainit and the salt multiplied. Then he said, "Sell [the salt).”
Then he said, “My, you speak very well. The salt will stay here. This salt will be yours because the people of Bontoc speak very fast. Maybe selling will be the trade of the Bontoc people.”‘

Then Lumawig again said, ’You pmple of Bontoc, get some clay and mold it into pots.” But the pots they made crumbled into pieces.
Then Lumawig said, ’You will not be the ones to make pots. Maybe selling is your trade for you can’t understand what I tell you.”
Then Lumawig moved the pot- making to Samoki. And he said, ’You people of Samoki, get some clay and mold it into pots.“ The people got some  clay  and  they  made  good pots.
When they made the [pots}, Luma- wig said, ”Go, sell the pots  you made.” And they easily sold [the pots].
Then Lumawig said to the  people of Samoki, ’Trom now on pottery will be  your  (trade).”  Then  he continued,


4.	People of Mainit speak in a singsong manner while the people of Bontoc Hi
speak in a direct, almost harsh, manner.

12





Funtok, nan lokham nan koayo tay “You people of Bontoc, (growing] nachawes nan kaliyo.”	weeds will be your ftradeJ because
you speak in a direct manner.”’



C his story is preyed durin$ a chomno or chono. A chomno is a morria$e feast
$i oen my ltte rry rich, in u hich mitierons pigs and corabaos are butchered. It is not necessarily o morria$e rite Jr ltte neuihju›eds but is oJmost aluxnjs xsed as a rifle for ltte rental o/ merriege drily omnng order couples.I

“Nan Chomno’n Lumawig”
Ay, chey kano nan chey ay Lumawig ay chey, kanan ama na ay Kamfunian en, “N gag man nan uschu-uschungam sisa?”

“How  He Celebrated  Hie Chomno”
Oh that Luma wig, it is told, his father Kamfunia n said, “Why do you keep looking down [on  earth)?”

”Laychek  ay  ma kigkhakhayam		“1 want to bet riend (the earth man,” kanan Lumawig.	people],” answered Lumawig.
“Kecheng,  alaem  et  nan  kitangan		“All right,  get  your  head  axe, mo, ya  nan  sukod  mo,  ya  nan  manok  your  spear,  your  rcoster  and  your ma,  ya  nan  aso  mo.  Ta   teyteyak  et   dog.  I’ll   place  a  ladder  so  you  can ta  pumanad   ka,”  kanan ama  na.	go down [to earth],” said his father.
Chey       pinmanad      siya      ad		Lumawig went down on Mt. Kalawitan. Panachena et id Kayang. Kalawitan. Then he went on  to Kanana’t en, “Chua, yangag pet Kayan. He said, “What kind  of  peo- chana’s kagkhayamen! Yake pet nan ple are these ! They butcher their inerpan cha  ya  lusab.   Nafuslan   pigs  on  slabs  of  wix›d.•  They  have nan payew cha, yake lusab nan  wide fields but  butrhcr  their  pigs on inerpan cha. Sumanga w cha na’s slabs of wood. I don’t want to be- kagkhayamen.”	friend these peoplr!”
Umali’t    ad    Finumcheng    ya		He went to Mt. Finumcheng and uschungana’t id  Safangan.  Ngem  looked  down  on  Sabangan.  But usto pay ay ilana nan fu-uk cha, when he saw that the hair [of the nakengchan. “Na walaw nan i- people} was cropped lat the nape]. Safangan ay nay cha, yangke cha “Oh, these people cif Sabangan, their nenkakaengchan ya sacha’t manga- hair is cropped and they fish in the chew cha’s ka wanga!”	river!”'
5.	Until today the salt springs are in Mainit, pottery is the trade of Samoki and according to them, the people of Bontoc raiee the best palay.
6.	The Bontoks butcher their pigs on beds of sticks Ded together. Obviously, they
butcher bigger pigs.
7.	Women usually don’t fish, only men do.

l3


PHlLiPPiNE STUDIES


Ey saet manikid siya et ikwana nan faat nan Khonokhon ya Safangan ya umey id Tufeng. Kanana akhes en, ’Na walaw nan i- Yapyapan ay nay cha, nangke cha in- ngitng itiit cha. Ey, sumanga w chana’s kagkhayamek tay pet inyahyahyah nan kali cha.”
Saet tumuli ct umali’t uschungan na’d Khonokhon. ’Walaw nan i-Kho- nokhon ay nay cha, fanafanan-iyog cha ya inpap-alaak cha ya. Ta nangke sumangaw akhes chana’s kagkha- yamek tay nangke inki-chiit nan kali cha. Ey, ke suma-ngaw cha na.”
Umali pay id Mangichis na, umali pay id Alab, “No, walaw nan i-Yaab ay nay cha, ke cha inlupisaak ya tangko kisob nan ili cha. Sumangaw pet chana’s kakhayem.”

Saet umali id Apa ct umilleng. Munaangen na pay ya umali ed Tuwed, ad Tumakayong. Umali ct ed Patungalew. Ninpalikot ct nan aso na ay chey ya inpadsek na nan  sukod na. Man manok na ya inkuka-id. Itukcho na saet umileng. Ilana nan chua ay mamagkit id Lanao ay cha in-uwag si falatong.

Kanana’t ken ama na ay, “Ama, isyeng mo ed nan akhew ta ilaek st khagkhayamek si nan chey  in-uwag si falatong id Lanao.”

So he climbed up [the mountain] to Talubin, passing between Gonogon and Sabangan. Again he said, “Oh these people of Talubin, they're so dark. I don’t want to be- friend these people, they’ll just con- fuse me for they talk with lots of yahs.”'
So Lumawig retraced his path and looked down on Gonogon. “Why these people of Gonogon are very small but very energetic. I don’t want to befriend these people for they twitter like birds. They’ll just confuse me.”
When he went further to Mangichis and reached Alab, “Oh these people of Alab, they’re very fair but their village is too  narrow and low [in the valley]. 1 do not want to befriend these people!”
Then he reached Apa and rested. He looked around t hen went to Tuwed, in Turn u kayong. And he reached Patungalew. His dog curled itself [around a huge roc k) and Lumawig thrust his spear [into the rock). His rooster scratched [t he ground).’ And Lumawig sat down to rest. He saw two young women gathering black beans in Lanao.
Then he said to his father,  “Fa- ther, make the sun shine as hot as it can, so I can choose the right girl to marry from those two women gath- ering black beans in Lanao.”



8.	The Talubin dialect has a lot of h and y’s.
9.	This rock is now called Palikot Aso, literally ‘Twisted Dog.” The rock still bears the marks where his dog crouched, tire spot where he had stuck his spear, and the scratch marks of his r‹x›sler.






Saet kano pigsaan ama na nan akhew. En na’t kano ibfe-ibfen nan chey yun-an nan si Fukhan, nan anak Fatanga, nan lufid na ka wanga, tay adi kakatpelan sinan akhew. Ukhay si Fukhan ay chey mamalatong.
Pumanad et si Lumawig ya kanana’n, ’la adi yo ngen kawinan nan chakupen yo’y sana’y falatong?“

Kanan  et  kano  Fukhan  en,”Ya
yake ka pet pumatey*’
“Adi. Insaludsod ak. Kanak en adi yo ngen kawinan nan sana’y falatong? Ta kawinan tako.”
I ki wa ki w na nan tag -ong et watwat. Sacha’t man gan. Sana’i kanan en, “Mangan tako ta sayo’t inkanan ken ama yo en engka kan‹› tumkew si epat ay tayaan ta ikalima nan nay inaala yo.”

Saet umey si Fukhan. Umey pay ya kanana ken ama na’y Fatanga ya, “Engka kano tumkew tay wad -ay man nan inchichiyayos nan lingct na’y chey ay mangwani’y inkhak- hayam kami.”

And so, it is said, his father made the sun shine as hot as it could. The elder sister of f'•ukhan, the daughter of Fatanga, it is said, kept  wetting her Inc in the river, for she couldn’t star.d the heat." Fukhan kept on gathering the beans alone.
Lumawig went down and said, “Are you not  going  to  eat  salt meat with the black beans you’re gathering?”
Then, it is said, Fukhan exclaimed, “Oh, are you going to kill us?”
’No. I just asked if you’re not go- ing to eat salt meat with those black beans, in order that we will eat.”
He stirred (the pot) with the ladle and [it was filled with) meat. Then they ate. Afterwards he said, “After we have eaten, tell your father to borrow four other baskets so we will have five of them, including what you have already.”
So Fukhan went home. And she said to her father, Fatanga, ’R›rrow more    baskets]    for    there’s    this  l healthy looking) man oozing with sweat who proposed to me.”

Kanan et  ama  na’y  chey   en   Said   her  father,  Fatanga,  ’that’s  Fatanga en, ’Na yake khawis ct sa good as long as he’s single.” Then he muket ay  fab-alo.”  Saet  umey  got  the  baskets  and  gave  them  to  tumkew  et  eyey ct Fukhan.	Fukhan.
lyey  na pay ya fatfatena  nan chry	When she brought the baskets, tayaan. Apsot na pay sinan isang ay Lumawig placed them  in  a  line.  pakhew ay  chey  ya  sana’t  ken  He   picked   up   a   bean   pod   and ipagpag sinan ka tangfew  nan  slapped  it  against  the rim  of  the bas- tayaan. Ninkakapno  et. am-in  nan  ket.  And  the  five  baskets  were  in- chey lima ay tayaan si nan falatong. stantly filled with black beans. Then

10.	The iu@ or tepis is the native wrap-around skirt of Igorot women.


PHIIJPPIfsfE STUDIES


Hana ct kanan en, “Chey, intako’t. lyun-una yo’t ta intako.”
Sakawil na pay sinan chap-ay ay chey ad Lanao, ya sanat tanmanad Sub-ang si fak-kag. Kinwani na’n, ‘Tanmak sik-a ct mupay insaknit cha ya insenget cha sika, adi ka kapup- uway.”

he said, “Lets go (homeJ. But you go ahead.”
Picking up a huge flat stone in Lanao and carrying it under his arm, Lumawig planted some gabi in Sub- ang. He said {to the gabi], ’I’m going to plant you and when they gather sugar cane, theJll use you for food. You will never wither and die.”

Ay, umey  pay ad  Fel-lang akhes,		When he reached Fel-lang [he ’Tanmnak sik-a  ct  mupay  insaknit said],  ’I’m  going  to  plant  you,  and cha pay  ya  alan  cha   sik-a’s   when  they gather  sugar cane,   they’ll infalon cha. Machachakuwag ka’y make use of you. You will always fak-kag.”	bear large fruits.”
Umey  pay sinan tap-ag na’y chey		As he went further up the village Apalay ya kanana’t en, ’Wto man nan in Apalay, he said, “Where’s the intengan nan ili sina ta siya’s innak center of this village so that I’ll place manginapnapan sana’y chap-ay.”	this flat stone there?”
Umey  pay  id Sig-ichan,  kinwani		When he reached  Sig-ichan,  he na et en, ’Nay sak-en inapnap nan also said, “I’ll put this flat stone in nintengan nan ili ay nay, chap-ay. Et the center of this village.”  And  when no pay inkiyob nan fatawa e alopen there’s a storm,  they  will light  a fire  cha nan linanges ya sul-okena nan on it and  the  rain  will  stop and  the chaya ya manik-a. Nan naay sky  will  clear.  This  place  Kensachan edchanak ay nalay Kensachan et ulay (Bontoc  Hi)  which  I  have  found, akit nan chanum cha ya kichang though  there is  little  water  here,  the kaman isawali-an cha nan kabfakang. people will have more than enough Infekas isama cha ya adi na man an- to share with their neighbors." Their anok-en  nan isama chatona. Kechang crops  will  flourish  and  their  crops ka man ay ken puno cha nan will not wither. Their granaries  will mangipay-an cha. Infekhas am-in nan always be full. All they plant  will isama cha. Tukhi cha ya machak- bear fruit. They  will  have  large chakuwag, in-isek cha’s falatong ya camotes, their bean plants will bend in-ipap-ay, itab ya in-ipap-ay. with fruits, their peas will flourish. Nintetengnen et nan edchanak  ay The  people  of  Bontoc  will always  be nay cha’y i-Kensachan tay sesemken level headed" for they perform  what cha nan maangangnen et na’y ya-ik is instructed them, and I  now  bring am-in nan kutod.”	them all the rituals.”
11.	He placed the stone in Khal-lat. The stone is now also mlled Khal-lat.
12.	Bouts is a very productive place and the people do produce wiore than they can consume and thus sell their products to neighboring towns and villages.
13.	1 can’t attest to this. Although it is true that the Bontoks know how to ob- serve rituals properly and still do up to the present.





Awnin pay, kanan Fukhan ken ama na, Yaket adi paat umali chi ay!”
’la sasad-en tako.“
Chey umali pay tay nalpas st Kal- lat, ay inapnap na nan chey chap-ay. Umey pay akhes sinan ka tangfew nan khunguwan ya kanana, ”Sino’n nin piner-ag sinan naay?”
Kanan Fukhan ,”Chakami.” “Nakayo’d  st ange ta  eppey  ko.”
Saet  kano  pumutlong  si  ange.  Italo
na pay, fotfotog ya ug-ukho  nan chey amom-og.
Ka pangew-an, uschong na pay akhes sinan kinuyog cha’y chey ay kaep-eppas, kanana et akhes en, “Sino nin kinuyog sinan nay?”
“Chakami ya."
”Nakayo’d si finayo ta megmek- hak.” Megmekhana’t akhes et mangmangalak.
Sana’t kinwani, “Nakayo’d akhes si chanum ta pay-ak  nan  panganan ta mapno, ta mid micha.yas tako’s sanka leem.”
Sana’t a khes ala n nan chey chanum ay chey ct kin wanina’n, “Chanum ka’y intengnen et intengnen man nan taynak ay nay, in-aforig ya amfutukhan cha man ya manokan cha ya ampakayan cha.”
Chey et nakueb nan kin wan in Lumawig, sacha’t en-asa wa.

Ket ay apalan nan kakasod na’y chey st Lumawig. Tay ma-id mimila’s fakhas na, ngem no infanew, mapno nan fanga’s

Meanwhile Fukhan   said   to her father, “What’s taking him so long ?”
’M’s wait for him.”
Finally Lumawig arrived for he had finished with the stone Khal-lat. Then he also stood by the  pigpen and asked, “Whose piglets are these?”
Fukhan answered, "Ours."
“Give me some camote leaves.“ And, it is said, he cut off a leaf. And when he fed the piglets they sud- denly became full-grown.
At the door, he looked down on some chicks which had just been hatched, and again he asked, ’those chicks are these?”
’Mey’re ours."
“Give me some grain so I’ll feed them.” And when they were fed, they became full-grown.
Then he said, “Give me some water also so I’ll put (the water J where we eat and it will be full, and bad luck will not enter this house.”
Then he got the water and said, ’You cold water, bless the people of this house. They will have many pigs and their chickens will multiply.”


And what Lumawig said was ful- filled. Then they [.Lumawig and Fukhan) were married.
However, Lumawig’s brothers-in- law became jealous of him. For they didn’t see any rice in his house but whep he stirred [the pot] it would


PHILIPPINE STUDIES


makan. No ikiwakiw na nan ag-ong,
watwat chi.

Sana’t kanan ken Fukhan en, "Intako’t na’s Lanao." Wad-ay cha nan an-ak na. Sacha t umey ad Lanao. Ischi nan finm ulyasana. Kanana ct en, “Inpachono ak et."

Kanan akhes nan kakasod na en, ’Yangke into man nan  narpuan  tona ya maid fofotog na ya nuanuang na ya chomno nan kanana!”
Ngem inpilit na tay kina-eb na ct nan afong na’s chi. Kinwani na’s nan chey kakasod na, “Engkayo umala’s chalatey ay kisog-echan nan payok.”

Incha kano alan ya fefe! Hana’t kanan, “Cho, yangke nget-layen st apey sa.” Sana’t en kenswat nan fatang isnan chey chemang nay chey et umali ad Lanao nan kaew na.

Kanana’n, “Chey chayo sipli- siplingan sa ta satako isuno. Siplisiplingan yo.” Saet langsen na nan awak na ta siya nan chalatey ay kisog-echan nan fanga.
Finalatana nan chey fanga sana’t isug-ed. Sana’t akhes wakiwakan si away kaat ay fuker, chey chay ninkapno.

“Ek lalayan nan chey cha fotog ta waschin akhes makcheng.”
Umey pay ad Kadkadan ya in- ngo, “Ali kayo ay finnanan-ig.” Umali kano ya kanua-kanuang.

sud den ly be full. A nd when he stirred [the pot} with his ladle, [it would be filled with) meat.
Then Lumawig said to Fukhan, “Let’s go to Lanao.” By that time, they had children. And they went to Lanao. It was there where he cel- ebrated his @iyos.” He said ’I’ll give a chomno.”
His brothers-in-law again said, ’here did [this ko1] come from who talks of having a chomno when he doesn’t have any carabaos or pigs!”
But Lumawig insisted ton his chomno) for he had finished his house there. He said to his brothers-in-law, ”Go and get big logs so we will use them to prop up the cauldrons.”
But, it is said, they came back  with saplings. And Luma wig ex- claimed, ’be fire will eat those!” So he uprooted a huge pine  tree  from the nearby mountain and the tree rolled down to Lanao.
Lumawig said, ”Okey, chop those [brancho) into pieces to be used for firewood. Chop them to pieres.” Then he cut the kirge trunk into logs and they were used to prop up the cauldrons.
He then placed banana leaves at the bottom of the big pot and  placid it over the fire. Then he dropped a few grains of rice and the pot sud- denly became full.
“Now I’ll go call the  pigs so each of you can catch (a pig].”
When he reached Kad kadan he shouted, “You small game come here.” A herd of carabaos, it is said, came rushing down.

14.	The Jfiyus is a marriage feast where only pigs are butchered.

18


LUMAWIG BONTOC MYTHS

“Faken   kayo,   nan  finnanan-ig  si	“Not you, I want the small game umali.” Ya na’t tokaken  chaicha.  to  come.”  And  he  drove  them  away. “Awnin  kayo.  Nan  fotog  nan umali.”      ’You wait. (I want} the pigs to mme.”
Idwani, umali ct nan chey cha ka Then droves of pigs came running fotofotog. Kanan Lumawig, “Ayet, down. And Lumawig said (to  the  waschin chumpap.”	people), “Come on, each catch (what
you can].”
Ngem   nan  kakasod   na adi  paat		But his brothers-in-law were not makadpap. Kanana, ’take yo iyag- able to catch anything. He said, ’Why akhew ay manpap isnan kua yo!” does it  take the whole day for  you  to Sana’t pen-egnan nan kachakuwakhan catch your [pig]!” Then he caught the ya takchen cha.	largest pig and they tied it.
Kanan   Khumanab,   “No   mang-     But   Khumanab  [one  of  his  broth- ngen  eg-ay  ko  felayen  sa  ya   ers-in-law)  said,  ’You  wouldn’t  have makadpap  ka  ngen.”	been able to catch that pig if I hadn’t
tired it out already.”
Siya  chi  nan  ma-ikapya no chono.	This is what is prayed during chono.


MYTH 4

“Si Khumanab”	“ How He Punished Khumanab“

Si  Lumawig  insulo  na akhes nan		Lumawig also taught [the people] angnen ay makifuso. Usto’y umey how to wage  war.  On  one  such  ex- cha’y makifuso,  pinmeteg  nan  pedition,  the  sun   was  so  hot   they  akhew, iyuwen cha et  kanana nan  became  thirsty,  and  his  brothers-in- chey kakasod na et en, ’la ngag mo law  said,  “I  thought  you  were Lumawig ka, ke mid paat inumen Lumawig,  how  come  we  don’t  have tako. Ayke tako uminom sinan any water  to drink?  Are  we going  to wanga’y nay nakikifu!”	drink from this muddy river?”

Lumawig  ngalod  tay ikak-an nan		But he was Lumawig so as they filig ay chey ya cha  et  madchata  et walked  through  the mountain,  their  nan  ikwan  cha.  Umey  cha  pay  sid- path  was  cleared  of   any  obstacle. i’s  tengan id  Paing  id  Tokukan,  When  they  reached  the  center   of sacha’t tumuli, ta intsachintan nan Paing  in  Tocucan,  they  went  to  the fawi.	$u›i where they lighted a fire."


15.	The @tri is a saned place where prayers are held. It is located either in the mountains or beside the river. To light a fire in the fawi means to pray.

19


PHMPPINE STUDIES


Tumuli cha pay ya kanan cha kayet en, ’la ngag mo Lumawig ka, yangke mid paat tako inumen?”

Awnin pay, umali cha pay id Chekaa, inchachawes cha’s run cheey wanga. Hana’t kanan akhes, “Na intako’s sa man. Lawa nan waneng  ay nay. Umikeg man nan wane ay sana’s inumen. Intako’s sa man ta sak-ct to tumufay si inumen tako.”
Kumeg-ed cha pay isna’d Isik, chemang ad Sameyew, tufayen na’t nan cheey cheppas, infodfod-o nan chanum.
Kanana’t en, “Adi ka Khumanab, ta sata iyan-anongos ay uminom.”

lyan-anongos cha pay ay chua, usto pay ay isublat na ay uminom, ken-isurtot na’t, ken itulod na’s ka chanum ay chey. Nakaeb et st fato et nakhayad et ischi. Ya fumab-ala et nan chanum iska fulingig na. Ango- ango-wen cha nan lumaos, sana’t ap- a pan st fato. Ikad yangkhay  nan  inc had-a wa wan nan chanum is kawad nan fato nan mila tay kinab- onana.

As they went back up the moun- tain, they said again, “I thought you were Lumawig, how come we don’t have anything to drink!”
Eventually, they reached Chekaa and they immediately proceeded to the river. But Lumawig said, “Let us go on. This river is no good. Drink- ing the water will cause you to cough. Let’s go further and I’ll pro- duce drinking water for us.”
When they neared Issik, facing Sameyew, Lumawig thrust his spear into the cliff, and water issued forth from the rock.
Then he said, “Khumanab, let the others drink first, and we will drink last.”
So they let the others drink, and when it was his turn to drink, he [Lumawig) pushed him [Khumanab] into the water head first. [Khumanab] turned to stone and was  left  there. And water kept flowing out of  his anus. Passers-by kept laughing at the sight so he [Lumawig) covered the sight with stones. Only the portion where the water flows out of the rock can be seen today for he covered it.





“Nan Fatfato”

MYTH 5


Khal-lat"



’be	Stones”

Narpo nan chey

cha’d   Lanao, sana’t  alan		Coming from Lanao, he picked fa to   ya  sasakfitena,  ya	a stone and carrying it under



his

isaana id
Khal-lat.

Chao-ey.  Sana’t  isaad  id	arm, he brought it to Chao-ey. And Kanana’n,  “Naay  nan fato	he laid it down in Khal-lat. He said,


16.	Khal-lat is a big flat stone which now has a crack in it. The term Khal-lat also
means the place where the stone is, near Ato Sig-ichan in the Bontoc dli. 20





ay kab-en tako, tapno no lumateng nan fatawa, ay chey mid pengpengna na‘y lateng wen no in -uc han si inlaglagkhituweng ay uchan, chintanyo na ta tumke nan lateng ya nan uchan. Siya chi nan chawaten yo ken Khal-lat. lyarpo yo ad Foyayeng ya ad Um feg nan apoy, sayo’t chintan na, maekew.”
Idwani, marpod Foyayeng ya ad Umfeg nan apoy ay saeng, eegnan nan a mam -a ya chacha inga-o, “Ekhewem nan fatawa sika’y Lumawig ay nangischo. Nay inyai mi nan apoy ay man-nget sinan nginadnam st Kal-lat ay infakham. Maseg-ang ka ta mekhew tay naskaw am-in nan takho, ya manok, ya fotog. Pabfalaem nan akhew ta mangakew.
Siya chi nan usar na n t nd -i’s Khal-lat.

“Here’s this stone that we will  bless, so that when the weather turns cold, the kind  of  cold  which  never  stops or when it rains  a  very  cold  rain, light this so that  the  cold  and  the rain will cease. That is what you will beg from Khal-lat. Bring the fire from Foya yeng and Umfeg, ligh t this (stoneJ, and the weather will clear.”
Today, from Foyayeng and Umfeg torches are held by old men as they shout, “Make the sun shine, you Lumawig n'ho taught us. We have brought the fire to light Khal-lat as you instructed us to do. Have mercy on  us for the ple and  their chick- ens and their pigs are cold. Bring out the sun and let it shine.””

That is what Khal-lat is for.

Sabfayan
Ngem  no adi umud-uchan akhes,		But when the sun shines and it ulay  masublisubli  nan  kaato-ato  ay	never rains though the different atos manerwap  ya  adi  paat maseg-ang si	take turns beating their gongs and Lumawig,  nan  chey akhes inriapnap	still Lumawig does not pity them, na’y    fato   ay   chakcha ku wag   ay	then the large stone he placed up- mattotood  isnan  khawan  nan ato ed	right in the ago in Chao-ey is used, Chao-ey,	siya	chi    akhes	nan	and the women fetch water for this isakchuwan   nan   fabfafai.  Adi  cha	[stone]. They don’t get water from umala  isnan  wanga, ischi id Tukiod-	the river. Instead they fetch water in ingyaw   nan   mana kchuwan cha  ay	Tu klod -in gya w where t he water fumala   kannay  is  ka cheppas.  Isaa	flows from a rock. They bring this cha  nan chey chanum sacha’t iyemes	water and pour it over Sabfayan." ken Sabfayan.

17.	This ritual is not done whenever there’s a storm but only when there is long period when rain falls continuously so that the thatched roofs are never dry and it is very cold.
18.	This is done during droughts. But it seems this particular ritual is not done anymore for some unknown reason. Or it may be that there hasn’t been any occasion for its use so that other persons interviewed by the marcher,  were not  familiar with it.

21


PHILIPPINE STUDIES

Tinadlangan”

Tsinag-os   na  ad   wanga,  sana’t     Stopping  by  the  river,  Lumawig iyali ed At-ato, ya isakley na. Kanana got the stone and carrying it under en, “No nangapey kayo isnan lepas his  arm,  brought  it  to  At-ato.  He nan sama, uma kayo’s paluki, isukfit said, “When you observe the apey, yo. Pay-an yo’s tapey wen no fayas. after  the planting season, get pufuA Et na siyana nan inkedchawanyo’s and place it here.2' Put rice wine or menfegkhasan nan insama yo ay sugar cane wine (here]. This is where pakhey. Nan makhayad ay suk-i yo you ask for a plentiful harvest. Place sinan Tinadlangan ay nay sayo akhes what is left of the  paluki  for ippeyo’s nan  khungu wan  et  na  Tinadlangan  in  your  pigpens  and matakho nan fotog. Et khawis nan your pigs will be healthy.  And  they angnen cha ay chumadchakhe.”	will grow well.”
No   lumaos   ka,  ingka   sukfitan	When you  pass  by,  place  your  si paluki, tay siya nan chey paluki here, because this is when you mangwaniyam en, “Pa-inumek sika say, “I’m giving you something to Tinadlangan. Maseg-ang ka ta drink Tinadlangan.  Have  mercy  so umanantso nan pakhey ya infekhas.” that my rice plants will grow tall and
bear lots of grains.”



‘Si  Kabfikhat”	“How He Taught the Chomno to
Kabfikhat’
Kanana  ken  anochi  na, si anochi		Lumawig spoke to  his  younger na ay Kabfikhat, ay inmey ad brother, his  brother  Kabfikhat,  who Sadchanga, kanana’n, “Chintam man settled in Sadanga. He said, ’Tluild a nan chey ad Amfot-o tungpo na id fire in Amfut-o as far as Maligcong, Maligcong ta, ay chey kaew ta  kab- and  we’ll  build  a  mortar  out. of  the  en ta’s lusong.”	tree trunk.”
Ngaag met tay chinentana tetewa. So he [Kabfikhat] really built  a Tinangad na sana’t ilan et in-as-asok, fire.  Lumawig  looked  up,  saw  the saet umey. Umey pay ya kanana, smoke and climbed the mountain.

19.	Tilt dlan$an is a large flat stone which has marks of fedleng or ribs on its sur-
face.
20.	Ayinj, literally “fire” but used here to refer to the ritual right after the planting eeason. This ritual is an offering to the unseen guardians to help in preserving the  newly planted palay from harm.
The pzluki is a cactus-like plant with small leaves. This is sometimes grown as house
plants by people in the Poblacion.

22






“Na, ya man nan kem pet nilong- sutan nan poon na. Ayke sik-a’s yun- ak ta sik-a’s mengkwas nan poon!”
Ngaag met si anochi na, nen sikachan na’t nan langes na’t inmey id Sadchanga nan chey  poon. Umey si Lumawig, inkwana nan sened. Hana’t motmotmotan.
Siya chi nan insusunget  na, “Sik- a ngen nan yun-a ta inkwam nan pmn? Yake ka pet umam-amis!”
Matawen pay, kanan et nan ’nochi na’y chey ay, “Chomno tako ct.”

Chomno cha pay ad Sadchanga, yaket ay mamuchong cha ct nangan cha’s puchong. Maligwat pay nan chey chay inmankatkat isnan pakhey, umey cha’t matorngo cha isnan at- lang. Tay ukhas kano ya maid, aki- akit is nakhayad tay sinis-isis-iyan Lumawig. Kanan et kano nan i- Sadchanga, “Intako’t, umey tako’s di, no wada tako in-atonan.”

Khasat na’t ya inmey et st Lumawig. Hana’t kano kanan en, “Ngag man nan! Tuma nan ad -i kayo sum-ed ya. Nan anochik ay nay Kabfikhat, ad-i na kanan en, ’ya ta sad-en tako’s yun-ak, si Lumawig.’ I- kayo’t ta umala kayo kasin st pumu- chongan tako.” Sacha’t kasin umey.
Kecheng pay umey cha, umey cha pay et, nan innatkat nalafes tay napnonapno ct tay infutofutog na’s

And he said, “Why have you cut down the porn?” Are you the elder  so that the pmn is yours?”
But his brother kicked the trunk and it went all the way to Sadanga. Lumawig had to be satisfied with the upper half of the trunk. And he scolded [his brother].
This is what he said, “Are you the elder so that the poon is yours? You’re abusive.”
After a year, his younger brother said, ‘Yet’s have a chomno [biggest marriage feast].”
It was chomno in Sadanga so they observed mamuchong, and they ate their puchong.^ Those assigned to get the palay started off and  proceeded to the rice granary. But, it is sai‹i, they found very little palay left, for Lumawig had made the grains dis- appear. So, it is told, the people of Sadanga said, “Let’s go, let’s go there, if we have lanother granary) to move to.”
Luckily Lumawig arrived. And, it is told, he said, ’It’s your fault. Why did you not wait for me? That brother of mine, Kabfikhat, he didn’t say, ’Let us wait for my older brother, Lumawig.’ Bring our puchong and let’s go.” So they went back.
So they went, and when  they were there, the granary was filled to the brim for he [Duma wig J had


21.	The pmri is literally the lower half of the tree trunk which is obviously better
because it is bigger than the upper part.
22.	A puchong is a piece of fresh stick with a slab of meat tied to it and stuck into
the ground where a prayer or a ritual has been performed.

25


PHILIPPINE STUDIES


ka tangeb nan cheey penpen. Sacha’t akhes angkhay inala nan nifutog ay chey. Ya sisya ay mamapno kayet nan pakhey ay chey ay kinapin. Nan nifutog angkhay nan inala cha.
Pad-anen pay Lumawig et fayowen cha, hana’t kanan en, “At kasi yo ituli nan sana’y adi  kafayo tay sana at masawalan nan fanga.”

“Et sa masawalan nan sana ay finayo. Am-in nan fotog ay nay nenkafetweng cha, masas-ayag nan manok yanan ungang-a et mikaskasiw cha.”
Sa-et umali’d Fonto k et, un- unana’d Funtok. Innan pischo-pischo angkhay nan chono’d Sadchanga ken anochi na, st Kabfikhat.



“Id Sadangn”


Adi pay si et am Kabigat inmali’s Sakasakan et nangasawa. Si Lumawig, nangasawa ad Funtok.
Narpas pay ke et kananda kano en, “Ka ifaga en maabat ta et ta insipur isna rusong.”
Clugas cha maabot ed Fay-engan ct insipur asna rusong. Payna kadaka- sana yungyungan na pen na langes, narpas pay na yangana langes am Kabigat a poon na mensikada na. Naruslusig umali’t Sakasakan na po- on na, poon na batang.
Ke et kanan kano Lumawig an, “Pakapa inpaamed sina rusong? Mopay mo inpakan ka sa at maagi-

24

added palay until it reached the roof. They took only the palay on top. And the granary was still full with the palay which had been added. They only tmk the palay on top.
Lumawig waited and they pounded the rice, and then he said, ’Return [the palay) which  has  not  In pounded for there is more than enough in the pots already.”
[Then he blessed them.) ’You will always have more than enough palay. Your pigs will be fat, you will have lots of chickens, and your chil- dren will be healthy.”
Then he went back to Bontoc where he had come from. He only went to Sadanga to show his brother, Kabfikhat, how to perk›rm the chomno.



“How He Went To Sadanga” (Sadanga Version}

Lumawig had a brother, Kabigat who got married in Sadanga. Lumawig got married in Bontoc.
Afterwards, it is told, they said, “Let us meet in order to make a mortar.”
So they met in Fay-engan and cut [down a tree for} a mortar. But then, when Kabigat looked down at the logs, he kicked the poon [bottom half}. And the poon of the pine tree rolled down until it reached Sadanga.
Then, it is told, Lumawig said, “Why did you do that with the mor- tar? When you raise pigs, they‘ll


LUMAWIG BONTOC MYTHS


agidan nan tupek na. Chakami chadlo ay i-Funtok na a tabtafa nan fotog na. Inmura kami ya khawis.” Chagas na ay mangwani en, ‘No siya pay sa et sika et nan mamangpango ad domno tay sika na en pamid. Ta sapen mamanpangon ayagan.”
Chagas cha tu-a ay siya et umat et machomno cha ed Sakasakan et mangam pango ay eda ayagan si Lumawig ad Funtok. Sapay na karaw- anan na umali da pen ages. Mabukar da en kat kayman tay ayke ka makiili. Mabukar da kayman ya manaran da Luma wig. Mani kid cha pay ad Fangda-in na ke et mamaag na anak Lumawig ay kasmeyan ay tumae.
Ke ct kanan kano Lumawig, ’Ono pa yo patanggaan sa alitao yo. Ta kan pay manoa ya dedang na pay ay intuptup si alitao yo’s sa ta naarse na ikamkam yo.”
"Ay paam."
Et na enmey na saan na guran, ke et kanana abes, ”Na ta chomno ak abcs.” Ha-ct abes chomnoen nan an- ak na.
Umey abes si Kabigat tay madkat. Adi pay na kabigatana mad kat. Umey da pay ad Lengsa dan na, inumreng da akit. Chagas cha kasin ay marubwat, umdan da pay sa ili is Kabela wan,  kena’t kano  kana n, ”I ndad awes ta ko angga y,” kanan kano Kabigat.

have long snouts. We in Bontoc have bigger and fatter pigs. And whatever we plant grows well.”^  He  contin- ued, “If that’s the case you’ll be the first to celebrate a chomno | marriage feast]. When you do, don’t forget to invite me first.”
The time came when they held a chomno in Sadanga and the first  to be :'nvited was Lumawig in Bontoc. So they went. But they had to leave the next day for they were not from that place. Lumawig and his com- panions hiked | home]. As they were climbing up Fangda-in, Lumawig’s children suddenly left the others to defecate."
Then, it is told, Lumawig said, “Why do you bring bad luck to your uncle? He will have to butcher an- other pig because of this.”

“Never mind."
After a m ont h, Lumawig also said, “I’ll celebrate a chomno too.” And he too held a chomno for his children.
It was Kabigat’s turn to go [to Bontoc]. The next day  they  started off. When they reached Lengsadan, they rested for a while.  They  then went on and when they reached Kafelaw pa place overlooking Bontoc], it is told, he said, ’Set’s go straight ahead,” said Kabigat, it is told.



23.	The Bontoks point out that even today, Lumawig’s curse holds true. The Sadanga pigs are small, lean and have long snouts while the Bontoc pigs are very much bigger.
24.	A common rmult of a big celebration like this is dysentery for there are times
when the meat is barely c‹x›ked before it is served.

25


PHILIPPINE STUDIES


Umdan da pay ya kan Lumawig anna, et umbun dan da tumukcho. Ilan da pay et into pay na esa ay unga, maid. Chagas na kano en mangwani anna, “I ngka yo’d ta ingkayo ilaen. Wanden yo’d na daran.”
Umali da pay ahna ilit Buntok anna en, na sak sinasako murmuran nan am-ama na esa ay unga na p‹x›n na atakey. Kanana kano ta  fakagen na kena’t kano kanan, “No, no adi kayo pet enpatey, adi ka’n fakag! Saken na, saken na am-ama. Tay adi kayo pay enarawig, saken nan batog st ara wig. Ta mo umey kayo ya mangan kayo ya sasana ikaman yo a wa’y kasi’s umaliyan yo.”




°Id Tonglayan”


Id Lanao, apusen nan kakasod na siya. Idwanin nan chey afong ay chinomnowan cha inmey nan chua ay kakasod na ay lallalaki, insukfit cha nan sili isnan chey ka sakhing.

“Cumiwachay kayo pet tay iyali yo nan ng aag isnan afon g ko. Taynak ct chakayo ay an-ak ko ya asawak ta umeyak et is ummayak.”
Kinmaeb sinan chey alop ay nanin-utan na ken chaicha. In pey na’t nan manok iska segnad. Inpey

When they reached Lumawig’s house, they sat down. Then they no- ticed that a child  was missing. And, it is told, he said, “Go and look for him. Retrace our path.”


When they reached the outskirts of Bontoc, they found an old man hold- ing the child in his arms in a bed of atnhry.* As they, it is told, raised their bolos to strike, it is told, he [the old man] immediately said, “Ekin’t, don’t kill me, don’t strike. I’m  an old  man. (I took the child to make you come back] for you haven’t performed the almaig.” 'So that when you attend a feast, there’ll be other  opportunities for you to return.”




“How He Sent His Family To Tinglayan”

While they were living in Lanao, Luma wig’s brothers-in-law were filled with envy. So around the house where he had celebrated his chomno (marriage feast), two of his brothers-in-law hung hot pepper.
fLumawig said’] ’You poison me for you bring evil to my house! I’m leaving you my wife and children and I’ll go where I’ll go.”
He then made a coffin |by hollow- ing out a huge log] and placed them inside. He put a booster at the foot.


25.	The atu£ey is a plant whose seeds are made into beads.
26.	During a chomno, before entering the village, visitors are supposed to gather and pray. This ritual is called the aleuiig.

26


LUMAWH3BDNTOCNM7HS


na nan aso’s ka ul wanan. Sana’t anuchen. No maituknog nan kawad nan aso, in-ngong-o. No ma-ituknog nan tupak na, inkoko-ok nan manok.



Sana’t kanan, “Chey umey kayo’t ct wad-ay mangchan ken chakayo ay naamasangan ay i-Tonglayan. No kanan cha’n ifalam nan sagnim, ad- inn ifab-ala. No pay ifalam pen-ekyag ko nan panga et ken suplak na nan limam. Iskeng mo’s afong ta siya’s managniyam.”
Sana’t anuchen chaicha, ya id Tonglayan tet-ewa nan na-isaklaan cha. Nan naay na amasangan ay i- Tonglayan, mangaew, sana’t chomten nan along ay chey tay insasakley iska ilit nan wanga. Fakaken na koma, kanan et Fukhan, “Adim padpad- anen tay naay kami’s na.” Inlunluney na kano chi ay nanglukat sacha’t fumala.

Saet kano inpattong cha’s ka ato  id Tonglayan. Si Fukhan et managni’s ka afong na. Ilan cha pay kano ya matiking nan fatawa. Saet umali nan i-Tonglayan ay mangayag ken siya ta manager’s ka ato. Inawi- awis cha.


Umey pay si Fukhan ay chey ka ato ct managni. Nalichongan na nan kin wan in ka -ichang na ken siya. Insagsagni pay si Fukhan ay chey, ken ekyag Lumawig nan panga et inkasusuplakan nan lima na.

He put a dog at the  head. Then  he set them afloat on the river. And when the end of the coffin where the dog sat bumped into something, the dog would howl. When the lower end bumped into something, the rooster crowed.
Then he said, “Go, and eventually you will be rescued by a widower from Tinglayan. But when they tell you to dance [under the sky], don’t dance. If you do, I’ll drop a branch to wrench off your arm. Dance only inside the house.”

Then he set them afloat and, {as he had stated], they were really res- cued in Tinglayan. This widower from Tinglayan was on his way  to cut firewood, so he started to chop the coffin which he found on the river bank. He was about to strike with his axe when Fukhan said, “Please be careful for we are here.” So he carefully pried open [the cof- fin), it is said, and they came out."
[After some time], it is said, there was a celebration in Tinglayan and the men played the gongs. Fukhan danced inside her house. Anti the people saw, it is said, that [as she danced1, the world tilted. Then the people of Tinglayan asked her to dance at the ato. Eventually they were able to persuade her {to dance].
So Fukha n went to the ato to dance. She had forgotten her hus- band’s warning. And as she was dancing, Lumawig dropped a branch and her arm was wrenched off.


27.	It is assumed that Fukhan mamed this widower

27


PHIIJPPINE STUDIES




‘Id Knn-ew‘

Idwani nengngan ct nan chua ay an-ak Lumawig ay waday id Tonglayan. Ilaen cha kano ya lumaos nan okis si falatong iska wanga, et sinmek cha nan si ama cha. Kanan cha ct, “Inta ilan si ikit ta ay Fatanga id Funtok.”
Umalong cha’t. Sisinmek cha nan kinwanin rna cha’y, ’Than makikifu nan chanom, siya chi nan wanchen yo. Adi yo pay wan wanchen nan nafuleng-anan.”
Ngaag met tay umali cha’d Masuwan ay chey ay tumoy-okan nan chanom ay marpo’d Kan-ew, ket siya nan makikifu. Siya et nan inlong cha. Edchanan cha nan i-Kan-ew ay cha in fa li wes. Sae ha’t kanan en, “Chakami ed si mangangnen.” Ippey cha pay nan sintungfo’y chey ya et napno nan sanga.
Ngaag met tay kecha’t alu-alusen chaicha, tubtufayen cha chaicha ay mammatey. Adi cha ilin-awa nan cheey i nang nen cha ay chey ay insukhe cha ya, ulay isang ay tungfo ya ninkakapno nan sanga cha. Hacha’t al u-alusen chaicha ay sin-akhi et ippey cha kano nan kampila chas, pipinnang ya ad-i kasingfisingfitan nan awak cha. Ad i cha katkatey.  Aw nin pay ya ke cha’t f a ka ken chaicha, tubtufayen cha’t chaicha, ya ke cha’t chadlo umusan cha.
Chey umey ct nan i-Funtok ay mangala ken chaicha. Hacha’t alan nan cheey alawi, achawey, kasatan, siya nan atang cha. Alan cha akhes

28

*How He Cursed Can-eo”

Lumawig’s children in Tinglayan were now full-grown men. One day they saw, it is said, the pods of black beans floating down the river, and they remembered their father. So they said, “Let’s visit our grandfa- ther, Fatanga, in Bontoc.”
And they started walking up- stream. They kept in mind their mother’s instruction, “Always follow the muddy branch of the river. Don’t follow the clear water.”
Unfortunately, when they reached Tocucan where the water from Can- eo flowed, it was muddy. So it was where they wended. They found the people of Ca n-eo crushing sugar cane.  And they  volunteered,  “Let us do it.” When they c rushed a single stalk, the jar was filled with juice.
But then they lthe  peo ple  of Can -eo] started to stab them, to strike them with their spears. They weren’t grateful to them for filling their jar by crushing just a single stalk. And they started stabbing the brothers, it is said, with their bolos and hea d a xes but their bod ies could n’t be wounded . They [the brothers] would n’t die. Finally, they hacked them into pieces and stabbed them with their spears, and eventu- ally they died.
So the people of Bontoc went to get [the brothers’] bod ies. They brought poles and pieces of wood to carry their bodies home. They also


LUMAWIG 8OMTCX2 MYTHS


nan taked cha’y chey ay puway, sa- et lakta. Siya chi nan intaked cha. Inyey cha’t ad Cheppas chaicha, nan- ak Lumawig.

Et pumanad st Lumawig ya kanana’n, “Chakayo ay i-Kan-ew at amfusowen kayo, ngem ad-i kayo malakay et chakayo matey, ad -i kachadchad-uman nan ili yo!”



‘Id Sabangan”


Narpu kano id Kabelawan. Malpas pay id Kabelawan, naypay nay Tuklaw-igan, tikidena ed Gensadan, idakar na’d Dakalan, nilanatad na’d Langtagan. Hana’t kano itikid et ibilig na’t ayenna ed Kamantaka. Ayenna et ed Ta-ed at kano gisob-gisobena.
Ayenna et ages ed Gummob, ct ilana pay ages ed Balili. Ayenna pay id Balili ct ya, “Ayta pay na si ili. Nalilibong! E, anggay.”

Saet wada nan kanantako en Tam- bingan ya iyusdong na id Nanyaa, ct idesnga nan Yang-a. Hana pay iyey id bilig et ayenna id Palawapeo. lyusd ong na pay id Lagan, et kanana’n, “Gawis id Sabangan. Ay ta umeyak et umila si asawak.”

brought twine. They used it to tie up their bodres. And they brought Lumawig’s sons to Chep-pes and buried them there.^

Lumawig descended and cursed them, ’You people of Can-eo, you will be killers but you will all die young, and (your peopled will never multiply.”^



‘How He Plowed a Field in
Sabangan‘

It is said, Lumawig came from Kabelawan. After Kabelawan, then to Tu kla w-iga n, cli mbed Gensada n, moved on to Da kalan, t hen to Langtagan. Then, it is said, he climbed the mountain to Kamantaka. He went to Ta-ed and, it is said, looked around.
Then Lumawig al so went to Gummob, and also looked at Balili. But when he went to Balili he said, “What kind of place is this! It is so small.”
There is also a place that we call Tambingan, and he lmked down on Nanya-a, and reached Yang-a. Then he   went   up   the   mountain   to Pala wa peo. He looked down on Lagan and said, “Sabangan looks good. I’ll look for a wife there.”


28.	This place is now a sacred grove called Papattay where monthly religious cer- emonies are held. The Bontoks point out that during WWII the whole lows of 8ontoc we botribed and only Papattay was spared.
29.	It’s quite true that up to now Can-eo is knowrt for it’s warlike people. But there are few old men in their village and the Bontoks poinl at the scarcity of the houses that make up Can-eo.

29


PHNJPWNESTUDWS

Ayagenna  nan babai ay asawa na.		Lumawig called the woman who Kanana’n,  "Intupay nan Bagitan?"	was his wife. He asked, “Where is
Bagitan?"
Ayyenda pay  id  Bagitan  ya,  When they were in Bagitan,  ”[We   “Siyana pay id siyadi. Anggay ay will  buildl  from  this  point  to  that humaa ka pay. Humapo takos point. Go home first  .  We  will  build abungan takos na. Mo umali ka a shelter here. When you come back,  umiskeg kas nan guab na. Haka  cough  while you are still down  there.  umali ay mangyali nan baon ko.” Then bring me my food.”
lnkana pay kano ay namindua.  It  is said,  she  did  this  twice. The Ikapitlo pay ya datngana ct nan kano third time, she discovered him,  it  is  losi na nan isawilna  isnan  bato. Adi said, using  his  penis to uproot a big pay agin eeskeg ngem apdas na  ct rock.  Then  she  pretended  to  cough naila na.	but she had already seen [what she
wasn’t supposed to see].
Hana  pay  kanan  en,  “0,  ul-ulay      Then  he said, “Oh, these  people!" nd pay dana.”
Anggay et adi. Aped na et dinata	And that was it. He only leveled et maid danum na. Ay maagdan di this wide field but did not put wa- intagwan. Ina-yan ya di yong-an. ter in it.^ He did not  water  it,  just Yaket kabalebalewayan ya kalong- left and went to Ambango. That’s it. along-ayban. Hana’t adi danuman,
haet kumaan. Umey ct id Ambango. Siya di.

IThc Babayas are the public uiedding }eosts which are periodically performed in Sagada. Beas fnay either be held es exi initial marriage feasl or be performed Lnj a couple long married to bring good luck and many children.
T?ie bosic mytft for the bayas ceremony is fPxxd ix this account of how Lumawig loughs Lhe «wedding rites. Ivlany of the e‹›ents are fou nd in tile Bonloc Lumawig cycle, but I /my are adopted to we Sagada situation. The feet and translation is ñz/«m jam A Sagada Reader Dy William Hexry Scott (1988, 94-97J).

“Si  Lumawig Id Sagada”	“How He Taught the Bayss in
Sagada”
Wadas Lumawig  id   tag-ey,   Once  upon  a  time,  Lumawig   up naganak ay nakigtek isnan ipogaw. above had children  who grew  up to Wada et nan anakna ay lalaki ay be adults. There was one son who

30.	Lumawig’s field is still there. This field is quite big in comparison with the
size of the ordinary Igorot field.






id lona nan kabkababiyana. Dat kanan amada ken sia, “Ngan nan dakan kabkabiyanmo? Dakan adi badangan da-ida?”
Dat kanan nan de-ey lala ki, “Ayta, wada nan dededengngek.”
”Et domawinka obpay. Ala-errt
kad nan apoymo ta omeyka isdi.”

Dan at ala-en nan apoy yanan binosi na et omey, ya nanidiweng. Dat kanan nan amana, "Domawin to-ewa di."
Ilayogna et id Sapowan. Menmoli pay danat ilan nan tongon id Loko dan at kanan, ”Ay ma-id get kek datona.” Ilana pay nan tongon nan Lagod, danat kanan, ’9snay ayek ta eyak men-anap is todowek.” Sa-et menpanga-ey isnan Nga-ab et Dalikan danat datngan nan baba-i ay men-ab-abe. Danat kanan, “Ay ngan ik-ikkam?"

"Men-ab-abeak is bagoy."
Dat men-oto. Igwana nan nagabis ay bagas isnan banga dat ninkakapno. Danat kanan, “Omalika ta manganta." Manganda pay yaket nasaw-an.
”Kedeng. Itoloymo nan abbem ta eyak men-anap is todowek.”

Omeyet sinan Dompinas ya ilana nan mema. Aplotena di nan mema dan at imi-imen. I kayatna isnan togpop, itogpopna ct di. Nagolitek nan bato, nasamey nan ta-aw. ”Sia di ta waday sak kadamdamagan.”

“fooled around" with his sisters. So their father said to him, “Why are you always fooling with your sisters? Why don’t you help them?”
The boy replied, ”Why I keep hearing something [that tells me toJ.”
“So, go and marry in another town. Take your fire and go to some other place.”
So he took his fire and dried salt- meat and started right off. His father said, ”He’s really going to marry somewhere else.”
He took it down to Sapowan. He looked all around, and when he looked towards the Ilocos region he said, ”But I don’t know any of them.“ Then he looked toward the downstream region and said, ’This ig where I’ll go and look for somebody to enlighten.” So he stated right out for Nga-ab and Dalikan,  and  found a woman weaving. He asked her, “What are you doing?”
“I’m weaving a baby blanket.”
Then he cooked. He put a very little rice in the pot and it was filled to the brim. Then he said, “Come on, let’s eat.” They ate, and yet there was some left over.
“All right. You go on with your weaving, and I’ll seek somebody to enlighten.”
He went to Dompinas, and saw some betel nuts. He picked some and chewed them. He carried off a quid and spit it out. The rocks were stained and the grass withered. ’fat’s so I’ll be known.”






Daet Am-o, Binek-an. Ilosadna nan awilan. Sagongena pay nalikob nan sobo. “Sta di ct maliklikob di ganak di ipogaw ta way sak kadamdamagan.”
Omeyet isnan Amdakwag et ilana nan dowa st bababa-i ay mamat- batong. Danat kanan, “Ay ngan nan ik-ikkanyo?”
"Ay mamatbatong kami."
Danat badangan da-ida. lyaplotna nan igidna danat igwa isnan  lowan na esa; iyap-lotna nan awana danat igwa isnan lowan es nan esang. Danat kanan, “Ay nawitankayo?"


"Nawitankami." “Kedeng. Somaatako et."
Somaada et. Isnan nipadongda isnan dipayan danat ltanan, ’Ngan nan daken songso-ngen nan apoy isna?”
“Ay songsongsongem nan apoy tay sia sa nan sobanmi.”
“Enkayo, ibagayo ken amayo ta omali ay mangsab-at.”
Inmeyet san amada et ena sab- aten si Lumawig. Dat mensedey si Lumawig. Soma-ad at issan ilin st Madadne, dat kanan Madadne ken Lumawig, “Sino isnan dowa ay an- akko di men-asawam, nan oniya mo baken nan inodi?”
“Ay nan inodi."
“Adi pay bas-owem?"

"Ay ba s-owek," ay kanan Lumawig.

32

Then on to Am-o and Binek-an. He stuck in a pine of sugar cane, and  it put out shoots all around. ’That’s so the fertility of the people  will  shoot up all around, so I’ll be known.”
He went to Amdakwag and saw two girls gathering beans. He said, “What are you doing?”

“We’re gathering beans."
Then he helped them. He gath- ered a handful with his left  hand and put it in the basket of one, and gathered a handful with his right hand, too, and put it in the basket of the other. Then he asked, “Are your baskets loaded?”
“Why they are loaded.” “All right. Let’s go home.”
They went home. When they had reached the outskirts [ of the  town  ] he said, ‘Why do I smell fire?”
“Why, you smell fire because that’s our main entrance.”
’then go and tell your father to come out to meet me.”
Their father came out to meet Lumawig. Then Lumawig pedormed the sedey rite. They went home to Madadne’s village, and then Madadne said to Lumawig, “Which of my two children would you like to marry, the elder or the younger?”
‘the younger.”
’You’re not going to take them out of order?”
“I’m going to take them out of order,“ was Lumawig’s reply.


LUMAWIG 8ONTOC MYTHS


“Soma-atakot is ba-eyyo. Intoy kayatmos mensa-adanta ko, isnan goabna?”
”Adi isnan goabna tay masa-ob,” ay kanan Lumawig.

"Et  nan  tag-ay?"
“Adi tay nan tag-eyna et masa- ok.”
“Et nan kebasna?"

“Oen ta menkabkabas di ganak di ipogaw ya megmegan ya na-issama.”

Inmey ct isnan Lamag. “Sia di ta menlamlamag di ganak di ipogaw yas mamegmegan  ya st ma-issama.”

Inmey et isnan Namogong da-ct Tetep-an. Intikidnas Amtadaw danat isakyat id Bagingey sana’t iyey id Kanipawan et isodongna  ken  Kaan id Malingeb.
Sia et nan inkakkak-an st Kaan is M alingeb ay  naganak  is   ipogaw ya issan ginomtek san a n-a kna danat ipabbey da-id a. Sia san sinomya-an san menmegmeganda ya naganakanda is ipogaw ya sinomya san mensama-anda.
Danat iyey is Pikong dat st Palakawan is Losban, Bandowan is Bilig dat st Koyaw is Lokong.


Sia nan inikkan Koya w ay nangipabbey isnan an-akna. Sinmapo isnan abong danat mensegpen da- ida. Dadat ipoyawan isnan bebe ya

‘Two, let’s go to your house. Where shall we build it, down below?”

“No, not down below, because that’s where all the dirt goes,” said Lumawig.
“Up above, then?"
”to, because that will be too
SIROk)f.”
”Well, wk ere it’s spread out level?”
‘Yes, so that the fertility of peo- ple and domestic animals and crops will be spread out level."
He went to Lamag. ’That's so the fertility of people and domestic ani- mals and crops will climb up (lamngl, too.”
He went to Namogong and to Tetep-an. He climbed up to Amtadao and took it to Bagi-ngey, then carried it to Kanipawan and  looked down on Malingeb.
That’s what Kaan of Malingeb did, producing more people, and when his chi)dren grew up he set them up in houses. That’s why their increase of pigs and chickens and children came about, and the flour- ishing of their crops.
Then he took it to Pikong and to Palakawan of Losban, Bandowa of Bilig, then Koyaw of Lokong. (These are the traditional founders of the various dep-‹nj in Sagada.)
That’s what Koyaw always did, setting up his children in houses. He made a house and had them enter it [for the first time]. They cut a pine


PHILIPPINE STUDIES


dalatey dada iyal-an da-ida isnan inapid ay kagat. Dadat to-oden nan bebe ya ina lada nan manok ay kawitan yanan etag et manpano- odan ya inagganda nan agida sat mensapo ay mangwani:
Wada et si Lumawig id tag-ey. Nakigtek isnan ipogaw dat men- pabbey. Tino-od na   nan   bebena. I ndeg na kna nan lokod ya ganak isnan ipogaw. Makwas pay di inalana nan betegna et ibayas nan bommey. Isnan mapseng ya inalana nan kawitan et manapoyowanda ipoyodas tago yas mamegmegan.

“Inmey pay nan esa ay domingo tino-od na kasin nan bebena et ipaltiyana kasin di isnan beteg ya manok.
Inmey pay abes nan esa ay tawwen in alana kasin nan beteg yanan manok et paltiyena dadi.”
Sta et di nan intodon Lumawig ay inik-ikkan si Koyaw. Ay mo ginomtek nan an-akna danat ipabbey da-ida. Natagodat, dadat makigtek isnan ipogaw. Ninbo-okda isnan oban. Memmegmegdas nan beteg ya manok dapay mapopo-ot.

Sia et di nan ik-ikkan nan omili ay mangikkan isnan initdon Lumawig.









54

sapling and [wood for] a cookstove, and got them a grass rope. Then they set up the sapling and tmk salt pork and a rmster and performed the Set- ting-Up rite and called their kindred, and then said the prayer:
’here was Lumawig up above. When [hisJ people came of age, he set them up in houses. They set up the sapling. He instituted longevity and fertility of people. After that, he took a pig and held  wedding  rites  for the couple, and the next day took a rooster and performed Taking- Down [the sapling] to bring  down life and the increase of animals.
“When a week passed, he set up his sapling again, and again killed a pig and a chicken.

“After a year passed, he again took a pig and chicken and killed them.”
That’s what Lumawig ta ught Koyaw always to do, that when his children would grow up he would set them up in houses. They thrived, so that there were plenty of people. They lived to have gray hair. They were successful in raising pigs and chick- ens, and they were well cared for.
That’s what the whole town’s al- ways done, carrying out what Lumawig taught.





MYTH 12

lThis is the Bauko Psion of Lttmeuiig’s rnerriegr. Ti • tr xl and trensJatim is
eW com “Prayers in Lepanto-Igorot” by Morice Vanoterbergh {29f3J).


‘Id Bauko”


Si kano Lumawig yokyokena kano san awwidingna sinan daoda dana pay adi dunoen san kaenda, sa ct kano kinwanin amana en: “Sino pay san inmat ken sik-a?”
“Dedengngek man san dinma- napas s’ daga, dan pay maidekdekey san egesko, dan et sia san isadutko.”
“A w et, ta kad uy-uyek san gayangko mo tayudengka ay  umey ct wa ada ay tet ewa.”
Sana et kano uy-uyen san gayang- na, ya mentayuderig kano ay umey, sana et kano kanan en: “Anggay ay ayka ta ummmata si kaonmo.”
Sada et kano alan  san  gayangna ya gi-dingna ya sin laeyna  ay  sana ya bedtxxlna, sa et kano: “Anggey di, enka et.”
Umey kano ed Kalawittan yan payongana ed Pingad kano, yan siwawatikda: “Ay adiak uppay layden na,” kanana kano; umey pay kano ed Data, payongana kano ed Banaaw: “Ay ken uppay siay ayek na.”
Sana pay itakdeg kano et umey yan ilana kano et naubse-ubseyanda; “Ay adiak uppay layden na,” kanana kano: ’la kad ayek ad Nlapil,” kana- na kano et umey, umey pay kano, yan: “Ay ta uppay naken nenkaaya- nganganda, ay adiak uppay layden na, ta kad umeyak ed Kay-ang.”

How He Celebrated His Marriage


Lumawig, they say, he plays, they say, on his jew’s harp under their house, and does not prepare their food; then, they say, his father said: “What happened to you?”
’fl am listening to those that walk on the earth, and my belly is touched, and that is what makes me lazy.”
“All right, I shall let down my spear, if it goes down vertically per- haps it is true.”
Then, they say, he lets down his spear, and it goes down vertically, they say, then he says, they say: “Come let us fetch your provisions.”
Then, they say, they take his spear and his copper bracelets  and his blanket there and his headband, then, they say: ’there you are, go.”
He goes, they say, to Kalawittan and looks down on Pingad, they say, and they use the Pingad-dialect:  “I do not like these,” he says, they say; he goes, they say, to Data on Banaaw: ’Tlere I shall go."
Then, they say,  he  stands  and goes, he looks down,  they  say,and they all have porters; “I do not like these,” he says again, they  say:  “I shall go to N1api1,” he says, they say, and goes, he goes, they say, and: “Why! they are bandy-legged,  I  do not like these, I shall go to Kay-ang.”


PHILIPPINE STUDIES


Umey pay kano, yan sisasa- kaangda: “Ay adiak uppay layden na,” kanana  kano  abe;   umey kano abe ed M as la, kend a  et kano nangubakuba: “Ay ad ia k uppay layden na.”
Sa et kano umey ed Bila, yan ilana pay kano, yan menas-asuk san ibila, ilana pay kano, yan gebgebenda san banga: “A diak uppay layden na ta mengebgebada st banga.”
Itakdeg na pay kan o san din- ma ngna ed Apa, yan wada da Banga n ken Bugan ay me n-a si batong, sa et kano du mag-us et sumaaada, sana et yapsut san awana et igtona sinan loan Bangan, ken et kano sana, et yapsut san igidna, et iguana sinan loan Bugan ken et napno: “Anggey tay na pno san egenyo et ta et mangantako.”
Sada et kano mangan, yan ad in kaka k-kaanan, sa et kanan da Bangan: “Ay uppay Kabunian na, tay bab-ana yan namongsan, bookna yan nalabayan.”
“Anggey nakakantako.”
Sada ct dundunen si Bangan et en manakdo, ken et kano nakilut san sinakd ona, sana et kano kana n: “Adiak sa ta nakilut.”
Sana et dundunen si Bugan, sa et kano yeyna pay yan menliling-en: “Anggey sumaatako et.”
Sada et umey sinan digsian, yan wada san agamang: “Sino pay san men-agamang sina?”
Sa et kanan Bugan: “Agamang mi
adi na.”

He goes, they say, and they all spread their legs: “I do not like these,” he says, they say, again; he goes, they say, again to Masla, and they all  wear b•-bark,  they say: “I do not like these.”
Then he goes, they say, to Bila, and he looks, they say, and the Bila people make smoke, he looks, they say, and they put their jars in the fire: “I do not like these, as they put jars in the fire.”
He stands, they say, in front  of Apa, and, there are  Bangan  and Bugan who gather cow peas,  then, they say, he sands there and they ar- rive, then he plucks at his right and puts them in Bangan’s You-basket, and they say, it gets filled, then he  plucks at his left, and puts them on Bugan’s im-basket and it gets filled: ’how that your load is complete let us eat.”
Then, they say, they eat, and it does not diminish, then Bangan says: “Why! is he Kabunian then, as  he has only one great t‹x›th, and his hair is long.”
“We have finished eating.”
Then they send Bangan to fetch water, then, they say, the water she fetched is dirty, then, they say, he says: “I don’t like that as it is dirty.”
Then he sends Bugan, then she brings it, they say, and it is  clear: “Let us go home.”
Then they go to the outskirts and there is a  granary:  ’those  granary is this?”
Then Bugan says: ’this is our








Sa et: “Itokdok sina; sino san
ngadan amam*’
“Si Kadangen."
Sana ct kanan: “Kanam st amam  ta umyali si apey ya danum  tay kanan din mangili.”
”Inayan pay sa s’ mangili, sino san bumaykatan sana?”
Dan et adi: “Anggey ta umyeyak." Sana  et  yey  san  apey  ya danum,
sa na   et   kano  dawaten,  et uban
ya gana k san kanana: “Anggey sumaata et."
Sada ct kano sumaa, sada ct kano mangan, sada ct makakan, sana ct kanan: "Men-asawakami ken Bugan."

Sa et kanan a mana: ”Da ke st Bugan, ta isonsontako sinan yon-a.”

“Adiak st Bangan, tan manakdo et nabud kan, dan pay mang an st Ba9 gan en iwanwan-ina, st pay Bugan ct mangan et inmanmana.”

Sa et siay inasawana s’ Bugan, sada et umanak, sa et tulo san anakda, sa et yumo-ngayong san yugtan: “Sino san nenbegew sina? kakan danka adi mangan.”
Sada et menpapadpad, sada et padpadan san pasang si Beskaan, sana ct kanan: ’la kad sumakiatak ken ama, mo sino san kanana.”

Sa et umey, yan kanan amana: “Sino san inmaliam?"

Then: “I’ll sit down here; what is your fathers name?”
"Kadangen."
Then he says: ’tell your father to bring fire and water because the stranger says so.”
“Ay! that stranger, why does he send people there?”
Then: “I shall bring them.”
Then he brings fire and water, then, they say, he receives it, and talks about old age and many chil- dren: “Let us go home.”
Then, they say, they go home, then, they say, they eat, then they finish eating, then he says: “I shall marry Bugan.”
Then her father says: ’Tet Bugan there, and let us put  the older sister in her place.”
“I don’t like Bangan, because when she fetches water it is full of sand, and when Bangan eats she does it unmannerly, but when Bugan eats she does it well.”
Then he married Bugan, then they get children, then tht•y have three children, then the younger one gets ill: ”Why is that? when you should eat you don’t.”
Then they have communication made with the spirits, then they com- municate with the posing at Beskaan, then he says: “I shall go up to my father, to hear what he says.”
Then he goes, and his father says: “Why did you come?”



37


PHILIPPINE STUDIES

“San    anakko    ay    yugta n   ay		“On account of the youngest child menyoyo-ngayong.”	who is very sick.”
“Ay lasuyka ay kenka makilu- ’there you  are,  loving  men,  go maydan  si ipugaw, anggey  umeyka and  fetch  a  cock  and  put  him  in ta alam san kawitan ta idmangmo, front, and it will get cured.”
auni ct makaan.”
Sa  ct  pumaytok  et idmangna yan		Tfien he comes down and puts nakaan,   ken  et   kano binumsil  san	him in front and it got cured, and, anakna:  “Enka,  ta  daitako  di  pam-	they say, his  child  got  strong: oanda s’ pasang.	”Would you hold this for you alone, let us send it down to the men of the
pasen$ sacrifice.”


MYTH13

“Id Kay-ang”	^How He Went to Kayan”

Si Lumawig idi umey ed Gotong, When Lumawig went  to Gotong, nintikid ed Kawag et umey ed he climbed  up  to Kawag  and  reached Gayang dat umey ed Kamiling.  Et Gayang  then  went  on  to  Kamiling. ilana et  nan  dna  ay  babai  ay  He  saw  two  young  women  picking maanani si batong. Et  umey  na’t  beans.  And  he  went  up  to  them. datngan daida. Datngan na pay ya When he reached  them, it is told, one kanan kano nan babai, “Dey et of the ladies said,  “It’s  mid-day  al- nakag-aw. Satako’t mangan.”	ready. Let’s eat.”
Sa’t  kano  umey.  Idi  nakakan  da So,  it  is  said,  he  ate  with  them. sada et kasin men-ant. Idi masdem After they had eaten, they continued sumaa da. Idi sumaa da kenwanin harvesting. In the evening they went Lumawig, “Sige ta iyun-una yo ta home. On their way home, Lumawig engkayo kanan si ama yo ta umali ta said, “Go on ahead and tell your men-iyali st apoy, men-iyali si etag, father to bring fire, salt meat, and men-iyali st danum.	water.”
Dey umey nan dna ay babai,  So the women  went and  told  their imbagada  ken  ama  da.  Usto’y  umey   father  [what  Lumawig   had  said}. si ama da wada met nan apoy ay When their father  reached  Lumawig tinagon  Lumawig.  Kanana,  “Ngan he found  that  he had  already  built a pay nan mensapulam isnan etag ya fire. He said, “What are you going to danum?”	use this salt meat and water for ?”
“Adi ta  masibban  nan inyalin san	“In order to eat ... are the two
. no an-ak mo ‘sa dna ay babai ay young ladio who were picking black ninbatong?”	beans your daughters?”


LUMAWIG 8ONTOC MYTHS


Nintikid da, et sumaa da kano san baey nan am-ama. Nakauto et nan dua ay babai et nangan da. Nakakan da et kanan Lumawig, ’Umeyak ct is-nan dap-ay ta ennak maseyep.”

Sana’t ninemnem, “Ay maiwed kayman nangtangad ken datuna?” kanana kano.
Saet kanan kano ama da ay dey en, ’flbagam ken daida.”
Ibagana et, “Maid,” kanan kano san dna ay babas-sang.
Sana’t kano kanan en, “Laydek san esa.” Sada et gab-en et mensilayad da. Sada pay kano maek sinan dap-ay.

Mabung-bungo et gab-en da et nan men-asawaan da. Saet menbakil st Lumawig si kaiw et matupog ct maisapu st baey.

Mensapo pay kano’s baey ya kanan kano nan mangili ed Kay-ang, “Ay badangan tako st LUmawig.” Et badangan da.
Saet kano ibag-ct Lumawig san payok ct ippey na san dna ay begas. Sana pay kano kanan en, “Es-estem sa ta enak kad ilaen san  sapuwen nan mensapu.”
lilan pay kano asawa na san dua ay bukel ay begas ay menliwliwes, “Ha’t ikan pay ngata t una ay mapno?” Pay-ana et si begas.

They climbed up (the mountainl, and went home, it is said, to the house of the old man. The two young women had already cooked and they ate. After they had eaten, Lumawig said, “I’ll go now to the dep-ey to sleep.”°'
Then he remembered,  “By  the way, have any of these (young ladies] In with a man?” he asked, it is said.
Then, it is told, their father said, “Ask them.”
He asked them and, “None,” re- plied, it is said, the two young ladies.
Then, it is told, he said, “I love one of them.” So they finalized the engagement and they loved each other. Then, it is said, they slept in the dap-ay.
Early the next morning, they per- formed the marriage rites. Then Lumawig cut down (pine trees] and the logs were gathered to be built into a house.
As he built his house, it is said, the people of Kayan said, ’ ’s help Lumawig.“ And they helped him.

Then Lumawig, it is said, placed a big pot over a fire and dropped two grains of rice {in it]. Then, it is  told, he said, ’batch over this so I’ll go to see how the work is progressing.”
As his wife looked, it is said, at the two grains of rice swirling in the pot, ’Tlow can this fill the pot?” And she added more rice.


31.	The dep-ey among the Kankanays is the same as the alo of the Bontoks. Aside from serving as a council house, it is also the sleeping place of old men, widowers, unmarried men and visitors of the barrio.

39






Ngem nan bilin Lumawig  ct adi na dadauman. Sa’t sumibo ct san payok et umey et san danum san mensapsapuwan da. Et dilawen Lumawig, “Ay pinay-an ubpay nan babai ay dey nan payok st begas?” Idi umey pay kano yaket pinay-ana tet-ewa.
Et siyadi et masapu et nan baey  da et mentalaken da st otik. Ha’t kanan kano Lumawig en, “Ta mensida ta kad ta mangigtungan di i-Kay-ang en nentalaken ta.”
Sana’t kano kanan en, “Dakayo ay baballo, engkayo mangaew. Ilan yo nan dadake, ta waday langen.”
Adi da patyen tay wada’s kasaod Lumawig ay mangitudo, “Ay papatyen yo nan apon di anito ay sana? Tay ulay maid tun-od na od iman. Tay way nalpu ed daya.” Adi patyen san nabilin ct banban-eg san langen ay insaa da.

ldi wiiken da san otik sada pay ippey san langen et logitan, et nasiken nan otik et.
Et kanan kano aben Lumawig, “Engkayo man-a si geyag yo ta men- ipay-an yo sinan watwat yo,” kanana kano. Yaket adi patyen san udom na et dampay patyen san udom na. Tay begew ay nasiken san nakalogitan nan beteg et siya nan patyen da ct. Siya daida san nakagabno si waday isida da et. San egay nangpati pay et maid kano inablos das sinda da et es-esa ay gedged et anggay.

But Lumawig had warned her not to add anything. The pot started to overflow and the water reached where the work  was  being  done. A nd Lumawig said, “Did that woman add rice to the pot?” When he went to check, it is said, she had really done it.
When their house was finished, they raised young pigs. Then, it is told, Lumawig said, “Let’s eat meat so the people of Kayan will see that we have raised (pigs].”
Then, it is told, he said, “You young men, cut some firewood. Get the large trunks.”
But they did not obey him for Lumawig’s brother-in-law said, “Are you going to obey that son of an  anito (spirit]? He doesn’t have any forefathers. Maybe because he came from the sky.” They did not obey his instructions and they brought back small logs.
When they butchered the piglets, and burned off their hair, they sud- denly became full-grown pigs.
Then, it is told, Lumawig  again said, “Go and get containers so you’ll have something in which  to  place your share  of  the  meat,”  he  said,  it is told. Some did not obey him, but others did. They had seen how the piglets greiv when their hair was burned. These  people  were  able  to get lots of meat. But those who diso- beyed him, it  is said, had only a slice  to eat.


LUMAWIG BONTOC MYTHS



“Id Wanga‘	How He Fished in the River"

Inmey da kano nanganop  ngem  They  went  hunting,  it is said, but nasaew da. Sada pay kano sumaa et were frustrated. So they went home, kanan kano Lumawig en, “Engkayo it is told, and Lumawig said, “Go to sinan dap-ay ta ibaga yo en nasaew the dap-ay {council house] and  tell  tako.”	them we weren’t able to catch
anything.”
Umey da  pay  kano et, “Anggay	When they got there, it is said, mentupog kayo  si  bayading  ta  [the  old  men  said},  ”Get   some  waday baon da. Ta umey da men- camote for their food in order that  uwas sinan wanga tay  nasaew da.”     they’ll  go  to  the  river  to   cleanse
themselves  since  they  had  bad luck.”
Umey  da  pay kano san wanga ya	When they reached the river, it is mangiyeb da ta pamangan da sinan said, they fished to add  something to deey indawat  di  umili ay bayading. the camote given by the people of the   Et adi kapunpunit sinan danum.  village.  But  they  couldn’t  hold  back Sana’t  kano alan  san bayading  et  na the water. So, it is said, he placed the et maptet et nan danum et. Sana pay camote into the water and the water depapen san negay sana pay kano stopped flowing. Then he caught the utowen. Et  alaen  Lumawig  san  fish,  it  is  said,  and  cooked   them. inpunit na  ay  bayading  ct  mangan   Then   Lumawig  got  the  camote  he da pay kano kayet. San meningitan had used to dam the river and they Lumawig et ibekas na kano sinan ate, it  is  said.  And  when  Lumawig danum et menkiwkiwi  kaman negay.     threw  his  fish  bones,  it  is said, into
the water, they wiggled like fish.

Siya’ kano di.



“Nan Kinmannan Lumawig”

That is what is told.


“How Lumawig Left”°'


Kano et  st  Lumawig  et  men-   lt  is  said,  Lumawig  decided   to baybay. Et detngen na  et  ed  Ba- plow a field. And  he reached  Ba-ang.  ang. Ena't baybayen et kanana He started to plow the field and, it

32.	It is only in Kayan where there is a story about how he went back to the sky.
•o the logical assumption  is that  from  Bontoc  he carried  the rituals  up  to  the villages in the higher valleys, passing through Sabangan and Sagada before reaching Kayan, Tadian.

41


PHILIPPINE STUDIES


kano en, “No iyalim nan  baon  ko si kag-aw, men-eskag ka sinan tupak na.”
Siya kano sinan damo et nen- eskag. Idi mawakas, kanan kano’n asawana en, “Apay masapul ay men- eskag ak sinan tupak na mo?”
Umey na pay kano isid-ip. Yaket am-in ay ulay dua’y ingana dampay dua’y ipugaw, bu-ok na ct anggay kaman kaipu-ipuga w ay men -ub- ubla san deey baybayen da ay deey. Dat kasin mentauli et men-eskag, ngem anggay tinagon Lumawig di. Sampay kano umey ct anggay es-esa gedan si Lumawig tay nen-aabet dadi.
Sampay kano kanan Lumawig en, “Anggay mangan ta, ta sumaa ta et. Adi ka ubpay kabilin.”

Sumaa da kano ct kanana kano ct, ’la sumaa ak.” Et umon-unod  kano st asawa na. Umey da pay kano ad Kamiling yaket na singputen ct nan bengen san babai ct maiwakat yaket nenbalin si bato.

Sapay kano umey ct sinan tung- tungdo na ad Gayang et ipad sek kano Lumawig san sukod na et kanana, “Kumab ka. No  makakkab ka ct umunod ka. No adika pay ct anggay mataynan ka.”
Kumab et si Lumawig, si asawa na yaket aped menag-aga. Yaket kana n kan o Lu ma wig en, “Ay maliton ka, ubpay tua ya?”

is told, he said [to his wife], “When you bring my food at mid-day, cough while you’re still at a distance.“^
It is said, on the first day she coughed. The next day, it is told, his wife said, ’Why do I have to cough while still at a distance?”
So, it is said, she went quietly and peeped at him. He was using his whole body [to plow]. Even his ears were like two people, while his hair were like numerous workers plowing the field. Then she went back and coughed but Lumawig knew what she had done. And, it is said, when she reached the field, Lumawig was whole again.
Then, it is told, Lumawig said, “Let’s eat and afterwards we’ll go home. It seems you can’t follow in- structions.”
It is said, they went home and, it is told, he said, ’I’ve decided to go home.” And, it is said, his wife kept following him. When they reached Kamiling, it is said, he seized the woman’s necklace and the beads were scattered and turned to stone.
Then, it is said, he went to the top of Gayang and Lumawig, it is said, thrust his spear into a rock and said, “Climb up. If you can climb up, fol- low me. But if you can’t, you’ll be left behind.”
And Lumawig started to climb, while his wife kept crying. Then, it is told, Lumawig said, “Come  to  think of it, you’re pregnant aren’t you?”


33.	Just like in Sabangan, there is also a wide field in Kayan which is said to have
been plowed by Lumawig.

42


LUMAWIG BONTOC MYTHS


Kawten na ct nan liton asawa na ay dey et, ka wten Lumawig et pabalaena ct nan unga ct dey petden na daet, “Dey, tuptupam nan siki na no siya nan laydem. San tuptup na pay sikyam.” Yaket aped menag-aga nan babai ay dey.
Saet kano sikyan Lumawig, dana ct tuptupan. Pakaben na kano sinan sukod na ay nenbalin st bato et kumab ct san dua ay unga ay dey. Dampay mataynan da Lumawig ay sin-asawa.

“Et dey, umunod ka no makkab ka. No adi ka pay ct mataynan ka. Ngem nan bilin ko ken sik-a, no way laylayad sinan ili pay ct adi kan ma- anal-alibi sinan batawa. No  sinan dao nan mangab-an da sinan gangsa et siya nan manalibiyam,” kanana kano. Et dana’t taynan ct umunod sinan dua’y unga ay dey.
Idi pay kano makasin et wada san bayas id Kay-ang et gaeben da san gangsa isnan batawa. Et nanalibi et san babai ay tinaynan Lumawig ay dey, et ekda gen et Lumawig san buyak. Kasin pay kano manalibi sinan batawa yaket kasin  na ekdagen. Sapay masmek asawa na din buyat inbilin asawa na ay Lumawig ay dey.

He put his hand inside his wife’s belly, and Lumawig brought out the baby and divided it into two, ’There, add {the upper half} to it’s feet if that’s what you want. Or add feet to the upper half.” But the woman kept on crying.
Then, it is said, Lumawig added the missing feet and head. It is said, he made them climb up his spear which had  turned  to  stone   and  the two  chi ldren  climbed   up.“ And Lumawig and his wife were left behind.
“There, to11o w us if you can climb. If you can’t, you’ll be left be- hind. But remember this, if there is any celebration in the village, don’t dance in  the  open  air.   If   they play the gongs  inside,  then  you may dance,” he said, it is told. Then he left her and followed his two children.
Afterwards, it is said, there was a marriage celebration in Kayan and the gongs were played in the open air. The woman Lumawig had left behind danced in the open air and Lumawig dropped his bolo. Again, it is said, ‘ she danced and again he dropped his bolo. It was then  that the wife remembered the warning of her husband Lumawig.








34.	Lumawig’s spear is still there. According to the residents of Kayan it was very much longer but the 1990 earthquake caused some damage.








*San Nangapey"

Umey nan sin-akhi ay chey ad Tur-uwan id Samoki. Inkayu- kayuwek cha’t ay sin-akhi tay chinmalupayo nan pakhey. Nan chey fateng ay kulitas ya itab chinma- lupayo kayet. lnliwliwes cha ay sin- akhi, ya kanan nan esang en, “Chah, ke kaaayyew nan naluyaw ay am-in ay esek, am-in nan pakhey!”
Ay, saet pumanad kano’s Lumwawig et kanana, “Et kecheng chasa ay matakho, et en uchan et matakho sa.”
Chey sae ha’t kano kanan ay, “lnta’t ta inta ilan nan chey chay cha mangapey id At-ato.” Sacha’t kano umey. Alan cha’t nan pasiking  cha ya kanan cha’y, “Chuplakam man nan ili mi’s Kensachan tay chey ay malipayo nan in yes-ek mi ya nan pakhey.”
Ay, sacha’t manikid ad Kalegleg et chuplakan nan chey legleg ay chey. ”Umakayo ta siya’s usalen yo nan legleg ay sana ta ikapya yo ay kanan yo ay, ’ay legleg ka man ay, wad-ay in-oloor st ulo na ya ilegleg cha man sa ya makaan nan o1tx›r nan ulo na.”’
Ay sacha’t akhes pay intam-aw ad sachag ay c hey, u mali cha’t si Makalifeng. Isadsad cha’t nan chaing cha.   Ta   sacha’t    kinwani   en, ’Ooh,

^3Yhat He Did Ouring Apef°

Two brothers went to  Tur-uwan in Samoki. They started to complain for all  the  palay  had  withered.  All t he pea and bean plants had shriveled tm. The brothers kept look- ing around and one said, “What a pity, for all the crops, and all the rice plants have withered.”

Then, it is told, Lumawig came down and said, ’lose plants will live. It will rain and those plants will grow again.”
Then, it is told,  they  said,  “Let’s go meet those people performing the apey in At-ato.” And, it is said, they went. They got their sarigi [rattan backpack] and prayed, “Shower our village of Kensachan [Bontoc fi] be- cause our crops and rice plants have withered!”
Then they climbed up to Kalegleg and [Lumawig) blessed the legleg,^ “Get that legleg and pray saying, ’Oh legleg, here is someone whose head is aching. When she uses you to wash her hair, make her headache go away.”’
Then they looked to the west, and rea ched Ma kali feng. Then t hey started their chaing.” Afterwards they said, “Let’s go to the place where


35.	The apey is the ritual right after the planting season. This ritual is an offering to the unseen guardians to help in preserving the newly-planted palay from harm. During apey the people of 8ontm fIi lodge paluki at Tinadlangan.
36.	Lzgicg is clay used as shampm from the place aleo named Legleg.
37.	A cheing is a prayer combined with chants and choreographed movements.






intako’t man ad chachaingan, ta intako afaten nan inmey id Appay. Ta iyafat nan inala tako’y nay ay inmangmang nan nay chay i- Kensachan. Nangke ubfeng nan inmangmang cha ya kakawitan.”
Hacha’t tikichen ad Angakhicho et i-Salukong cha’t umey cha  id Luwefan. Et en-epap-ay nan angnen cha’y manaing. Awaten kano’n chey pakhey nan chey ipap-ay. Hacha’t kanan en, ‘Ooh, yangag man en, yake tako iasadsad nan chaing tako ya ayke wad-ay khanaten tako’s na. Chah, intako’t man.”
En asilokod cha pay sinan chey tayay cha, “Yangag pet man nan inala yo’d Appay. Yake ulon si simsimot! O, kaot alaen  nan  inyey ta ko’y pakhey ta ituli yo. Pet simsimot nan watwat yo! Chakami pay et ubfeng ya kakawitan, isna’d Kensachan. Sasakap pet ed Appay issas. I nta ko’t, umey yo alaen ta intako’t issa, issa’d Kensachan.”
Umali cha pay kano’d At-ato, en isadsad cha’t akhes nan chaing cha’t, inchaing cha ken Tinadlangan. Sacha’t umali pay id Pangwew. lyanok-a cha nan cheey fawwet cha. Infawwet si Falanay ya manaktakiki. Infawwet pay si Fomitog ya masaskook ad Angsafot.
“Nangke pet ma na ktakiki nan fawwet Falanay, ke si Fomitog ct chey masaskook ad Angsafot! Ay intako’t, alan yo nan sangi’y sana  ta  intakot isaa nan pakhey nan i-Kensachan, tay nay narpas nan apey cha.”
Sacha’t pay chengaan si paluki’s Tinadlangan ya umali cha’d Ken- sachan. ’Michengyas sipichena ya’s

prayers are held so we’ll meet our companions who went to Appay (Western Bontoc J. So we’ll show them what the people of Kensachan have given us. Here they use large pigs and boosters for their rites.”
So they ascended Anga khicho, passed through Salukong and reached Luwefan. And they prayed well. And the rice plants, it is said, also grew well. Then t hey said, ’Though we pray, we won’t get any- thing here. Come on let’s go.”


But when they compared the con- tents of their containers, “What have you gotten from Appay! Why it’s the head of a bird! Go and retrieve the palay you brought them. How come your share is so small! Here in Kensachan we have pigs and chick- ens. Oh those people from Appay! Go get [the palay] and let’s go to Kensachan.”
When they reached At-ato, it is told, they said their  chaing,  prayed to Tinadlangan. Then they proceeded to Pangwew. They spun their tops. Falanay tried his top but it wouldn’t spin. But when Fomit-og threw his top, it spun all the way to Angsafot.

’Tlow come Falanay can’t spin his top, while Fomit-og’s  top  went  all the way to Angsafot! Come on, get your sungi [rattan backpack] and let’s bring home the palay  to  Kensachan for their apey is over.”
Then they placed paluki [cactus- like plant with small pointed leaves] on Tinadlangan and finally arrived in


PHILIPPINE STUDIES

faneng  ya’s  pakhey,  ya ininot, ta adi	Kensachan. ’be	palay will bend to- al-alan  si  utot  ya  kinok-oloko,”  siya	wards the wall (of the rice field] and chi  nan kanan cha.	towards the other side, and they will thrive, and the rats and lizards will
not steal them,” that is what they said.




*Nan Tinulungana"

lWYFH 17
“How He Helped Two Brothers”


Sumaa  si  ina  cha,  ’la  ngag man		When the mother  (of  the  two nan engkayo’n insasanga’s sa? Adi brothers] came home she said [to her kayo’t chentan angkhay  nan  afong sonsl,  “What  are  you  looking  so  tako?”	gloomy about? Why haven’t von
lighted a fire?”
’Ooh,   kanam   en  chap wan  nan		“You said that our father died nal-an ama mi, yake pet fuso’n nal- well, but he  was  murdered  by  our  ana.”	tribal foes.”
Yakena’t    kinwanin,   “E ngkayo’t		Then she said, “Go and see if the ilan  nan  chemang  mo  nalafey.”	way is clear.”
Umey  cha   pay  ya   peypeyan   na     So  they  went  and  heard  three bird nan tulo’y lafey. Isikwat na nan epat,  calls. Then  they  heard  a fourth.  “We  itked cha. “Awni’t ta ifales si ama ta.” will avenge our father.”
Sumaa  cha  pay  et  kinwanin  rna		When they went  home  t heir  cha,  ’la,  nakcheng   nan  sinakhang	mother asked, “Did it  go  well?” yo?”
“Nakcheng pay.”	‘Yes all was well.”
Napat-a  pay nan  talon ay chey ya  The  next  morning  their  mother  kanan ina cha, “Wyo’t isukusok nan said, “Go and avenge your father’s suke’y sana sinan fuso tako ay i- death against our foes the people of Suyangan.”	Suyangan.”
Yake  cha’t  pay tet-ewa isukusok	So  they   went.   They   reached ay chey. Umey  cha  pay  isnan  talon Suyangan  by  nightfall.  They  went nan  i-Suyangan  ket  naschem.  Umey down  the  hillside  and   started   to cha pay inchalulog ay chey ya  build  a shelter.  “So we’ll  have some- kumaeb cha’t st afongan. ’la wa’y thing to use when we harvest.”
in-aniyan ta.”
Yaket  kinwanin   nan  anochi  na,     But  then  the  younger  said,  “But “At pay maloopan ta. lntakay san one side will be Dlocked [by the nafilkhana.”	mountainside]. Let’s go higher.”






Umey cha pay san chey nafilkang, inkaeb cha tet-ewa’s in-afongan ay chey. Yaket pay kinaekaeb  cha  pay ya sumkhep cha pay ay chey. Sacha’t mangag-akhew ay chey.
Yaket sana nan inyadyad-an isnan fufong ay chey. Yaket kinwanin san yun-ana, “Engka man ta fumala ka ta ilam no ngag nan inyadyad-an ay chey. Ay saet pewakem nan fufong ta asop ya kasi umali ta inkailulusaw.”
Sana e tetewa pewaken san chey fufong ay chey. Sumkhep pay et kasin cha mangag-akhew ay sin-akhi. Yaket sana tetewa ay inyadyad-an. Yaket ninkalulusaw et ninpespes cha’t nan chey siki na.

’Ham nan khaman ta penkilikil ko na.”
Kinwani na, ”Adi kayo kumilikil ta pumanad-ak ta inab-afig tako.” Yaket pumanad ya si Lumawig.
Yakena’t kinwani, “to pet mang- payan yo’s inani yo?”

“Maid pay."
Yakena’t kinwani, “Sika’y anochi engka alan san sangi’k ay kar-akha. Adim alan san napangkitan ay sangi’k tay inkipon ko pay chi’s fuso ya inkipon ko’s lako.”
Umey pay ya menfalya na’t si asawan Lumawig ay chey, kena’t inala san chey napangkitan ay chey. Ilana pay ket kanan Lumawig ay, ’Yangag tay nan napangkitan nan inalam. Inkipon ko pay sa’s fuso ya lako.”
’la man fumales kami.”

So they went to the top of the hill and really built a shelter there. After they had built it, they went inside. Then they ate their lunch.

Then they heard {somethingl jump- ing on the roof. The  elder  brother said, ”Go and see what is jumping on the rix›f. Then cut a hole in the cogon fronds so, hopefully, when it comes back it will fall through it.”
So he {the younger brotherl really cut a hole in the roof. He went back inside and the brothers continued eating. After sometime they really heard [somethingl jumping on their roof. It fell through the hole and they grabbed its féet.
“Give me my head axe so I can slash it.”
He said, ”Don’t kill me. I’ll come down and we’ll talk.” And when he came down, it was Lumawig.
Lumawig said, “Where are you going to put what you have har- vested?”
"[There isJ nothing."
Lu mawig sa id, “You who are younger, go and get my new sangi [rattan backpack}. Don’t get the old one for I used it in tribal wars and trade.”
He went, but he tricked Luma- wig’s wife and he got the old one. When Lumawig saw (what he had brought) he said, “Why have you brought the old one? I used that in tribal wars and in trade.”

’Cause we want to get our re- venge.”

47


PHILIPPD IE STUDIES


Yakena’t kinwani ay, “Kecheng.” Sana’t kanan isnan yun-a ay chey, “Ayed pespmem ed nan khayang ay nay.”
Pespesen na pay nan khayang ay chey ket makaktaab nan kicho. Eg-ay na ipeg-anan. Kasin makaktaab nan kicho, eg-ay na kayet ipeg- anan. Yakena’t alan san yun-a’y chey, kasin na’t ichuwas san anochi na’y chey. “Pespesem ed akhes na.”

Pinespes pay san anochi na’y chey ya naka ktaab nan kicho’y chey. Yakena’t kinwani, “Naakchan pet nan icho yo. Awni’t alaen yo nan fales ama yo.”
Yaket pay tetewa napat-a nan talon ay chey ya sacha’t umey san chey sasakchuwan san apon san i- Suyangan ay chey. Inte-e nan yun-a’s nan liblifan ay chey. Pag-a lin nan mamuknag ay chey ya nenlangfitana. Nenlangfitan akhes nan anochi nan manakcho ay chey. Sacha pay chaan ya ala san ulo cha’y chey.
Yaket sisilutan pay nan chey cha’y i-Suyangan chaicha. Yake cha’t umchan pay san Fantokhan id Taokan, in-ingati cha, “Intakang ka man ta umey ka ken chakami tay ke sumisilot nan fuso miy nay i- Suyangan.”
Yaket mint a kang pay tet-ewa sana’t kentangfan cha-icha. Umchan cha pay ay chey ya kecha’t kasifa- fakag sinan fato’y chey. Ninkalebleb et nan khaman cha’y chey ya san chey falfeg cha’y chey.
Kinwani cha, ”Yake pet anito chana. I ntako’t inpabsa sinan

And he said, “All right.” Then he said to the older brother, “Come, hold my spear.”

As he grasped the spear, sud- denly lightning struck. But he didn’t loosen his hold. Again lightning struck, and again he held tight to the spear. Then he (LumawigJ got the spear from the older brother and gave it to the younger brother, ’Tlold tight to this.”
The younger brother held tight to the spear and lightning struck. Then he said, ’You’re from a sturdy root. Soon you’ll avenge your father.”

The next day really they went to the place where the child ren of Suyangan fetched water. The elder brother stayed in the place where the road curved. And when a farmer passed by, he struck him down. His younger brother also struck down a person who had come to fetch wa- ter. Then they cut off their heads.
Then the people of Su yangan started trailing them. And when they reached Fanto-khan pa large stone] in Taocan, they pleaded, “Open up and come to us  for  our  foes,  the  people of Suyangan, are following us.”

And [the stone] really opened up and swallowed them. When they [the people of Suyangan) reached the stone they started hitting it. But they only dulled their bolos and spears.

They said, “Those were anitos [spirits]. Let’s go to sharpen our






sagsachi.” Yaket maligwat cha pay tetewa’t inehan pabsii ay chey.
Yake cha’t akhes in-inga-o ay chey san faton  Fantokhan,  “Inatakang  ka ct ta umitubfa ka ta sumaa kami’s ka ili mi’d Mabfileng.”
Itubfa na pay chaicha’y chey yake cha’t mangal-aleya-ey. Insakhong ct nan i-Suyangan ay chey, ’Wadaw, ke pet tet-ewa anito chasa!”
Sacha’t pay umali’s san ili cha’y chey, khab-en cha nan patik. Ya sacha’t umyai san ato’s fotog pay ay chey. Mamegnas cha akhes san ato cha’y chey. Nakakan cha pay ya kecha’t kab-en san patik ay chey. “Awni’t inpinalatik si chug-an nan fotog yo, tay na fotogan nan chap-ay, manok ya masayag chadlo nan manok.”
tek yo pet chadlo nan kaeb si patik. Awni et kumedse kayo ay sinpangato.”

weapons.” And they reaily went to sharpen their weapons.
Then they (the brothers] shouted to the stone Fantokhan, “Open up and spit us out so we’ll go home to Mabfileng.”
The rock spat them out and they started chanting and singing. The people of Suyangan looked back, ’truly those were anitos.”
When they reached home, they performed t he pa I ik. • A nd they brought a pig has sacrifice) to the ato. And they prayed at the ato. After they had eaten, they performed the patik. “What you have planted will be abundant, your pigs will thrive, and your chickens will flourish.”


“[Since] you know how to do the patik properly, the people of this ato will prosper,” [said Lumawig).



38.	The petik is a thanksgiving ritual wherein a pig is butchered at the ato.





Rei'erences

Botengan, Kate C. Bontoc life-ways: A sfudy in Educut ion and culture. Manila: Capitol Publishing House, Inc.
Scott, William Henry. 1969. On the Cordifirra. Manila: MCS Enterprises.
. 1988. A Sagada render. Quezon City: New Day Publishing.
Seidenadel, Carl. 1907. The first grammar of the language spo rat by the Bontoc Igorot. Chicago: Open Court Pubishing Co.
Vanoverbergh, Morice. 1953. Prayers in Lepanto-Igorot or Kankanay as it is spoken in Bauco. Llnioersilnj of Maurin Journal Jr East Asiatic Studies 2 (April): 9.


49




Filipino Folklore
Author(s): Lucetta K. Ratcliff
Source: The Journal of American Folklore , Jul. - Sep., 1949, Vol. 62, No. 245 (Jul. - Sep., 1949), pp. 259-289
Published by: American Folklore Society
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/537202


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms



































University of Illinois Press and American Folklore Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Journal of American Folklore





This content downloaded from
195.176.29.132 on Fri, 16 Sep 2022 16:13:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

FILIPINO  FOLKLORE

COLLECTED BY LUCETTA K. RATCLI FF

IN t go8 while a teacher for the United States government in the provincial high school in Pagsanjan, Laguna, I suggested to a class that had been study- ing Washington Irving's Alhambra the collecting of local folk tales.' The fol- lowing are selected from those written by the pupils.
The first group concerns the pinciple of evil.


i. “A Legend of the Asuangs”
By  Antonio Maceda
When I was a little boy, I was told by  my grandfather  a story about  the asuan g. The asuang is a  person  who  has the  power  to  change into a  kind of  monster  with a relish for human flesh. There are two  kinds of  asuangs,  the  kind  that  walks and the kind that  flies. The  walking asuang can appear in any  ani mal's form,  but  only  as a male. I t is his custom to sleep by day and to wander at night in the form of whatever animal he may choose. If an as uang does not go out at night to wander about, he becomes  sick.  The  asuang  enters  the  garden  to  destroy  the  plants,  but if you know his real name and  call it,  he  will stop at  once. The  asuang loves  to  wait under the house of a pregnant woman  waiting  for  the  birth  of  the  child  to steal the baby. I n former times a  pregnant  woman  dld  not  dare  to go away  from the house for fear of seeing an as uang which would cause a miscarriage. I t is the custom of the flying asuang, which is usually a female, to mark her body with a  certain oil under the arms;  then,  stretching  her arms from  the  window,  her  limbs are left behind, and  she flies away in  the  form of sotne bird  to seek for food.  Now,  if those living in the same house wish the asuang not to return,  they  move the  limbs to another corner of the  room,  and  then  the  two  parts of  the  body  have difficulty in joining. If they can not join before four  in  the  morning,  it  is impossible  ever after. Other charms against asuangs are garlic, ashes, and salt.
In the town of Binangunan, in the province of Tayabas, it is said that nearly all
the people of  the town  are asuangs. Once it  happened  that  three  young  men  decided to make a tour  from  town  to  town,  and  upon  approaching  Binangunan  they  saw three beautiful ladies with bright f aces and long  hair carrying  water  from  a spring in long hollow bamboo pails. The young men asked if they could carry the pails for them.  The ladies granted the young men's request, and afterwards  all  went  to  the  ladies’  house where the men lodged that night. The ladies lived alone in a large beautifully ornamented house. After a long conversation night came, and all sat  down  to  dinner. After eating, they slept in different chambers, the  ladies  in  the  front  and  the  young men in the rear. After ten o’clock the latter heard the young ladies stir and go to the
'	These folk tales, collected by Mrs. Lucetta Kellenbarger Ratcliff and her students more than forty years ago, were accepted for publication in the Journal in i 939 by its then editor, the late Ruth Benedict. Since Dr. Benedict retired from the editorship at the end of the same year, the tales were not published, but handed down in the backlog to subsequent editors. Although some of the tales may not derive directly from oral tradition, exhibit literary embellishment,  and lack discussion and annotation, the editors have nevertheless chosen to include  them  in  the “Pacific Number” because of their wide variety of types and  motifs. The author’s classi- fica tions have been kept, but numbers have been added to facilitate reference. Spellings deriv- ing from faulty grammar have not been normalized.—Tim EDITORS.

259

e6o	Journal of American Folklore
back part of the house. Using a bit of oil,  they  flew  away,  leaving  their  six  lower limbs lying upon a bench. After their departure the young  men  changed  the  limbs around so that when the ladies  returned  at  four,  they  had  great  confusion  in  joining the bodies to their lower limbs, and they saw that the young men had changed them around. When it was nearly four in  the morning,  they  asked  the  men  to  put  their limbs in the right order, promising to marry them if they did so. The  young  men  arranged them in order, so then  all  the  bodies  were  joined  and  the  three  became ladies with ordinary bodies. Afterward they were married to the young men.
After the wedding, one of the asuangs said  to the  husbands,  “If  you do not  wish us to be asuangs any more, we will carry you on our backs  to the other shore of  the sea where you will pluck three lemons from the lemon tree growing on the shore, and these you must put into three jars of water for us to drink. When  we have drunk all  the water, tie our feet and hang us to a tree, heads downward, and beat  us till  we vomit a crow-like thing, which you must cut into very small pieces.”
The men obeyed their wives. Ped ro's wife vomited the black thing after a long beating. He cut it to pieces so she was then unable to become an asuang again. The other two failed to beat long enough out of mercy to their wives, so they were still asuangs.
Some time after this, each couple removed to a separate habitation. Later a notice came to the asuangs from their president of a meeting in their hall far away from Binangunan. The two asuangs flew there, carrying their husbands on their backs. As they entered the hall, they saw nearly all the asuangs assembled  eating dinner. The four newcomers sat down to eat also, but the two husbands who were not asuangs saw that what they were going to eat was the flesh of hu man bodies, such as fingers, ears, and such parts. Yet one husband tasted a piece and as it  tasted  fresh,  he called for salt. What do you think the asuangs did ? All flew away, even the two wives who, however, returned later to get the men and to carry them home.
A few days after this occurred the two asuangs left their home at night again and went to the meeting of the asuangs, but this time alone. Suddenly their president ordered the two wives to be put into prison for life as a punishment for what their husbands had done. When the husbands were tired of  waiting for many  months for the return of their wives, they decided to go back to their own town, leaving their companion, for he had now a good and faithful wife.
z.  “The Tianac”
By  Alfredo  B. Callputan
Once upon a time an old fisherman lived in a little hut in a town near the Bay Lake. Mabute, the only son of this fisherman,  was  a  sensible  boy.  One  day  when  Mabute was washing the rice, the earthen pot was broken. This accident alarmed him, and he decided to run away from the house for fear that his father would beat him.
Many weeks elapsed, yet Mabute did not return, and no word concerning him was heard, so his father abandoned the hope of seeing him again. Now  Mabute had gone  to his cousin, Matacao, and they often had a good time together. One evening when  the sky was dark and the rain was gently falling, Mabute and Matacao were wander- ing together to the house of Mabute’s sweetheart;  that  house  was quite far away in the cocoanut groves. As they were walking together, M abute said, “Oh ! we are very brave! See! there is no one else who dares to wander in this lonely place.”
“We are brave because we have an important errand, to visit your lad y, Masarap,” replied Matacao. After these jovial words, peace seemed to reign, broken only by the happy voice of a baby at play. But Mabute was terrified by the voice. Matacao, how-

Fili pine Folklore	z6i
ever, was not frightened at all. Mabute urged that they run away because he thought that that voice was the voice of the asuang.
“No, no,” replied Matacao, “we are brave and we must not run.”
“But what shall we do in this dangerous place if it should be the asuang?” asked Mabute. “Let us go nearer to see what the sound really is,” said Matacao.
This time Mabute agreed and so they went in that direction. Reaching the place where the voice had seemed to come from, they found a very plu mp baby 1ying on the wide leaf of a banana plant. Mabute immediately lifted him up and kissed him many times. “Oho! What good fortune!” said Mabute with pride, “I should like to take good care of this baby, so that when he grows up to be a lad, I may have a fine servant to prepare my food, to clean my shoes, and to pick up the cocoanut shells.”
“It is mine by right, because if I had let you run a while ago, then you would not
have found the baby,” said Matacao with anger.
As they were conversing together, Matacao became still more angry,  and  he  rushed to the bamboo fence to get a club. When Mabute saw this,  he  tried  to lay down the baby which they were quarreling about. Suddenly the baby was changed to an ugly old man, with a frightful aspect. This old man had long mustaches and beard, his nose was flat, his eyes were smaller than a peseta, and one of his feet was short. Mabute was so terrified that his hair began to stand on end. When the tianac per- ceived that Mabute was afraid, he bit Mabute’s arm. Of course, Mabute cried as  loudly as he could for help, for he felt sure that the tianac would kill him. Fortunately the tianac ceased biting and gradually disappeared. Matacao ran home, and  Mabute ran after him faster than he had expected. When they reached the house, they were very tired and everybody in the house was alarmed.
“What is the matter, Mabute?” said Pacita, the mother of Matacao, with astonish- ment.
“The tianac, the tianac bit me!” replied Mabute shaking with fright. “What about the tianac?” asked Pacita.
“Bit me!” replied Mabute pointing to his left arm.
“Oh! the tianac bit you? He does not harm you unless you harm him. I have observed that many times, and now I will tell you more about him. The tianac’s left foot is always short while the right one is very long, so that when he sits, his right  knee is higher than his head. The dissimilarity of the tianac's feet makes him difficult to walk or run, yet he is a fine ju mper and he can jump as far as he wishes. So if you can see a baby or hear the cry of a baby, don’t heed him, and just repeat to yourself, ‘Jesus, Maria y Josef’ ; then the tianac will disappear, and you will no longer hear Its crying.”
“Suppose I run?” asked Mabute.
“No, you are not to run. Because if you run  and show your cowardice,  then  he will bite you for fun,” said Pacita with a wise air.

3.	“The Tikbalang”
By  Dolores Zafra
The tikbalang is a kind of monster  which  looks like a man,  having very long feet so that when he sits on a bench or on his heels his knees are higher than his head. The tikbalang can imitate anybody he likes. Sometimes he is visible to men, and some- times not. His especial delight is to lead people on the wrong road.
One day, when a farmer's young son, called Jeronimo, was going  to  his  cousin’s house in the cocoanut grove, a tikbalang appeared in the form of an old man and told Jeronimo to follow him as his guide. The poor boy was guided on the wrong road. He

e6g	Journal of A trierican Folklore
was led to a place surrounded with bamboo trees where he could not escape. Then he was conducted into a small pretty house inside the bamboo trees. There he was left alone and began to cry, for he was separated from his relatives, and he  was very hungry but had nothing to eat. For two days his relatives waited for his return but in vain, so they went into a cousin's house and asked if Jeronimo had been there. They answered that they had not seen him. Then his relatives searched for him, and after three days, they found him in the small  pretty  house inside the  bamboo  trees where he was left by the ti kbalang. He was very pale because he was afraid and very h ungry. They carried him to his house and when he reached home he had fever, for the tikbalang wished him to have that kind of sickness for one week. The poor Jeronimo lay on his bed for three days, could not eat, and no one could cure him, not even the physicians called by his relatives. Vt'hen the week was ended, however, Jeronimo gradually grew better.
4.	“The Cafré”
By  Pastor  J. Maceda
On the other side of the Balanak River just south of  Pagsanjan  is a barrio called  San Francisco. A poor couple once lived there with  a daughter  named  J uana. She was one day walking in the cocoanut groves where she met the caf re in the form of a fine looking young man.
“Good morning, Miss J uana,” he said in a courteous way,  and  her  answer  was  a sweet good morning. Then she invited him to take a walk with  her,  because she  was alone and because she thought that he was her  good  lover,  And res. The  man  gladly went with her. They talked together about their future home, and all too  soon  they reached the house of J uana where they parted with sweet smiles.
As it was the month of May, sacred to the Virgin, the barrio was having a religious
procession of the cross every night. Very many girls were fond of going with the procession, and J uana was one of them. I t happened that one night she was at  the  rear of the procession. She noticed some one z'a1king behind her so she looked back and saw a man about as tall as a big banana plant. She was so badly ft igh tened that she ran into the midst of the procession shouting, “The caf re is after us!” The proces- sion was confused in a moment. Many men went to fight the caf re, but he ran so fast that no one could overtake him. He was soon lost in the darkness. The men went back to the procession, and there they saw that the girls were so terrified that they could neither hold up their candles nor could they say their  prayers. After  the  procession had reached the Ermita, a small chapel, J uana went home with some friends; and on their way she saw And res looking for her. From their conversation she found out that And res was not the one who had walked with her that morning. Then she began to be afraid because she knew that it had been the caf re who had talked  with  her. She would not even permit her friends to go an inch away from her, and in this way she reached her home unharmed.
It was soon well known to the people that a caf ré was in the barrio and that he was
in love with J uana. The girls ceased going with the procession. Every night after the procession all the men gathered in the groves about  the  house  of  Jnana  with  their bolos, because the caf re was often seen near that house. At midnight when all  were asleep, he would go from one house to another  to disturb  the people  by  shaking  the posts of their houses and by groaning like a lion.
Soon the news spread to the town so that  many  went  to  the  village  to  help  the  barrio people. One night there were about four hundred people, among whom were two policemen with their guns. These two policemen saw the  caf ré leaning  by a cocoanut tree, and at once fired at him. He roared like a lion and then vanished from sight. The

filipino FolklOYR	2 b3
men investigated the place, but there was nothing except a tall banana  plant which  the bullets had pierced. After that night the caf re did not appear again.
(Note: The writer of this story was present two years ago when the shooting occurred.)
. “The Celebration of  the Dewata” By Miguel Pato
I n olden times the people believed in many anitos, but now very few civilized Filipinos believe in them. Yet still there are some people who celebrate an annual feast for the anitos, called the Dewata. M y friend invited me last year to see this curious celebration. They usually celebrate this Dewata in the month of August. fiefore the celebration they invite many people, especially those who have a Dewata like theirs. \\’hen the appointed day comes, the man who celebrates the Dewata puts bands of red ribbon on his body in order to distinguish himself. They put an altar in the house and also on the ground in front of the stairway. They cut the nodes of small bamboos and put them on these altars; inside of these bamboo nodes they put wine, because they think that the spirits of their ancestors and enchanted people will come and drink the wine. The man decorated with bands of ribbon dances with a sword in front of the altar. After a few moments he descends the steps and dances in front of the altar with a spear. Soon, with his spear, he strikes a pig which they have placed in  f ront of the altar. Then other men kill this pig and make grand preparations. During this time you can hear the men and women shouting and clapping their  hands with joy. After this the man with the ribbons goes u p into the house and  dances there. They use the drum only, and everybody can dance with swords or daggers. They be- lieve that during their celebration the spirits of their ancestors and the enchanted people are present to see the game. After the game they bring forth food and put the plates on the floor. Then the chief of these Dewata calls the spirits to eat, but no one ever sees the spirits when they come. They celebrate this feast in order to move the spirits to grant them good crops and to guard them from pestilence and other mis- fortune.
6. “The Monster of the Balanac” By Ponciano Loren a
In one of its many windings, the Balanac River forms a cove where the water is very deep and the direct rays of the sun are kept away by the thick leaves of the bamboo leaning from the bank above. Formerly this spacious, shad y cove was a favorite bathing place for every age and sex, because of its natural beauty and peace- ful surroundings. There were always a number of people in the place.
Once upon a time there appeared at this spot a mysterious monster with a body half fish and half human. The bathers were filled with consternation. This creature was said to have its dwelling in a cave under the bank. This cave was supposed by many to be made of gold, for whenever the monster appeared, gold could be found on the bank. At midnight this monster would appear on the surface of the water riding in a golden chariot with a torch in his hand, but when the sun began to rise in the East,  this chariot would disappear suddenly, leaving the water black for a little while.  Many said that this monster fed on hu man beings. After a time people began to be frightened and consequently they abandoned the bathing place. Yet, when the news of this monster was spread abroad, people came even from other towns to peer from among the clumps of bamboo, hoping to catch a glimpse of the mysterious monster, but in vain, for no one has seen it these many years.

u 64	Journal of American folklore
The following group of tales deals with enchantment, kindly water spirits, or magic as an aid to the lazy.


2. “Legend of Halimumog” By Honorlo Montecillo
In Alaminos, there was once a very extensive farm on which many farmers to- gether with their families lived in separate cottages. This farm was located at the foot of the mountain, where according to tradition, an Enchanted Man lived, who pos- sessed precious treasures. Often when these farmers were gathered together at rest under a spreading tree near their cottages, as was their  habit,  each  told  a  story about the Enchanted Man. One favorite story was that, in earlier times, the farmers could talk to that man and could even borrow some needf ul things, especially all kinds of plates to be used on wedding days. But it happened that a dishonest, odd looking fellow did not return what he had borrowed, so after that no one could see the En- chanted Man again.
One day before the Enchanted Man had been offended, one of these  farmers, named Remigio, was plowing steadily, when he saw the form of an old man, standing at one end of his rice fields. I t seemed to him that the old man seemed to be waiting for something, so he made his carabao go toward him, but when Remigio came close to the stranger, he saw him holding a kind of basket filled with tomatoes, radishes, onions, and meat. Then the old man talked to Remigio, asking his help to carry his basket to his house, pointing out the location on the mountainside. Hearing these words, Remigio hesitated, for he did not know of such a habitation. As he was thin k- ing, the tradition, related so often by his companions concerning the Enchanted Man, came to his mind so he bore the old man aid. After walking a few minutes up the hill- side, they arrived very soon at a long building situated under a big tui tree, the posi- tion of whic h was very familiar to Remigio, but he had never seen such a long, large building before. Entering the house, very much surprised, he saw a long corridor with a room at one end, which made him wonder st ill more. On each side of this was a row of jars, the contents of which he did not know.
The old man took him into the room, where a sum of money was given to him as a reward. This room was so richly decorated that it awed the farmer, as he had never seen such beautiful furnishings before. There were an ottoman  and  a roc king-c hair in which he was invited to sit; so he seated himself,  but  jumped  up very suddenly like a deer that hears the gun, for suddenly he thought that he would  turn over. The old man just stood still and said to him, “Whenever you need my help, you need only come back here and you will obtain aid in whatever you may need.” Before Remigio lef t the house, all the jars on both sides of the corridor were opened for him to look in, and he beheld such wealth that he easily determined to return in his next difficulty as the Enchanted Man said. When he departed, he was warned not to let other persons, even his own family, know where he had been, nor how he had obtained the money. Then the farmer went home and continued plowing with his carabao. He gave the money to his help mate and followed the advice of the Enchanted II an. Thereafter, he often went back to the ord man's house, which could not be seen by others, to get anything he lacked. His wife’s curiosity was soon aroused, and she asked him day after day about the matter, but he merely replied, “Keep still.”
As time  went on,  he  became very  well-to-do;  but  he still  worked  hard  and  al ways
kept the warning of the Enchanted Man  in  his mind. Once  when  Remigio  was  with  the friendly old man, he was offered a jar filled with wealth to be taken to his cottage



z66	Journal of American Folklore
a golden centipede, and many other golden things; for whatsoever the naiad uses is made of gold.
Our ancestors have many traditions concerning this naiad. About the time of the American occupation, a poor little girl living in a barrio of  Majayjay  was  passing near the fall with her mother one twilight when she stopped to wash her feet in a stream near by. After the mother had passed on, the little girl heard her name called and looking up, she saw the fair naiad. Following her guidance, the little girl stepped into the stream; and lo! the water on which she stepped was changed  into  golden sand. Upon her arrival at the naiad's cave, she was very much bewildered and amazed at the decorations of her habitation. The naiad gave this poor girl a  great sum of money including bracelets, necklaces, rings and earrings, saying  that she  must  not tell where these valuables came from. Although the bag of gold was very heavy, yet the little girl went away without any di fhculty because the naiad helped her at first in carrying it; but as she proceeded alone, the bag became heavier and heavier until she had to ask for aid. When she reached home, her mother asked her where that money came from; but she said that she must not ask, for it was a secret. Finally the mother asked her so persistently that shecould not keep quiet longer, so she had to tell the for- bidden secret; but after so doing, she found no money in the chest where she had hid- den her treasure.
Another tradition is that if any man brought a white cock, that is, one with feathers,
legs, claws, bill, and other parts all  white,  the  naiad  would  come out  from  her  cave and would call the man and give him money in exchange for the cock.
During the guerilla warfare between the Americans and Filipinos, an American captain who was stationed at Majayjay once went to Botocan to take a bath. When he reached the river, he decided first to go to the bottom of the fall; he did so and when he arrived there, he saw the golden centipede. So he dived suddenly to catch him and as the golden centipede was so big that he could not move quickly, the captain caught  one of his legs. He made this one leg into two big rings. When the Americans heard about this treasure, many of them went there, and they have continued  to visit  the falls until the present time; but whenever an American or any foreigner goes then,  even if it be Mr. William H. Taf t, it rains heavily although the sun shines brightly.
Once a skilf u1 miner came and, slipping up,  he suddenly  put some  magic  medicine  at the entrance of the naiad's cave; but although he caught  the  naiad’s  servant,  she herself escaped. The naiad  was seen  that night  riding in a ship in  the  air  accompanied by inn u merable butterflies, and she sailed away to the top of  Banajao  Mountain.  But  she soon returned to her beloved haunt and has often been seen since.

g.  “The  Caliraya Fall”
By  Getulio  A. Glorioso
There is no tradition I like better than the tale of the Caliraya  Fall,  which  is situated about six miles northeast of the town of Cavinti. The Caliraya River  pro- duces a most wild and desolate impression, because it is surrounded by a dense forest, and all the shadows on the water, the rocks, and even the water itself, look black ; but in its lower course are huge stones at the base of a cliff over which the water of the fall rushes, and in its mist one always sees a rainbow.
The people living near regard the fall as a wonder, for it  has  two different sounds, which foretell the weather as accurately as a weather bureau. \Vhen the sound of the roaring is very low, even if it be in the midst of the  hot,  dry  season,  bad  weather follows on the next d ay ; but after several days  when  the  waterfall  begins  to  sound very loud, it is known that the next day will be very pleasant and bright.



According to an old tradition which has been told from generation to generation, this fall is controlled by a naiad. There is a story of an old fisher woman ignorant of the naiad’s power over the fall, who once on a bright morning approached the place. At first, as she drew near enough to the fall to see the huge stones below, she stood wondering, for the white clothes, which she had at first seen spread on the rocks, had suddenly disappeared. She remained quiet behind a clu mp of bamboo and watched the place to see if she could catch a glimpse of the clothes again and if she could tell whose clothes they were, but in vain. Then the rain came and darkened the  place. Soon she began to feel very much afraid, and she returned home, keeping her ex- perience secret for some time.
Meanwhile she heard about the naiad and her magic so she went a second time to the river with her younger sister, both carrying clothes to wash. The sun shone very hot, for it was nearly noon. They piled their clothes on a big flat stone near the fall, and the sister at once began to wash, squatting and pounding the garments on the stone. The elder sister was wandering about the fall, hoping to catch a glimpse of the naiad, for she had heard that the naiad granted magical power to that mortal who was so fortunate as to win her favor, often enriching the happy person with gold. On this day, however, no trace of the naiad could be seen,  but in a short time the waterfall  began to roar loudly and waves rose in the river until the flat washing stone  was covered. The sisters, very much frightened, ran home in haste, leaving some of the washing behind. That same night the elder one felt sick, and little by little the secret of  what she had done leaked out. The whole family then understood that her sudden  illness had been caused by fright, and the story gradually spread throughout the village.

to.  “Juan  the Lazy“'
By  Maximo A. M adridejos
In a little village in the mountains there once lived a poor old farmer, who had only one son named Juan Zafiro. Little J uan's father loved him very much and taught him how to read and write when he was seven years of age; but unfortunately when he was about eight years old, his father died, so he and his mother lived alone in their little cottage. His mother worked very hard on the farm;  but J uan,  though  he ought to have worked to help her, stayed in the cottage and did not like to work. The people called him Juan the Lazy. When he was very hungry he just called his mother to give him food and water.
One day he called his mother, for he wished to take a bath in the river; so his mother called for aid from her neighbors to carry Juan to the river. Having arrived at the river, the neighbors told her that she should not take such care of Juan; they advised her to leave him by the bank and he would go home himself when  he was very hungry, so she abandoned him. Juan stayed there like a statue on the bank of the river crying and calling his mother. Many people who saw him said, “Move, J uan. Go home, you lazy boy.”
Until it was about two o’clock in the afternoon Juan stood  there and  at  that time no people were passing by, for all were taking their siesta. It  happened  then  that Juan saw a package of papers floating on the stream. He immediately reached out for it; he opened it at once and found a book of seven pages. The book contained nothing except the word “Fibicoy,” written on each page. When he pronounced the word “Fibicoy,” the little book answered, “Yt'hat, sir, have you anything  to command?  I am ready to do it.” Juan was very glad when he heard these words, and he said eagerly, “Fibicoy, carry rrie home.” After saying this, Juan found himself in his cot- tage, and the book lying on his bosom. His mother was not at home at that time, so he

z68	Journal of American Folklore
called Fibicoy again to bring him the best kind of food, for he was very hungry. After that he gave the book many commands, and the book obeyed him every time. His mother wondered at the change in her son because she was not called upon  to  take any more rare of him.
Not far from J nan’s cottage there was a town famous for its  beautiful  buildings, but Juan had never been there. As he was anxious to visit this town,  he ordered Fibicoy to carry him there. I t happened that when Juan was at  the gate of  the  town, he heard the sound of the bells; as he had never heard so many church bells ringing before, he immediately rushed away in terror and ran very fast through the groves toward his village. He did not know where he was and had forgotten all that he had seen on his way. But the next morning, when he found that Fibicoy was not on his bosom, he went again toward the town to find the precious  book.  He cried  very loudly “Fibicoy, Fibicoy” ; but as no one answered, he still traveled on. Upon reaching the gate again, he found his little book lying on the road. This time  he visited  the town, and after he had seen all the pretty houses he ordered  Fibicoy  again  to carry him to his cottage.
Not long afterwards his mother and his neighbors discovered his secret. Then many people went to Juan to ask all about his book,  for  they  believed  that  the book  was  given him by a magician who was a friend  of  his  father;  many  others  said  that  the book had been the property of  his anrestor  many  years  ago.  I t  is said  that  Juan  and his neighbors received benefit from the book in all of their difficulties.

i i. “The Magic Handkerchief”
By  Maroiano Rosero
Once upon a time there lived a young couple who were not very happy. The hus- band, Antonio, was a lazy fellow who would never work. His wife worked  very hard to earn their living while he spent the time idling. As the wife could not any longer stand feeding her lazy husband, she went away and stayed with her neighbors, leavin g her lazy husband alone in the house. One midday when the day was very hot, he fell asleep and dreamt that a vision appeared, telling him that God would kill him or else take his arms and legs from him if he would not work while on earth.
When the man woke up, he was terrified by that  dream,  and  looking  from  the window he saw an ear of corn  lying on  the  ground.  He decided  to  plant  this corn  and to try to work, fearing that  the dream  might  come  true. The  next day  he  went out  to the woods and built a tent for himself where he spent the  night.  The  third  day  he planted the corn ; and in a  short  time  the stalks bore  wheat, corn, rice and  millet,  and the grain spread to five times the original size of the ground where he had planted the grains of the one ear of corn.
One morning as he was strolling on his farm, he suddenly saw a white horse ravaging his grain, but when the horse saw him, it ran away towards the forest. When Antonio returned to his tent, he thought it would be better  to make a  trap to catch  the  horse, so he set to work and made one. At night he set the trap where he had seen the horse eating the grain.
t"hen he woke up the next morning, he unhooked his spear from the post and
went to his trap. As he approached, he saw the horse entangled  there and  ran  to spear him; but the horse said that if Antonio would spare his life he would reward him. So saying, the horse lay down on the ground and told Antonio to take the white hand ker- chief from his belly, as it was magical and would give Antonio whatever he wanted. To Antonio's surprise the horse opened his belly and revealed the handkerchief  which Antonio eagerly seized.

Fili pine Nell/ore	z 6g
Antonio led the horse to his tent, and the first thing he did was to ask for a golden carriage. It at once appeared, and  he  rode downtown  to get  his  wife.  At  first she did not know him; but when Antonio told her that he was her own lazy husband, they embraced each other and lived happily ever after with that magic handkerchief and became the richest couple in that town.
i z. “Doro and the Magic  Medal” By Leopoldo B. Uichanco
There once lived in the district of Surigao in the island of M indanao a poor old Moro who gained his living by hunting and selling wild animals from the forest. He had a small son, Doro by name, who had a great dislike for labor.
The boy grew up without learning any kind of work. When Doro was almost a young man, his father died, and then there was nobody to support  him. Poor Doro! He presented himself to their Datu and applied for the easiest work possible. This Datu had a daughter (a princess we may call her) known by the name of Silay, who was the beauty of all M oroland. Many Batus and other Moros of high  rank sought her hand in marriage.
Doro was fortunate enough to obtain a position in the chief's household. The Datu appointed him to bring wood for fuel from the forest every  day.  When  Doro  had finished his task, he would pass the rest of the day enjoying a siesta.
One day when Doro was about to cut down a small tree in the forest, he heard from a distance a strange voice, as if through a bamboo tube, calling him by name. He looked around, but there was nobody to be seen.
“Doro!” repeated the voice, “Quick! Hurry!” The boy looked again  and  was  frightened at seeing a large non-venomous snake, called  sawa  by  the  Filipinos.  The head of this sawa was caught in the mouth of a  wild  carabao  in such  a  way  that  it could not get out.
Doro would have run away, filled with fear, had not the sawa spoken again. “Be not afraid of me,” cried the sawa: “I mean not to harm you. Know that I am the only son of the Datu of the district of M isamis. I promise you a reward from my father if you will release me from this captivity.”
“With all my heart,” replied Doro, giving the head of  the carabao a hard  blow  with  his stone hatchet,  which killed it  at  once. Then with all his energy  he seized  the body  of the sawa and pulled it out of the beast’s mouth.
The sawa was now set free. With joy, he asked Doro to follow him that he might receive the promised reward from his father. They went to Misamis where the sawa's father lived. When the father heard about the misfortune of his son and the service rendered him by Doro, he determined to reward the youth fi ttingly.  Now the Datu had a magic medal which entered his mouth by day for protection, but came forth by night to wander in unknown places. This the sawa's father presented to Doro, saying, “This medal is of wonderful value. Happy is he who possesses such a charm, for any- thing in the world is ready to obey his commands. But be caref u1! Dare not let a woman lay her hand upon it or she will bear a child and you will get into trouble.”
After receiving this reward, Doro went away to the nearest forest and cutting down a big tree, he seated himself upon it. “Carry me,” said he, “to Surigao to the home of the Datu.” The tree obeyed him and went as swif tly, it is said, as an express train. When Doro reached his home, the Datu was away engaged in warfare with some rival tribe. Silay was alone in the house with her maiden companions. She noticed how strangely Doro arrived. Full of envy, she called to him. “Why do you dare,”

z  o	Journal of Ameri‘can Folklore

said she, “to excel your chief by so doing? Or do you intend to make yourself  chief  in your master's place?”
The meek and yielding Doro was frightened so he started to tell the princess all about it.
“Oh!” said Silay, “that medal ought to be mine, for you ought not to excel your superior. Come! Give it to me quickly.”
“But ... ,” replied Doro.
“Dare not say another word,” interposed  the  princess.  Doro  would  have  explained the evil power of the medal, but the  princess  took  it  by  force  and  angrily  ordered Doro from her presence.  Doro  went  back  to  his  work,  hating Silay for depriving  him of his medal.
The prophecy of the Datu of  M isamis came  true.  In due time Silay  bore a son. The most peculiar thing about this boy was that he could c reep immediately after being born.
A few days alter the birth of the child, the Datu arrived. He  was  very  an gry on finding that his only daughter had  borne  a child, and  he at  once sought  out  the cause. All the members of the household declared that Doro had been the cause of the mis- fortune. The Datu then su mmoned Doro to a trial. Doro explained the  power  of  the medal and ended by saying  sorrowf ully,  “I would  have  explained  to  her  about  the evil power of the medal, but she took it from  me by force and  would  not  allow  me to say a u-ord.”
The Datu decided that Doro was not  to  blame,  but  his daughter,  Silay. All  that day the Datu was sunk in though t and all night was sleepless, thinking  of  what  to  do  in order that the terrible misfortune of the princess would not reach  the  ears  of  the members of his tribe. Al length  he thought of  a  plan. He Issued  orders to all  the  males in his household. “On the third day,” said  he,  “a  large table is to  be  prepared  in  the yard of the house. Each of you is obliged to bring one kind of food for the table.  He whose offer is eaten by the son of Silay, who will  be  placed  in  the  middle,  will  have her for a wife.”
Vt*hen the third day arrived, each of the Moros in the household prepared the most delicious of Moro foods to be offered on the table. Each of them had an offering ex- cepting Doro. The kind old Datu noticed  this.  “What’s  the  matter  with  you,  Doro?” said the Datu. “Don’t you like being a candidate  in  this  contest?  Or  would  you  not want to accept Silay for your wife should you happen to win her?”
“I do not mean that,” replied Doro; “but I have no money to buy anything.” “Well ! Is that the only trouble?” interrupted the Datu. “Here are seven centavos.
Buy anything you choose.”
Doro accepted them with joy. He  hastened  to  the  store  and  bought  different varieties of bananas—lacatan, morado, tundoc, and gloria. The table  was  then  com- plete. Watch well! The infant was placed  in  the  middle.  The  heart  of  each  com- petitor beat as if to break through his  ribs. The  infant  could  find  nothing  that suited him until creeping to the other end of the table, he found Doro's bananas and, being attracted by the color, he ate three of them.
Lucky youth! Doro was no longer a wood cutter! On the next morning the marriage
was celebrated with wild music by Moro bands. After the celebration the couple were led to their home with loud shoutings and cryings by the savage Moros. The title of Datu was given to Doro, and from that time he was reverenced and honored as the Datu of Surigao.
The following are examples of the tale with a moral.

z 7 z
III
i 3. “How Sampaloc Lake Got its  Name” By Melamo Dans Valdellon
At the southwestern base of San C ristobal Mountain is the town of San Pablo, the
largest of all the towns in the province  of  Laguna.  From  the  front  of  the  church  a long wide street bordered by acacias can be seen  leading  to the  north,  and  following this street one reaches Sampaloc Lake, one of many near the town.
According to tradition, that lake  was  not  there  many  years  ago,  but  in  its  place was the large luxurious plantation of a churlish farmer. I n the  midst of  the  plantation was his house beside which stood two sampalocs, bearing sweeter fruits than is usual  with such trees.
One day a crowd of small boys was standing before the farmer's cottage, one of
whom was a well-born boy but an odd-looking fellow with golden curling hair. He was eagerly addressing the farmer in a low voice.
“We boys have come together to ask if you  will  please  give  us  some  sampaloc fruit.”
“Ha! Sampaloc fruit without pay?” asked the farmer. “Yes, sir, without pay,” all answered.
“Well, boys, my sampaloc fruit is for sale, and only friars, priests, and other high men in the town have or will have these without pay; and my sampalocs,” he con- tinued, “are not for boys who do not know how to appreciate a kind-hearted act.”
“We do know how, sir,” was the answer; “and we can each help you when we  be- come men.”
“But surely I can't give them to you,” and the farmer returned to his carabao and
plow.
“Well, excuse us for troubling you,” cried the boys ; “but don’t be angry at us.” After a while as the farmer was a little farther from the boys, each of them picked  up a stone and threw it at the sampaloc trees. The farmer saw them when he turned his carabao around at the end of  the furrow; and  running  upon  them he whipped each of the boys whom he could catch, so that many of the boys ran home crying.
Late in the afternoon of the following day, an old woman dressed as a beggar came before the door of the churlish farmer with her little son who had  been  very eager  the day before to have some sampalocs, and she politely asked him if he would please give her and her boy some sweet sampalocs.
“Vt'ithout  pay?” asked  the farmer vexed.
“Yes, sir, without  pay,” was the  answer.
“My sampalocs are for sale, as your son, I  know,  learned  yesterday,”  he  replied, “and only friars, priests, and the Capitan Municipal and other principales in the  town have had or will have my sampalocs. To a beggar like you, from  whom  I could  not  hope for any help if I ever got into trouble, surely I cannot give them.”
“Oh! unkind man,” she  said,”  if  priests,  the  capitan,  principales,  and  friars,  who are always giving you heavy loads to bear and fatal blows, are the only ones who  have had or will have your sweet sampalocs, and those who are poor, the beggars like us, unable. to buy your sampalocs, receive none,  then oh! selfish  man, churlish farmer,  this is your last day and you will not see another morning on the earth.”
“Abah! why ... ?” asked the farmer scornfully.
“Because from tomorrow on you will live everlastingly under water,” she answered. Having said these words, the old woman departed with her crying  boy. The mother and the son had not gone far from the farmer’s cottage when a sound like

a)	e	Journal of A mexican Folklore
rolling thunder was heard all over San Pablo; many people went to the place from which the sound came, but seeing the farmer's plantation slowly sinking, they were very much terrified and ran away.
“Oh! that is the punish ment of God that has fallen upon that unkind and churlish farmer,” many said.
“Because of his superior sampalocs he became proud and selfish; now  he  will  live ever more under that lake,” the old woman continued.
Ever since the lake has been known as Sampaloc Lake.

it. “A Sunken  House” By Alfonsa Caballes
Once upon a time there lived a man and a woman who never had any children. Every day they went to the church to pray, and they burned many candles before the altar in order that God might grant them a child to  inherit  their  property;  they vowed that If they were to have child, they would not let it step its feet on the ground as long as they were living.
Finally their prayer was granted. They had a child, a girl. She was very sweet and pretty, and her parents never allowed her to go out doors without a guardian to carry her. By and by when she became a young lady, her parents forbade her to step on the ground as long as they were living; and everything she wished from out doors she had to order.
One day while her parents were away, a misfortune befell her. She took her em- broidery and went to the window to sew. At the same time a young man,  who  was passing by the window, stopped to watch her. Wishing  to  prove  how  faithfully  she could keep her promise to her  parents,  he  took a  pole and  knocked  her  thread  from  the window so that it fell on the ground. As  the  maiden  had  no  more  thread  and wished to finish her work, she desired to have the thread very much ;  as  she  was ashamed to give orders to the young man, she herself went down.  As  soon  as  she stepped on the ground, the house sank and the maiden and the young man became alligators. On the site of the house was quickly formed a deep, black lake full of alliga- tors. Even to this day the lake may be seen  near  San  Pablo;  and  it  is  always  the custom of  the  fisherwomen  to  throw  the  first  fish  that  they  catch  to  the  alligators. If they did not do this, the alligators would eat them.
The following appears to be a variant of “Snow White and the Seven
Dwarfs.”
i $. “The Maiden and the Monkeys”
Once there lived a man and his wife with their young beautiful daughter. When the maiden was yet young, her mother died. The man was very lonely at the death of his wife so he soon married another woman. The new wife was jealous of the young maiden and secretly drove her away from home. She wandered into the woods. Wild fruits were her only food. But one day, while she was walking near a brook, she found a small cottage. This was the home of the monkeys, but they were not  there. She  went to the cottage, and on the table she found small  plates containing  food  and small glasses of water, so she ate and dran k. After that, she went to sleep in a small bedroom. When evening came, the monkeys returned home and found that the food was gone. One of the monkeys went to the bedroom and found the young maiden sleeping. He did not wake her. From that time the monkeys were very kind to her and considered her as one of their companions. When the stepmother heard this, she wanted to poison the young maiden. Disguising herself as an old woman selling apples,

2 73
she put poison in one of the applies and went to the woods. When she arrived at the monkeys’ house they were not there. She offered the applee for sale; but the  maiden would not buy, so the woman gave her the apple. The  maiden  then  began  to eat and after a short time she fell fainting. The woman went away,  hoping  the  maiden  would die. When the monkeys arrived, they found that the maiden was lying as if dead  and began to cry loudly. It happened that a gentleman was  passing  near  the  cottage.  He went to the cottage, looked  at  the body, and asked  the  monkeys  to give him  the body  of the maiden, which they did willingly,  as  they  thought  he  understood  better  than they how to bury it properly.  He  carried  the  body  about  a  mile  from  the  cottage when suddenly the maiden vomited the poisonous  apple and  regained  consciousness. The gentleman asked her to marry him, and she gladly consented. They  went  to  the house of the gentleman where they  were  to  be  married.  The  maiden  went  to  invite her father to attend the ceremonies. When he saw the maiden he fainted, for he had thought she was already dead. The shock was so great that he did not recover.

lV.    RELIGiOUs  LEGENDS
The following group of etiological myths shows the influence of Spanish Catholicism:
i 6. “Two Legends of the Holy Family”  By Eladio Sablan
Of all the many traditions told of St. .Joseph and  the Virgin  Mary,  I shall  relate to  you two legends of how the carabao got its white streak and how the lanzones got the marks under their thick skin.
In the days of old on Christmas Eve, the Savior was born in a humble stable in Bethlehem far from the ears or eyes of men.
But many animals led thither by the dear Father were present praising the Sacred Baby in a sort of singing; the carabao, however, a large, crude animal with quick sudden movements, venturing too near the simple cradle, made a very loud noise which disturbed the Holy Baby and roused the anger of St. Joseph. To make the carabao move back, St. Joseph flicked him  with a  white  handl-erchief, which  hit him just below his neck. Since then, every carabao calf is marked with a white streak below the neck which never disappears, causing the carabao to be slow in motion and to call with a soft voice even though a large awkward animal.
According to tradition, the Virgin Mary with the Holy Baby in her arms was once traveling through the forest of something-or-other. It happened that she had brough t no food, and  the  Christ  Child  and  the  Virgin  became  very  hungry  so  the sweet II other was forced to seek some food in the surrounding forest. The first tree which she encountered was an ordinary tree but loaded with fruits arranged in clusters like grapes. The bark of the tree was gray. The branches were few but with thick, large and tough leaves. This was the tree bearing lanzones. The Virgin picked some fruits, pinched the thick skin open and tried to eat the pulp. Though it was then a poison, it did not klll her. From that time the pulp has borne the marks of the pressure of the nails of the Virgin and the people began its cultivation until at present the lazone is a delicious fruit, found in abundant quantities in Laguna, to which province it is pe- culiar.
•	7  “Origifl  Of  the  Cocoanut” By Julian M. burst
When I was a very small boy, I was told by an old woman a story which I have never forgotten of how the cocoanut happened to grow in the Philippines.

z 74	Journol of American Folklore

In the little town of San Mateo, there lived a couple who had been married for many years but new er had a single child. One morning while they were eating their break- fast, the man questioned his wife, for he was a jolly little fellow who smoked his pipe in all the luxury of cal m retirement. And so he said, “What do you think of going to Obando and praying to La Purislma, the Miraculous Virgin, to give us a child?”
“Well and good,” answered the woman, smiling with joy.
So on the next day they prepared for their journey, leaving the care of the house  to some neighbors. On the third day  they  reached  Obando  and  directed  their  steps straight to the church where they knelt down and prayed. After praying, they .vowed before the Virgin that if they could only have a child, he should become a sexton at  the age of nine. For nine days they went to  the church and  prayed  in  this  way  and  after that they went home.
In the course of time, t he little child was born. He was very different from many other children, for his head was as round as an orange, having a mouth, a nose, and an eye. The mother and the father could not express their happiness. They inquired  of the doctor what to feed their baby, and the latter said that goat's milk would do.
Many weeks and months elapsed and the little round baby grew a little bigger. Sometimes the father would not go out to work but would stay and play with his  child. Of tentimes he would throw the baby up, then catch him like a ball. One time  he put the baby on the window sill and called him to jump down to the floor. As he was laughing and calling, the little child was struggling to answer his father's calls, when he suddenly fell from the window in the other direction.
The father looked out suddenly, but no sign of the baby was to  be seen.  The mother was so out of patience that she was very angry. They went to a fortune teller and inquired what should be done about the matter. The latter said that they did not need to worry, that the time would come when their son would bear many sons and they would have many grandchildren. He further told them to remember the place where the child had fallen and to sprinkle it with goat’s milk and water three times a day. Inside of a month a little tree with long pointed leaves had grown on the spot and In seven years more the tree produced fruit, a large and round one. When the coir was removed from the fruit, a brown nut was found, having three holes representing the mouth, the nose, and the one eye of the little child. This was the first cocoanut ever seen in the Philippines.
i 8. “San Isidro Hill” By Elisa Cordero
Behind the romantic town of Pagsanjan rises San Isidro Hill, famous for its natural beauty.
A legendary story is connected with this place. The old people narrate that when this hill was yet covered svith a forest, there was a golden cow, supposed to be the very rich treasury of this place, which ran back and forth all night, but always stopped in the morning with her face toward the southeast, where the mestizos dwelt, and with her tail to the northwest, where the natives lived. This action of the cow was in- terpreted by the people to explain why the mestizos are rich, because fortune or riches is facing them, while the natives in the northwest are poor, because the cow has her back to them. This story is often told even now by the lower class of people.
Another story is also told concerning this hill. There was once a farmer, poor but religious and honest, who cherished a great devotion to the Virgin Mary. His name was Isidro, whence the name of this hill was derived. One day when he was plowing his rice field, the day became so hot that he could not endure the thirst he was suffer-

Fili pine  Folklore	z $
ing. He was far from the town and could not find water. On his way home he found  a  solid rock where he climbed to rest himself.  But  the day  became  hotter and  hotter so that his tongue was parched with  thirst.  He smote  the  rock  with  his staff,  and  from this rock clear, pure water burst forth. Isidro with  delight  drank  thereof,  thanking Heaven for it  and especially  the Virgin  Mary,  because of  her  kindness.  He continued to be a farmer, honest and religious, and when  he met his death,  he was considered  by  his neighbors a saint.
If one climbs the steep ascent of San Isidro today, one can see a boulder beside  the path, with a little hole in its top, always full of water.

i g. “The Legend of Bay” By Godofredo Rivera
I n former days the town of Bay was on the beautiful shore of Lake Bay, but now it stands far back from the shore on the bank of a smail, sluggish river.
When the town was still on the shore of the lake, the Catholic Church stood in the center of the town. I t was supported by two religious native ladies who went to mass every day. The people in those early times paid more attention to religion and cared more to obtain eternal life in the spiritual world. They lived peacefully, and faternity existed among them. The Spanish priest, a Franciscan, Pascual Tarcuat by name, celebrated mass every morning ; but he was not to say the mass until the two ladies who supported the church had arrived. For several years all went on smoothly with- out much trouble as Padre Tarcuat was patient enough to wait for them every morn- ing.
But one day it was already very late in the morning and the ladies had  not come, the pious worshipers were impatiently waiting for the mass, and the priest was very hungry. When he saw how eager his people were to hear the mass, he was obliged to celebrate it without waiting longer. During the ceremony, the two ladies arrived and found the priest at the altar celebrating the mass. I n anger they  walked  directly  to the altar and upon reaching it, one violently boxed the cheeks of Padre Tarcuat, the other laying hold of his flowing beard in spite of  the priest's efforts  to break  away. At length they dragged him away from the altar by pulling at the rough cord  which the Franciscans wear around the waist. Now in the church great consternation arose, the mass was left unfinished, angry discussion and tumult were heard everywhere; on every street corner people stood talking excitedly. At sunset the priest abandoned the town. While he was In the banca, just before embarking in the casco, he faced the town, took off one of his sandals and threw it toward the town. After that, several calamities befell Bay and at the end of six months a very disastrous earthquake made the whole town sink into the ground.
A new Bay was built farther up the shore. Now it is a center of commerce and many cascos stop there for loading and unloading of cargoes. To prove the veracity of this story, another may be told of a casco  that once stopped  at  the very spot  where the old Bay sank and dropped anchor. When the rasco was ready to sail away, the pilot started to lift up the anchor.  He put forth all his strength,  but could  not move it,  so he called his companions and all joined together in the effort. All their strength was exerted in vain, so the captain ordered one of his sailors to dive and investigate the matter. The diver discovered that the anchor was fastened in the bell of the church tower of the old Bay. Even today the top of the tower may be seen when the water is very clear at the spot where the town sank.
In the next group the Catholic legends have been localized.

                                   Journal of A m•r*roti Folklore

so. “The Unbaptized Servant” By Juan A. Rosales
Once upon a time there was a priest in Majayjay who had an un baptized servant. This priest took special notice of his servant because he was always kind and true. After many years of faithful service to the priest, he finally was elected a member of the town council and was always kind and just to the people. After holding this office several years he died. Then his master, the priest, buried him in the cemetery of the Christians, for he did not know that he was not a Christian.
Not many days had passed when this servant of the priest appeared  as a ghost in the town, where he walked in the street every night. Wherever he passed, a great pestilence fell upon the people. Therefore the people watched each day to see in which street people became sick and the following night they moved to that street, for they thought that the spirit had passed there the night before and  there  they  might  be  safe, as he would choose some other street thereafter. As many of the people died every day, the report of the pestilence spread abroad. Finally there ca me two hale and hearty strangers who proceeded to the town council and offered to drive away this ghost. That day they were busily sharpening their bolos. At night they  watched  for the spirit to pass. At length he came crying in a most deep, horrible voice. As he was advancing, they met and wrestled with him until he became tired. The spirit ju mped and trembled, trying to escape, but it was in vain. During  their  tiresome struggle, they had not noticed that dawn was finally approaching. Then the spirit begged them to set htm free, and he would tell them the cause of his appearing every night. When freed, he said, “The reason  that I appear here is because my master, not knowing that I had never been baptized, buried me in consecrated soil ; so if you will dig my bones out of the cemetery of the Christians and cast them out of the town, I will not come here any more.”
After he had described his grave, they said, “Go now, most destructive man, but remember not to come again.” Afterwards he departed, and  the  two  men  went  to the cemetery, dug up the bones, and threw them out of the town.
Then the strangers presented themselves to the priest, announcing that they had driven away the evil spirit. The priest asked them, “\Vhat reward shall I offer to you for saving the people from this great pestilence?”
They replied, “We do not want great and valuable rewards, but only that every  year, from now on, you send oil to the church with one hundred and fif teen steps and furnish light every night to the patron of your church.” After saying this, they de- parted. Then the priest knew that one of the benefactors was the patron of M avitac and the other, of Majavjay. After that time the spirit never came again ;  but  the people have continued up to the present time to send a gift of oil to Mavitac every year.
(Note: Near M avitac there are no cocoanut groves; the gift of oil from Majayjay is for the use of the church.)
z i. “The Virgin of Los Banos” By Antonio Amador Perez
At the dawn of  the seventeenth  Century,  Los Baos, a little  town  in  the  province
of La Laguna, rose in popularity and renown on account of her miraculous Virgin.  For many years before this the inhabitants of Los Banos had been so familiar with the stories of her miracles that they became very indifferent to her, and as time went on, her miracles were no longer respected. One morning a footprint was seen on a block  of  stone at  the entrance to the church  by a faithful old  woman,  whereupon she scat-

tered the news to the whole town. The priests explained it as meaning that the people of the town would suffer some misfortunes. Another footprint was seen by a wild wicked man on a stone by the Danipalit, a fall just outside the town. Near the foot- print was a tub upon which traces of locks were seen. Besides this tub there was another with a piece of soap and some clothes, so the humble people believed it to be the washing tub of the Virgin who  had visited  their town again  to remind  them of her love and care for them even though they had forgotten to praise her. Now many people from the neighboring towns make a pilgrimage every year in the month of December to see the miraculous Virgin.
z s. “How Paete was Twice Saved” By Eusebio N. Quesada
Several years ago there was once a great conflagration in Paete, a village on the eastern shore of Lake Bay. The fire, it was said, was so great that the water in the stream in the center of the village boiled. The people, of course, were in great alarm and could do nothing but seek to escape from the fire, calling on God to have mercy upon them. Suddenly the sky became incomprehensibly dark and rain fell from the clouds, extinguishing the fire. \Vhen the fire was entirely out, it was found  that a pious man had gone during the conflagration to the chapel, where an image of San Antonio de Padua, the patron of rain, was kept and had sprinkled water on the saint, praying the while. All the people became so very much attached to the belief that the bathing of the image was the cause of the sudden rain that ever since the village has celebrated the festival day of this saint in a small chapel erected In his honor.
The patron of the village is Santiago Apostol. Not very long after the great con- flagration, the Moros happened to reach San Antonio, a small village in the mountain, about two miles from  Paete.  Great  was  the  terror  of  the  people.  They  first  entered the church and took away the golden goblet of  the sacred  sacrament  and  other  valu- able things. Then they plundered and robbed the village. The people,  in  order  to save their lives, walked on their hands and feet, and imitated  the  lowing  of  a  cow,  so perhaps the Moros thought they were animals. Several  of  these  Moros  began  their march toward Paete; but Santiago, the patron saint, came down  miraculously  from heaven, well armed, riding on his angelic steed, and took  his stand  as a guard  on  the road to Paete. Very soon the Moros arrived and were greatly frightened by the saint's glorious but terrible appearance. The angelic steed charged upon the thickest of  the throng, whereupon the  saint's  lance  overturned  everything  that  was  presented.  All were killed except two or three who ran away to call for help  for  their  companions. While marching down, something miraculous  must  have  happened,  for  when  the Moros viewed the tower of the church of Paete,  they  promptly  returned  to San  An- tonio and departed from the village. After their departure, the people looked  for  the golden goblet, and they found it in a rice field where the carabaos were gathering to- gether kneeling down. What about the patron? He  had  vanished;  how,  nobody  could tell. Yet the footprint of his horse is still to be seen marked on a wide stone, where the patron took his stand. Tradition says that several old  men  once  turned  over  the stone and found the same footprint on the other side.
z3. “The Legend of  the  Gate  of  Pagsanhan” By Perpetuo C. Fernandez
At the end of Rigal street there is an important gate on the road leading toward Santa Cruz. On top of the gate is the Spanish coat of arms with the crest above, guarded on each side by a lion.
I t is told that in former times as the Spaniards were once marching from Santa

z 28	Journal of A merit:an Folklore
Cruz toward  this town  with guns and a cannon, upon approaching the gate, they saw  a woman bearing a flaming sword in her right hand appear who marked a line in the street saying that if the  Spaniards entered  the  town for destruction  they  would  all  be put to death, but if they came with a friendly purpose and would not destroy the town they could enter. After hearing these words the Spaniards were filled with fear and returned to Santa Cruz.
A few months after this the robbers from the different towns assembled and or- ganized a band in the town of Magdalena. As they were then strong enough, they be- gan to rob Magdalena of money and other valuable things. Then they proceeded to other towns, such as Santa Cruz, Lilio, Nagcarlang, Mahayhay, and San Pablo, rob- bing wherever they went, but they did not go to Pagsanhan. After they had plundered the different towns, they went back to Magdalena and  there news came to them that the treasury in the town of Fagsanhan had plenty of money, so they decided to make a raid there. Before they started, however, one of the leaders ordered a member of the band to hang a piece of white cloth on a slender bamboo and  put  it in the  middle of an open field in order that they might see if the wind  blew the  cloth,  because  that was their sign; if the wind moved the cloth, they believed that danger would befall them. That day was calm and no breeze stirred the white cloth so they started.
As they were marching along, when they were yet very far from Pagsanhan, they fired a few guns so the people in the town were greatly excited, summoning the people in the barrios to come to the town to help them defend the place against the approach- ing band of brigands. Then the lieutenants of the barrios ordered the bugles made of horn to be blown, which was the custom in those days; and finally all the people were assembled in the central town. As they reached the town, the bells were ringing as loudly as though a great town holiday had come. Some people were putting forth their best efforts preparing to keep away the robbers if they should attempt to enter, while others, not knowing what to do, prayed to the Virgin Maria Guadalupe to save the town. When the robbers were near the gate, an old woman with a black cloth on her head went outside the gate and began to wave the cloth. Soon the sky became very dark, the thunder rolled, and the lightning flashed, so that the robbers were afraid to enter the town and rode away toward Santa  Cruz.  In gratitude to Maria Guadalupe  for her aid in this threatened danger she was made the patroness of the town.
Some years after this the Americans one day  came  riding  over  from  Santa  Cruz. They had formed the plan to fire a volley when near the  gate  which  should  be  an- swered by the firing  of  guns  by  the  Americans  approaching  from  Lumbang.  When the American soldiers were near the gate, they saw the  Spanish  coat of  arms and  the crest gleaming in the sunshine and sparkling  lights  that  seemed  to  come  from  the lions' mouths. Immediately they held their guns  downward  and  entered  the  town without a shot.
24. “The Legend of St. Sebastian”
By  Pilar Ejercito
On the  west side of  the Bumbungan  River where it is joined  by the  Balanak  there is a village called San Sabastian in honor of St. Sebastian, its patron. This saint, as is believed by some peasants of the place,  was a  great  fisherman,  who  was  very  pious and lived in a very simple manner. One day, as he was fishing in the river, a band of savages seized him and fastened him on  a  tree  where  he  was cruelly  martyred. Since that time, the tree that witnessed his suffering and death became sacred to the San Sebastian people. No one could cut any branches  or  leaf  of  it. The  only  thing  that could be carried away was the fallen leaves which they  use  to  cure sickness,  as  they were believed in those days to be a powerful medicine. Year after year this tree re-

Fili pine Folklore	*79
mained standing when suddenly it disappeared miraculously. The people sought it in the valleys and forests, but they were unable to find it. They erected a chapel on the place where the tree once stood and named it “Capilla de San Sebastian.” After  a  long period of time a great fire occurred in the village, burning many houses including the chapel. The image of St. Sebastian escaped from the burning chapel and swam across the Bumbungan River. After many vain searches it was finally found in the river Labo by the people of Lumbang, who then  made St. Sebastian  the patron saint of their town also.
The Lu mbang people relebrate the fiesta day of this saint every  year on  the  twen- tieth of January. At three o'clock  in  the afternoon,  there  is a  religious  procession  on the Bumbungan river. The image of St.  Sebastian  is  escorted  by  the  priests  to  the river and placed on a pagoda, made of two very large canoes  lashed  together, artisti- cally decorated with cocoanut and ana han leaves. The procession moves slowly up the river toward Pagsan jan between lines of stately  palms  and  in  the  distance  may  be seen Mt. Banajao crowned with  clouds.  As  the  procession  returns  toward  Lumbang the wo men and children on the banks of the river are  pouring water over  their  bodies, for the water is supposed to have healing qualities as the saint passes.

2§. “How the  Church of Santa  Maria was Built” By Sixto R. Domine
In ancient times the hill on which the Roman Church of Santa Maria now stands was a beautiful place. There was a particular tree called guava with broad spreading branches which bore beautiful flo wers and fruits. Other kinds of guavas bear big, rough fruits; but this kind bears fine, small, smooth fruit.
I t is said that every evening when the Angel us rang St. Mary appeared sitting on one of its branches.
Once one evening a man from the market was walking  near the foot of  this hill.  As the Angel us rang, he took his hat off and began to pray as he walked along. As he prayed and looked up to heaven, he saw an old woman sitting on one of the branches of that guava beckoning to him. The man began to run as fast as he could dropping all the shellfish, eggplants, and bananas he had bought in the market. When he reached home, he could hardly say a word about what had happened to him. After  he had eaten his supper—and a poor one it was, because of his having dropped all the things he brought from the market—he went to the convent to narrate that event  to the priest. He did not walk along that road near the foot of the hill, but walked by an- other way, for he was afraid he might see the old woman again.
Upon entering the convent, he saw the priest sitting on a chair, holding his cigar blowing the smoke through his flat nose. He saluted the priest and kissed  his hand, for it was the custom at that time and even now to kiss the hand of a priest. As they were talking, the man said. “Sir, as  I  was  walking on  the street at  the time  when the Angel us was ringing, I saw an old woman on the branch of the guava tree beckon- ing to me. I began to run as fast as I could, for I thought she was a ghost; and I fear she is there yet.”
“Let us go and see,” said the priest, and so they went with clubs in their hands. They went to the spot where the man had seen her; but they did not see the old woman, for she wanted only to appear to one person. Therefore the priest said to the man, “Brother, I think this old woman wants to tell something to somebody, and to- morrow evening I will come here and talk to her if I can.” So they went home.
The next morning was pleasant, and the sun shone brightly. Soon it was evening, and at last the Angel us was ringing. The priest went away from the convent as though

z8o	Journal of American Folklore
he were going to take a walk. He walked toward the street at the foot of  the hill, and as he was walking and praying, he saw the old woman beckoning to him from the guava tree. The priest immediately walked toward her as fast as he could,  but  his body was shaking and his hair stood up. When he came near the tree the old woman said, “Don't be afraid, wise priest, for the old woman who is talking to you is the mother of Jesus Christ. Oh! kind priest, I would like you to do one thing in this wide world. I will open my treasury to you, and with the riches you  will get from it you  will build a church on this hill ; on this spot where this tree is growing, place my altar.” She then directed that he himself should come every evening during the building of the church to take as much money as he could carry. As they were talking, St. Mary said to him, “You must stay here while I go and open my treasure and while  I am gone you must not move or else you will turn into a stick.”
Suddenly she disappeared, but in a short time she appeared again.  She  then  led him by a hitherto unseen passage into the hill through three great doors and  the  fourth door she unlocked and in that room was her treasure. St. Mary gave him a strong sack; he filled his sack with gold and money. When it was full, he could hardly lift it. So he carried it away, stooping under its weight.
He z as led by her again through the three big doors. As he stepped from the fourth door, St. Mary said, “Tomorrow you will begin your work. Do not forget that you must come here every evening until you have finished the work which I told you to do.” The priest, as he reached home, was almost breathless. He put  the sack in  his box secretly. It is said that when he finished building the church, he was larger and stronger than before, for he had carried his sack from the Virgin's treasury every evening.
The next morning the priest hired some workmen to build the church, and so  they began working as hard as they could and continued  until  the church  was finished.  Now it is one of the largest churches of the province of Ilocos Sur.  If  you  will climb  to  the top of the tower of the church, you will have a grand panorama of  the surrounding country, with the blue black sea in the distance.
After a few years the priest died at his convent. Now many people think that he buried a large part of the money left from the building of the church under the con- vent, and that thousands and thousands of jars of gold, money, and  precious stones are buried in that hill.
zb. “The Miserable  Children” By Orcenio L. Bonifacio
Once upon a time there lived a wretched family on a farm near Zamboang a, a city of Mindanao. The father's name was Malupit, and  the  mother's  Mapagpayo,  and they had two children, a son, Mapagtiis, and a daughter Maganda. The occupation of Malupit was to cut trees in the forest and sell them in the market. But when Mapag- tiis was about nine years old and his sister about five, their father could no longer support them and he became very cruel.
So on one cloud y morning when the roses were blooming sadly Malupit drove his children from his house without any cause. He said, “I don't like to see you children here any more.” The grieved mother begged her husband not to drive the children from their house, but Malupit did not listen to her pleading. Mapagtiis took his sister and asked his father to forgive them, if they had done anything wrong,  but  their father pushed them from 'the door saying, “I don't like to hear any more talking. Go away!”
The  poor  mother  was very sad. The lonely children  went  to  the  bushes  near the
house and  waited  till Mapagtiis knew that their parents were eating; then he with his

Fili pino Folklore	28i
little sister went under the house.  When  M apagpayo  saw  her  children  under  the house, she secretly dropped some rice through the  space  of  the split  bamboo  floor. Then Mapagtiis picked up the rice bit by bit  and  fed  his little sister and  himself. The poor mother did this every  time  they  ate.  One  morning  when  Malupit  was  eating with his wife, he discovered what she was doing.  He  asked,  “Why  did  you  drop  the rice on the ground ?” He then caught sight of  his two children  under  the  house picking up the rice which their mother  had  dropped, so he punished  his wife severely and  told his children not to come there any more.
The two miserable children then began wandering  in  the  forest. They ate  fruits and slept in the bushes at night. One day when Maganda became thirsty, Al apagtiis climbed a tree and looked for a place where he could get some water for his little sister. He saw a small hut about five miles from the tree, so he took his sister’s hand and began journeying thither.
When they reached the hut, they found nobody inside. There was no furniture, nothing but a picture of the Virgin Mary hanging on one side of the cottage. Mapag- tiis and Maganda knelt before the Virgin Mary, praying her to give them some food. Immediately there appeared before them an abundance of  food  and  clothes for each of them. They were very thankful to the Virgin, who graciously talked with  them  from the picture. They called the picture “Nani, Mamma.”  This  picture served  as their guardian in every way, and furnished all they needed. These children lived with the picture of the Virgin until they were grown, and to both came good fortune. Maganda married the son of a chief, and Mapagtiis married a chief's daughter.

V. FABLES
z2. “The Old Woman and  t he  Hawk” By Ramon Alvarez
Once upon a time there was an old woman living in a county. This old woman was  very, very poor. She had a cavan of rice.  As she  was alone and  could  not  afford  the time to watch the rice drying in the  sun,  and  besides she  was cooking  for  her dinner, she called the hawk to watch the rice.
Then the hawk came and said, “What do you want, old woman?”
“I have something for you to work,” said the old woman. “Please watch my rice in front of my house during this whole day, and I will pay for your services to me.”
“Why can you not watch?” said the hawk.
“No, I can't because I cannot do two works at the same time,” said  the  old  woman. “All right,” said the hawk.
“Please watch carefully the rice because the chickens,  hens, and  roosters  might eat the rice, and if any one of them may come, eat them,” said the old woman.
Then afterward the chickens came and said, “Good morning, hawk.” “Good morning,” replied the hawk and asked, “Why are you here for?” “We are here to eat the rice,” said the chickens.
“No, you cannot eat this rice, but I am the one who will eat you,” said the hawk. “Why are you going to eat us?” asked the chickens.
“Why, because the old woman told  me  that any kind  of  animals  may  come  to eat the rice, I should eat them too.”
So the hawk eats the chickens. And thus whenever the chickens see the hawk, they ran away and escaped from the has k, for the hawk was now very fond of eating chick- ens.
Finally the twilight came, and the old woman put the  rice into the sack. Then the old woman called the hawk and presented a big white wide handkerchief.

i8i	Journal of American Folklore
“What is this used for?” asked the hawk.
“This is used for putting some food,” replied the woman. “Please tie it around my neck, will you?” said the hawk.
Then the woman tied it around his neck and said, “Please keep this handkerchief for our friendship.”
Finally the hawk bade farwell to the woman and said, “Good-by, I'll travel around the world.”
“Good-by,” said the old woman. “Good fortune be with you.”
And thus old people say that that white feathers around hawk's neck was the handkerchief of the old woman.
28. “A Cat  and  a  Dog” By Mariano Brendia
Once upon a time there was a cat attending  the  master  at  I nnar. A dog was walking to and fro acting as a captain among domestic  animals in  the  house; and  after  awhile the master threw a bone to the dog, and the dog went to the  kitchen  and  chewed  it.  Then a cat gazing at his  master  received  a  piece of  meat; and  then  he ate  it.  By and by the master threw again some bones and small pieces of  meat for  both of  them,  but the dog acted so powerfully and gave nothing to the cat.
Finally the cat said, “Why do you greedily receive the meat,  Mr. Dog? Are you  not  yet satisfied north the bones given to you. Do you prefer to become fat or too fat indeed that your stomach may burst when it gets full.”
Then the dog answered with rage, and trying to kill the cat, “\Vell! who are you, poor little creature? Why do you say so? Do you like to receive my teeth?”
The cat then answered, “Oh! Mr. Dog. I never say those ask for war, but I simply tell you how you feel when your stomach is full.”
Then answered the dog with anger, “I wish not for friendship but for figh t.”
Afterwards the cat met his anger and said, “\Vell ! Well! Mr. Dog, what a marathon race we will have if you try to race with me.”
The dog ran after the cat, but he caught nothing save the air and running as if  he was hunting. Immediately the cat reached to a  high  tree and climbed  up to the top. So the dog barked at him and feel hunger and went home for unusef ul things.
zg. “A Fable Story About Animals That Talk”
By  Pedro Bulalacao
Once a contract was made between a crocodile and a lizard. The crocodile set a trysting day. The lizard came on the designated place. They talked together.  The lizard said, “Let us see who of us is stronger. To prove our strength we must have a race, and the one who wins should cut out the tongue of the one who gets lost.”
Then the crocodile said that he agreed with that condition. The crocodile said that the lizard must cut out his tongue if he lost, but if he wins then he will cut his tongue also.
Then they made the lizard’s home as the starting place and the crocodile's as the
goal, which was about tz o kilometers distance. Then  they  both  started  at  the  same time side by side. They used their efforts about  the starting.  The crocodile  after  run- ning about twenty meters, he could  not run fast any  more  because  his abdomen struck on the sand. The lizard kept on running as fast as he could until he reached  the goal. There he was laughing and looking at his friend, crocodile. The lizard waited for the crocodile for several hours till his friend came.
After that the lizard took out his knife and cut his friend's tongue, and he was
happy of having two tongues while his friend had none.

Fili pine Folklore	2 8 3
3o. “The Frog, the Turtle, the Firefly and the mosquito”
By Lueio Atio
One day the frog met the turtle with his house on his back. He laughed at him and said, “You foolish fellow, why don't you leave that house oo that you will never walk so slowly and awkward?”
“My friend, it is much better to walk slowly with my house than to let it be burned by the firefly. You know he always carries fire, and 1 am afraid he will burn it when 1 am away.”
“Oh! foolish turtle. Bring before me the firefly, and  I shall  punish  him so that  you  will be free of your trouble.”
The firefly was brought before the frog, but he also had good reason  that he was  not punished. He said he carried fire because mosquito would bite him if he would not have fire with him. Then the wise frog said that the mosquito must be punished be- cause he was very troublesome to anyone. He ordered that when the mosquito bites somebody he must kill him by tapping with the hand. Since that time mosquitoes are tapped to death by whom they bite.

3  “Robbers  and  Animals” By Leonor Cecilio
There were seven societies of bandits. All the chiefs of the number of societies men- tioned held a meeting. The seven chiefs appointed the youngest of  all the  robbers to be the judge of them. They did not know that their judge was the most skillf ul of all. They told the judge that he must command them any kind of  work and  if all would fail he would be the king too. The Judge ordered them to get the King’s money, and only the money, not including the box which was very large.
All tried many, many times and at last all failed. The judge said, “All of you fail, therefore I will try to do it.”
The judge went to the palace and asked the box where his key was.  The  box an- swered, “Key is not necessary, but scissors.”
He went to the smith to make a pair of scissors for him, but the  blacksmith  told  him to get charcoal. He went to the charcoaler but told him to get wood for charcoal. He went to the woods, asking some branches but the trees answered,  “Bring us a cup of water to satisfy our thirst, and we will give you some.”
He went to the river and got water. He brought it to the woods and got the branches made into charcoal and made scissors and gave the scissors to the box, but  the  box refused again until he could bring him  the  golden  needle from  the  back  of  the wild pig.
Then he began to go to the pig asking one of his back-hairs, and the pig answered, “All right, if you bring me some dog's meat to eat.”
He went to the dog and asked the meat of his back and  the  dog said, “Yes, if  you  bring me a cup of cow's milk.”
She answered, “Of course, I’ll give anybody who will bring me a spoonful of salt.” He went to the sea and asked the fishes to give him some salt, and they replied “You cannot get any, unless you let the sun shone on us while we are pouring the
water on shore and the shore becomes dry you can get the salt on it.”
The man requested to the sun that he must let him receive his heat upon the shore; then the sun shone very bright. As soon as the shore was dry, he got  the salt. He gave it to the cow to get milk, the milk was given to the dog to give him meat; then he gave the meat to the pig so that he could get the golden hair. He got the hair and  presented it to the box, and that was how he got the money.

c84	Journal of American Folklore
When the animals saw him that he had got the money, they held a meeting that when the robber passed by, they would come together outside the door and the cow would be the first to stand, the pig on the back of the cow, the dog on the back of the pig, and they invited the other animals to go with their serenade on the street to wel- come the robber.
The cow came out behind the house of the  robber,  secondly  the  pig on  the  back,  then the dog on the back of pig,  the goat on  the  back of  dog,  the cat  on  the  back of  the goat, and the last were the roosted.
They formed together like a high cone tower and began to sing together like a chorus. The horse began to beat, and they began on the third beat.
I t was a wonderful voice that everybody would jumped out or run. At eight o'clock in the evening the robbers saw them, and they  murmer that they could  not tell what it was, so they run and escape.

32.	' rlie Little Bamboo and Raguini”
By Julio Capucao
Many years ago old people said that plants and animals could talk.
One day a little vine called Raguini came crying to a little bamboo, and said, “Will you help me to stand, little bamboo?”
The little bamboo answered that  he could  help her,  but  he was very  much ashamed  of her because before, when he was young, he had very fine hairy dress; now  he had  none. Besides he was growing tall and small.
“Well,” said the vine, “if you are kind to help me, I shall promise you to cover your body with my leaves and flowers as your dress.”
The little bamboo was very glad to hear him and to help him. The little vine began climbing and covering him with her leaves and flowers. So both of them were happy.

33.	“The Crab and Its Mother”
By Primitiva Dy-Liacco
“My child,” said a crab to her son,” why do you walk so awkwardly? If  you  wish to make a good appearance, you should go straight forward, and not in that one-sided manner.”
“I wish to make a good appearance, mamma,” said the young crab; “and if you will show me how, I will try to walk straight forward.”
“This is the way,” said she, as she made another attempt to the lett.
The little crab smiled and said, “When you learn to do it yourself, you can teach me,” and then went back to his play.

34 “The Dog and the Pig”
By Higino Amargo
The dog went to the forest to hunt some deer. He saw the wild pig having youngs. He was happy for he thought that he would eat the pigs for his dinner.
When the young pigs saw him, they cried out, for  they  were afraid. The  mother pig asked them, “What were you crying?”
The young pigs answered that the big dog was approaching to us. The mother said, “Do not be afraid, for I should fight him.”
The dog tried to catch the youngs, but the mother said, “Stop,  my friend, do not bite them, for they were not enough for your dinner.”

28

But the dog answered to them and said that he wanted to eat them, loz he z'aa hungry.
The mother said, “If you z'ould bite them, I should break your legs.”
So the dog was angry and ran toward the pigs. The mother caught his tail and cut off. Then the dog ran away. He found his friend and went together to find  the pigs, but the pigs hid themselves in the cave, so the dogs did not find them, and they be- came hungry. But the pigs saved their lives, and they became big.

3 i	“A  Pet   Parrot” By Trinidad V. Canuto
Once upon a time there was an old family who had found a young parrot in the hole of some tree. They love this parrot as their own child, for they had no son nor daughter. After a few months the parrot began to utter words which they taught, and since the parrot improved his talking, the family loved and cared so much that they spend
their time mostly in teaching the bird how to talk.
At last after their hard teaching, the parrot learn intelligently human language and could answer any question that the family ask.
One day the family leave the house to go on some holiday of the town to celebrate the fiesta; but before they leave, they told the parrot to watch closely the house, for some robber might steal their property, placing the parrot cage in a portal at the door. Hardly the family had gone a mile, a man watching their leave went to the house to steal something and when he entered the door, the parrot asked him, “What are you
doing there, are you a robber?”
The man, seeing nobody, was much surprised and was about to run away when he saw that the parrot had done the talking so he laugh very much, “Ha! Ha! Ha!”
Now he, knowing that the parrot could do him no harm, began to steal, but the parrot kept constantly asking him many questions. When the man had finished steal- ing, he took the cage and bring it with him; but the bird was struggling hard to open the door, and at last the door was open and he flew away to his master in the town. The bird went in where his master was and said, “Master, there is a robber in your house.” So the master ran as fast as he could, following the bird, and they got to
their house. They found no robber, and the house was empty. The master said, “What kind of man came here?”
The bird answered, “A man with clothe and a hat on his head.”
The master seemed to laugh at that answer; but, seeing that everything was empty, he asked the bird again, “Where did he go when he went away?”
The bird answered, “In this way,” turning toward the place where the robber went.
Then the man z ent to the place where the bird points and found the man with the things that he had stolen and the robber was caught.

36. “The Rich II an and  His  Pets” By Dorotea O. Blasco
There was a rich man who could understand the animal's languages. He had a cat and a dog for his pets.
One day when he was at his dinner, his dog and cat were under his table eating everything that he gave them. The cat began to growl crossly and said, “Do not eat them.”
The dog was very angry and asked, “\Vhy! Do all these meat and bones belong to you? Our master gives these to us to be shared.”

z86	Journal of A mcrican Folklore
The cat replied, “Oh! yes, but next week all of our  master's  cattle  will  die and  you will find plenty of food.”
When their master heard their conversation, he stopped eating and began thinking what he should do. He made up his mind to sell his cattle. Then he sent for a butcher and sold the cattle, and he was glad that he did not lose anything.
In the next day he went to dine again. His cat and dog were underneath. He wanted his cat and dog to dispute again so he gave many pieces of meat. He was watching them, and he observed that his dog ate as much as he could.
The cat sat up quietly and said, “My friend, I know now  that  you  want all  the meat that our master gives to us. You never think of me. You care for yourself only. Please give me some.”
The dog replied, “Well, I shall give you a little, just enough for you to last today.” “Have you no pity,” asked the cat, “if I shall starve to death?”
The dog answered, “You will not starve. This evening a terrible sickness will attack our master and very soon he will die. His cook will prepare plenty of good food, and you can eat as much as you like while I will be under the house and will quarrel with many dogs that will come. I cannot come up, for many people will drive me away.”
Then said the cat, “Eat as much as you  can  but  only  give  me a little  to recover my hunger.”
The man was very sorry that he would die very soon. He went to  the wisest  man and asked some advices in order to save his life. The wisest man said, “I am so sorry that you will die very soon, but I cannot help you. If  you  did  not sell  your cattle, your death would not come sooner. Your animals will die instead of you.”
The man went quickly home and said his prayers  while  walking.  He was very sorry that he sold his cattle.
When he arrived to his home, he said many times in  a  loud  voice,  “Oh! my  Lord, save my life. I will give one half of my property to the poor and the other half to  the church If I may live for ten more years.”
Then evening came, and he was very weak, for he spent his time thinking what would happen. Then about seven o'clock his sickness came. Many doctors  tried  to cure him. He said “My Lord ! save my soul, carry my soul to heaven. This is the last  to see the world. Oh! I am dying.” Then he stopped and soon he died.
37 “The Hen and the Hawk”
By  Victoria  V. Odan
A long time ago the hen and  the hawk were friends.
One day the hen went to the hawk's house and said, “Good morning, M r. Hawk.” “Good morning,” answered the hawk. “Have a seat,” said the hawk.
“Thank you,” answered the hen.
“That was a very pleasant walk,” said the hawk. “Indeed, sir,” said the hen.
“Mr. Hawk, will you let me borrow your ring?” said the hen.
“Yes,” answered the hawk, “but you must take good care of this might you lost it.” “As soon as the hawk gave the ring to the hen, the hen bade good-by to the hawk.
The ring was too large for the hen.
One afternoon while the hen was taking a walk, the ring  was lost. The  hen  was very much afraid to the hawk. The hawk went  to  the  hen's house  and  said,  “Ex- cuse me, M r. Hawk, I lost your ring the other day when I was taking a walk.”
“If you cannot find my ring, your chicks will be mine,” said the  hawk, so the  hen began scratching on the ground to find I he ring; but the  hen  and  the  hawk  were enemies now because the ring never found again.

Fili pine  Folklore

38. “The Wise Monkey and the Foolish Giant”
By Louis Aguilor
Once upon a time there lived in the forest a monkey who usually climbed from one tree to another along the vines. But not far from the forests lived a tremendous giant. One day the giant accidentally passed by the monkey's land. “Good morning, my old friend,” said the monkey when he saw the giant. “What a happy day is this!”
The giant replied, “Good morning. My, what are you doing there?”
The monkey replied, “I am getting vines to protect  me  from  the  blowing  of  the wind. There will be a storm. Perhaps you will do the same.”
The giant, being frightened at the words of the monkey, said kindly, “Please tie me in this big tree. Will you not do it?”
The monkey said, “Yes, I will do it for you.”
So the monkey got plenty of vines and rattan and tied  the giant against  the tree very tightly. The monkey, knowing the giant was unable  to get out,  immediately gave him a whip.
The giant was so strong that he broke the cord. But just as he got out, monkey escaped from him by the nest of the bees. Finally the giant found the monkey and said, “This is the end of your life.”
“Oh, I shall live  longer  than  you,”  said  the  monkey.  “I  am  very  powerful  now. Do you not know that I am the guard of this house?”
The monkey was frightened. He struck the bees' nest and ran away, leaving the g'ant alone who was stung very badly and went down to the river to wash himself. There he found the monkey sittin g quietly by the sleeping crocodile, with its mouth wide open.
\\'hen the giant was too close,  the  monkey said,  “Do  not  disturb  the  king  sleeping in the room. I am now chosen the guard of the room (mouth of the crocodile).”
The giant eagerly asked the monkey to let him go in to see  the  beautiful  roo m.  At last the monkey consented to the giant. At first the giant put his head in, and the monkey gave him a push, thus awakening the crocodile, which immediately swallowed him—and that was the end of this fable.

3g. “The Crab and the  Monkey” By Vicenta Encisco
One day the crab was sitting near the door of his home eating a rice cake. A monkey came walking by with an orange seed in his hand.
The monkey said to the crab, “Good afternoon, M r. Crab. How are you today?” “Good afternoon, M r. Monkey,” said the crab. “I am very well, thank you.”
Then the monkey said, “I will give you  this orange seed  for  your  rice  cake.  You may plant this seed. It will  grow to be an orange tree, and  many oranges  will grow on the tree.”
The crab took the seed and gave the cake to the monkey. The crab planted the seed and watered it every day. \Vhen the tree was large enough, many oranges grow on it.
One day the monkey came again to see the crab.  “Good  morning,  M r.  Crab.  How are you this morning?” he said.
“Good morning, M r. Monkey,” said the crab. “I am very well, thank you.” “Did you plant the orange seed which I gave you?” said the monkey.
“Yes,” said the crab. “It has grown, and there are many ripe oranges on  it.  But  I cannot get the oranges, because I  cannot  climb  the  tree.  If  you  will  climb  the  tree and get the oranges, I will give you half of them.”
The monkey said that he was glad to help the crab. He took a basket and climbed

z88	Journal of American Folklore
the tree. He ate some of the best oranges, and he began to put the ripe oranges in his basket. He said, “This is mine.” Then  he  took  a  green orange from  the  tree and  threw it at the crab on the ground and said, “That is yours.”
When all the ripe oranges were in the basket, the crab said, “Mr. Monkey, I cannot eat the green oranges. You must give me half of the ripe oranges.”
But the monkey said, “Did you not say that you would give me half of the oranges if I would climb the tree? So every orange I have put into my basket is mine.”
The crab said nothing more, but he went under the tree and waited  for the mon- key. When the monkey was coining down from the tree, the crab caught his tail with his big foot and pinched it. The monkey dropped the basket and climbed into the tree again. The crab took oranges out of the basket. He cried, “Mr.  Monkey you  have tried to cheat me, and now you shall have no oranges.”
4° “The Vt'ild  Cat  and  the   Deer and  Bird”  By Alipio Aguilar
There lived in Pesia many years ago a man named Pocoy. One day, Pocoy wandered through the forest. While he was walking, he saw a wildcat. Pocoy followed the cat. This wildcat climbed the tree and the man watching the cat. When the cat reached the top of the tree, it found a nest with some eggs in it.
“Bird, do not fly away from your nest, for the deer at the foot of the tree is watch-
ing you,” said the cat. “If you left away your nest, the deer will shake the tree and the eggs will fall down.”
“Thank you for your notice to me,” replied the bird.
Then the cat went down and said to the deer, “Deer, do not leave your fawns, be- cause if you leave them, the birds will catch your fawns and use them as their food.”
“Is that true?”  asked  the deer. “Yes, it is true,” answered the deer.
As the result of this, the deer and the birds  were died  and  were eaten  by  the  wild- cat.
4* “The Hunter, the  Lion,  the  Tree,  the  Brook,  and  the  Hawk” By Louisa Concepcion
A long time ago there was a hunter walking along the forest with his dogs. When he was far from the town, the wind blew very hard and the rain followed. Then his dogs and he rested under a big tree. When the rain stopped, he continued walking. His dogs soon came near the cave. By and by he heard his dogs barking, because they saw a lion laying at the door of the cave. While the lion was laying down at the door of the cave, the stone fell on his back; then he could not come out. By and by the man saw the lion at the door of the cave. The lion said, “Please remove this stone at my back.”
The man said, “1 don't want to, for you might eat me.”
“No,” said the lion. “I will not eat. Please remove this stone, and I will give you a reward for your kindness,” said the lion.
Then the man removed the stone, and the lion stood up. “\Vhat then will you give
me as a reward?” asked the man. “I will eat you up,” said the lion.
“Is that your reward to me?” asked the man. The man refused. The lion was  very willing to eat the man.
Then the man and the lion went to the tree to ask for judge, for the man did not
want to be eaten up by the lion.
“Please give us your judgment,” the man said to the tree.

Fili pino  Folklore	z89
“What is the cause of your fighting?” asked the tree.
Then the man began  to tell  the story. “While I  was walking along  the forest,  I  met the lion laying at  the  door of  the cave. At the  back of  the lion  there  was a stone,  and he asked me to remove  the stone and  he  promised  me that  he will give  me a  reward. As I want to know what thing he z'ill give, so  I  remove  the stone at  the back  of  the lion. After I remove  the stone from  his back,  he stood  up and  told  me that he is going to eat me,” the man said to the tree.
“Yes, I agree to the lion's reason,” said the tree.
But the man said, “No I don't want to be eaten by the lion.” Then they went to the brook and asked for judge.
The brook asked, “What is the cause of your fighting?” the  man  told  the  brook the same thing that he told to the tree. The brook agreed also to the reason of  the lion. The man did not agree to the tree and the brook.
Then they went to the hawk which was sitting on the branch of the tree. The man said, “Please give us your judgment.”
The hawk asked,  “What  is  the cause of  your fighting?”
The man explained  the  matter of  their fighting. Then  the  hawk agreed  to the reason of the hunter, and the hawk went to the place  where  they  begin  to  fight. There  the hawk began to ask. Then the man begin to tell the story.
The hawk asked, “\Vhat is the position when this man see you here?”
Then the lion layed again at the door of the cave, and the man  put again  the stone at his back. Then the haz'k said, “Now, no one placed the stone at your back; there- fore no one will hel p you to remove the stone.” Then the hawk sent away the man to his way, and the hawk flew away.
42. “The Man and the Monkey” By Lorenzo R. Avenido
Once there was a man who owned a corn farm. One day while he was in the city, a large monkey came into his farm and gathered some of the fruits. Not long after the monkey was gone, he arrived and went to his farm. The man knew that there had been some one come into his farm and gathered the corn.
The next day the monkey came again and the man was at his farm, so the man knew that it was a monkey who got the corn. The man began to get the juice of the jackfruit and made it into a form of a man and placed it at the entrance of the farm. After that he went home.
Meanwhile the monkey was there and got into thé farm and saw  the statue of  a man standing near the door. The monkey went near  it  and  it struck  the statue and his feet, hand, and mouth was joint to that said statue. Not long after that the man came, and he was so angry and at last he bet and bet the monkey until the animal be- gan to talk.
The monkey said, “Do not bet me, for I will help you to marry the daughter of the King.”
The man stopped and brought it home and told hi in, “If so, you may go and told him what you had said.”
The monkey told the king, “My master was rich so he wish to be the husband of your daughter,” but the king did not refuse but still he agree to it. So they were married.
Salem, Oregon

Creation Myths among the Early Filipinos Author(s): Francisco Demetrio
Source: Asian Folklore Studies , 1968, Vol. 27, No. 1 (1968), pp. 41-79 Published by: Nanzan University
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1177800


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms










































is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Asian Folklore Studies






This content downloaded from
195.176.29.132 on Fri, 16 Sep 2022 16:17:44 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms







By
FRANCISco DEMETRIO, S.J.,
Cagayan de Oro, Philippines

Introduction: the creator god or gods—native concept o1 creation.
I.	The early creation myths: cosmogony (myths, versions and comments) .
II.	The creation of the first man and woman:  origin  of  man  from bamboo stalk.
III.	Other motifs,
1)	the egg motif,
2)	the flood motif and the symbolism of rebirth,
3)	the bad creator or marplot motif.
Conclusion:	links o1 creation myths  of  the  Filipinos  to such in other areas.

INTRODUCTION:	The creator god or gods and native concept of creation

From the reports of early chroniclers, we know that  the ancient peoples of the Philippines had a notion of  a  powerful being (or beings) who was responsible for the creation  of  the earth and of everything on it, the trees,  the  animals,  and  man. The name of the creator-god (or gods) varied with the various tribes: Lnort or Mutton for the “Indios” or Bisayan'; Nlal apat‹ig again for the Bisayan, Makaobus for the Ibabao Bisayan,° Bathe.la

1.	Pedro Chirino, S.J., Relocion de  toe  Islas  Filipinas, Dlanila, 1890. In Emma Helen Blair and James Alexander Robertson. TO e Philippine Islands, 1493-1803 (Cleveland, 1903-1909) , Vol. 13, pp. 26-217, esp. pp. 74- 75.
2.	Francisco Alzina, S.J., Htstoria de Yes Islas Break as, Part I, Book
3.	An Preliminary  Translation  or  the  Muñoz  Text  of  AIzin a,  Part  I, Books 1 to 4 by Paul S. Lietz, (Chicago, 1961) , pp. 184 & 114.

42	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.

Maykapal for the Taga1og,3 Gugurang  for  the  Bikol,4  B‹itola  for the Moro,5 Eugpa iulak Monobo for the Bagobo" with aliases: Menomn ertd Kala(agan, Bttlolokou› for the Negritos of  Panay Island' and so on.
The supreme being8 is generally taken to be very good and kindly, very powerful, and dwelling in the sky. To him is in- variably credited the work of creation."
The following points must be borne in mind when one con- siders creation among  the  early  Philippine  peoples,  First,  there is no question of creation in the strict theological sense as pro- ductio rei ez nthilo stti et sttbjecti or “the bringing of something into existence from non-existence, not ortIy as regards itselJ, but also as regards the material out oJ whtch it came to be.” In other words, the creation which the early peoples in the Philippiries knew, and, for that  matter,  also  the  other  primitive  peoples  of the past and of the present, refers to what  is  known  by  theo1og•ians as  “second  creation.”  This conception  presupposes a pre-existing matter or substratum out o{ to hich the earth was


3.	Chirino, op. c*t., pp. 74-75. For a morc complete account of “Ba.thala” and  its  variants,  cf. Jose L. Llanes,  “An  Annotated  Dictionary of Philippine Mythology,” UMJE A!S, V (July, 1956) , 51-55.
4.	Jose Castaño, O.F.M., “Breve Noticia Acerca del Origin, It.e- ligion, Creencias y Supersticiones de los Antiguos Indios del Bicol. ”
In: Wenceslao Retana, Archivo de I Bob lio5lo f'’ilipitt o, II (Madrid,  l895ff.) , pp. 359-360.
5.	Miguel de Loarca. ftelocion de Yes Ishas f'’itipinns (Manila?,  c a. 1580) ; In: Blair and Robertson, Islands, Vol. 5, p. 170.
6.	Fay Cooper Cole, The Wild Tribes o{ Darno  District,  Mrndenn o. Field Museum o1 Natural History, Anthropological  Series,  XII  (Chicap•o, 1913) , p. 106.
7.	Manuel L. Carreon (ed.) , “Ma zagtas: The Dat us  }zom  Borneo (the earliest known Bisayan text) ,” SMJ, VII ( 1943) .
8.	For the Bukidnon in Mindanao, Ma9bobo i/o is the name of the supreme being who is conceived perhaps to  be only  one  person, although the name itself seems to be  in  the  plural  form.  Inlormation  was  sup- plied by Rev. Vincent Cullen, S.J., in a paper entitled: “Towards a  Catechesis for the Bukidnon,” typescript, p. 1 (Bukidnon, 1966) . Father Cullen attended the First Plenary Council of Mam timutiats or  native  shamans or priests of the Bukidnon in Mindanao, 1966.
9.	These concepts are  very  much  in  accord  with  the  characteristics of the supreme being Is) of the sk3• as discovered  by  historians  of  re- ligion. Cf. Eliade, Patterns in Cco'nporotire  Religion  (New  York,  1963) , pp. 40-42, 46-52, 53-59, etc.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	43

made.'0 When the primitives speak of the  creation of  the  world, the term “world” is usually understood to mean the earth pri- marily, and, specifically, their native earth  or  place  or  island,  and then also everything that their earth or place “founds,” or supports on its lap:  the  trees,  the  stones,  the  rocks,  the  trees, the springs, rivers, lakes, mountains, sky, flowers, caves, shadows, and so on; everything in other words that went to make up the “place”  or  “vicinity,”   each  in  its  appointed  place.	This con- ception of the earth has been characterized by Eliade not as ohthoiitna or as earth known to the agriculturists, but as cosm ic,1l the earth as known to  the  earlier  layer  of  mankind  who  were yet on the level of food-gatherers. Thirdly, in a number of folk- tales and myths, the anirrials are thought of as already in  ex- istence  before  the  “earth”  itself was  made.	The birds like the eagle, the ducks, the turtle,  and  the  toad  are  often  responsible for securing the pre-existing materials which the  creator (s)  used to form the earth. And lastly, the winds,  the sky, and  the  ocean  are also presupposed as existing prior to the formation  of  the earth.
In this connection one should add that in the stories of the formation of the earth there is always  a  struggle  between  two  hostile  forces.  It  is  the  struggle  that  looms  large  in  the  story. The creation of  the  earth  happens  only  as  a  sort  of  accident. Y*ith the formation of the  earth  comes  also  the  creation  of  the first man and woman.
I.	THE EARLY CREATION  MYTHS:  CO,SMOGONY
The following are various specimens of these Philippine creation tales. The first is a foreshortened version of Pavon’s account.
10.	The difference  between  the  “first”  and   the.   “second”   creation  lies in  this: the  term  of  origin  in  the  first  creation  is  the  noti - e::cist ence or “nothingness,” while the  term  of  origin  in  the  second  creation  is  some pre -existing Interim:  dirt,   sand,   slime   of   earth,   rock,   etc.,   or   the heaven, the  world  carried  on  the  shoulder  of  a  primordial   giant.   The Indian and the Greek concepts of cremation are  not  different  from  the primitive.     Visaakazman,   the   “All-Creator,”    Rig-Veda   X,   81   and    82) is said to have generated the  earth  and  unfolded  the  heavens  in  their greatness. In  the  words   of   R.  C.  Zaehner,  Vi s“vakarman   “carves   them out of the primal  mood—a  word  which,  strangely  enough,  corresponds exactly to the Greek Ti,tIe  or  primal  matter.”  [The  Comparison  o}  Re- ligions (Boston, 1962) , p. 32) .
11.	Pottezns, pp. 242 ft.

44	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.

1.	“Away back in  the  long  ago.”  there  was  only  a  vast  immense sea formed by ocean. It so  happened  that  a  bloody  struggle  ensued between King Manaul and King Tubluck Laui.
After the struggle, Manaul was imprisoned. But he broke his chains and flew away into space seeking vengeance on Tubluck Laui. He was wearied with his flying and he saw no place  on  which  to alight.  The earth and the sky, oflended by Manaul who declared himself their enemy, tried to push him away.  The waves  lashed  at  him;  the  rains fell from the skies; and the gods of the  air, Canuay  and Amihan sent forth gales  and winds. The conflict continued unresolved for years until finally wearied by the strain, the contending parties sought to know each other’s desires in token of reconciliation. Manaul  begged  for  light,  and  fire- flies attended him; he asked for counsellors, and the birds were  at  his side. But  in  his  gluttony,  Manaul  devoured  some  live  chicks;  and, still unsated, he  devoured  (some  of)  the  birds,  large  and  small.  In their turn, his bird counsellors devoured  the  fireflies.  When  his  owls (the bird counsellors) passed by, he swore to them that they should be punished for eating his fireflies. Thus he made  them  stay  awake  all night, giving them  double-sized  eyes so they  might see better  and not  eat his fireflies. The king of the air (Tubluck Laui) angered by Manaul’s eating (some of) his bird counsellors, vomited  lightnings,  thunderbolts and whirlwinds. He appealed to King Captan of the Higuesines, genius (perhaps ancestor) of the people of the sea (sea spirits) ,  to  punish Manaul. Captan sent huge rocks and stones from the sky  to  crush  Manaul. But he  easily  escaped  unhurt.  In  this  manner  the  earth  had its beginning: for Manaul, finding a support on these big stones, made them remain fixed forever. They became his dwelling, and he  lived happily forever. “These lands (i.e.  the  Bisayas)  had  their  beginning rrom that time and are still here today. Thanks to the rage of Captan against Manaul, the world had its beginning.”12
Comment
First of all, let us remark  that  this story  answers  very  well to the descriptive definition of a  myth  as:  a  story  set  in  the time before the world as we know it began, whose dramalis pe’Fsome are divine or semi-divine beings, whose actions are
12.	King  Manaul  was  once  a  mighty  monarch  who  governed  all the  birds  or  the  universe.  With  the  lapse  of   time,  Manaul  became  a bad king and was  punished  by  enchantment  and  turned  into  a  bird  similar to an  eagle.  His  imprisonment,  however,  had  a  cosmic  purpose: he was to bring the human race into  existence  by  giving  like  to  Sicalac and Sicauap (Silalac and Sibnbay-e in Povedano MS  1572) :  the  first couple. King Titbluck Laui seems to have been responsible for the punishment  of  Menettl.  In  what  precisely  consisted  the  sin  of  Mnnntd  is not given us to know; nor  precisely  in  what  their  strugg•le  consisted. We know however that Tubluck Lotti was the god of  the  winds.  (Pavon MSS [1838-1839], Transcript  No. 5-C,  p. 26) .  Cf. also Loarca,  Relnc*on, p. 121.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	45

exemplary or  at  least  explanatory  of  the  subsequent  state  of things and affairs in the world today.13
The story is set back in the period outside or prolane or
historical time. The phrase, “Away back in the long ago,” with which the story opens  is  clearly  aiiother  expression  of  the  in trio tempo7’e which Eliade has  pointed  out  to  be  characteristic of myth-telling.  The  action  of  the  story  is  environed  in eternity, in those strong and powerful “times” when  the  gods  were most active in the universe, and man  had  not  yet  come  upon the scene. True,  the  animals  were  there  already.  The actors in the story  are  clearly  supernatural  cosmic  characters. We have Manaul ranged singlehanded, save for his fireflies and bird counsellors, against Tubluek Laui (King of the air) , sup- ported by his lightnings, thunderbolts and whirlwinds, and his allies: the gods of the earth and the sky, the gods of the air . Amihan and Canauay, and Captan, the powerful skydwelling guardian of the people of  the  sea.  The hero, Manaul, is depicted as a bird. He broke his chains and flew off into space and was afterwards tired of his flying.  He is clearly,  too, a  very  power-  ful figure. He  broke  his  bonds,  threw  defiance  at  both  earth and sky, and was unscathed  by  the  rain of  rocks which  Captan let fall from on high.  His  very  deft  way  of  fixing  the  very rocks to become his own foothold on the open ocean, thus creat- ing the earth, is a sign  of  sovereign  power.  His  action  against the guilty owls is explanatory  o1  the  wide-eyed  vigils  these birds keep in order that they may recognize his fireflies and not make the mistake again of preying on them.
In mythic thinking, the waters are said to be very ancient, predating and pre-existing the earth and all the animate and inanimate forms she carries upon her lap.1• This theory is also given concrete expression here. The story  begins  “when  there was only a vast immense sea formed by ocean.”
'I’ve Struggle Betw een The Hostile Torces.
We should note also the motif of struggle between the hostile forces.  The struggle  is not only  one.   It  seems  that  there were   a series of them. The story tells us that a bloody contention obtained between Manaul  and  Tubluck  Laui,  and  that  the former was imprisoned by the latter. But the former escaped,
13.	Eliade, Myth end Henl*tp (New  York,  1963) ,  pp.  5-20  and Patterns, passim, esp. pp. 410-434.
14.	Eliade, Patterns, 188-215.

46	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.
hurled defiance at both the earth and the sky gods and  thus merited their ire. Then, wearied by the strain of contention, the parties sought to understand each other’s desires. A truce fol- lowed. Requests were made and complied with. Light was supplied and counsel given to Manaul. But the truce is broken anew by Manaul, preying on his birds. This starts a chain-reac- tion: the birds (the owls) in turn prey on the fireflies. Manaul punished the owls; and this in turn causes Tubluck Laui to call upon Captan to hurl rocks and stones from the  sky  at  Manaul, and a resumption of hostilities ensues.
One might conjecture that perhaps here is an instance of a survival of the once very widely held theory in antiquity: the periodic return of everything that had existence  and form  upon the earth to the state of chaos, of latencies, and dissolution in water.	This eternal recurrence to  the  condition  of  things  “in the beginning” prior to the act of creation was necessary if the world  was  to  be  renewed  and  to continue in existence.	For it is precisely this ever-recurring reversal to the condition  of  seeds in water that served as a  preparation  for  the  emergence  of  a new birth of things and of men.  A new race is born  to repeople the  earth.	The world of things  surges  anew,  and  wakens  to the fullness of life and energy. Thus the universe continues  to exist and does not completely disappear exhausted of its vitali-  ties. In this myth, then, the return to chaos and  dissolution  in water would seem to be symbolised by the series of “strutspoles” between the various elements and the alternating triumph and victory of the one over the other. Thus, at the beginning of the myth we are told that it happened  that  a  “struggle”  between King Manaul and Tubluck Laui took  place,  in  which  Manaul was  bested.		In the next instance, however, we are told that Llanaul who had been imprisoned by  Tubluck  Laui  escaped. Then another struggle follows. After  this struggle during which the earth and the sky and the air  gods  were involved,  a  truce  was  struck.		But then a third struggle took place because of Manaul’s  treachery.	It seems that  in  this  third  struggle,  the act of the creation of the lands of the Bisayas took place.
The motif of conflict between the dragon and the  god  or sun-hero    is   an   extremely   widespread   motif.*	(B11.11, A531,
* The capital letters and the numbers refer to Stith Thompson’s classification of motifs in his MotiJ Jttdez o} Fo Ik Li*ezoture (Blooming- ton:  Indiana  University  Press,  1955) .  Subsequent  references   to   this work will be likewise noted.

CREATION   MYTHS  AMONG  THE EARLY  FILIPINOS	47

B875.2,  D1385.14,  G357.1,  H1561.6,  K835) .    One  may  come  upon
it in the ancient Near East, in  Greece  and  Germany.  It  is  also  found in  Central  and  Northern  Asia,  and  in  Indonesia  [Eliade, The Ttt•o and the One (London, 1965) , p. 92). In Vedic  mytholgy this motif of conflict is seen in the struggle between Indra  whose name otherwise is VTItTO-has or “slayer of Vritra,” and Vritra himself,  the  “encompasses”  who  imprisons  the  waters  by  means of his ninety-nine fortresses. [R. C. Zaehner, Hinduism  (London, 19fi2) , pp. 29-30]. Vritra symbolizes darkness, immobility, the potential, the amorphous, the undifferentiated, whereas Indra symbolizes  all  the  opposite  to  these.  Indra  wins  out.  smashing the  fortresses,  thus  making  the  sun  to  shine.  This  victory  of Indra for the Vedic Indian had a cosmological significance: the cosmos reduced to chaos by  Vritra’s  imprisoning  the  waters  is  once again set tree, and  Indra  can  recreate  and  refashion  the  world. In other words:  Indra,  the  creator,  creates  the  universe anew. (Eliade, op. cut., p. 92-93; Zaehner, op. cit., p. 30.)
Against this wider context of world folklore and mythology, we might be able  to  understand  better  the  deeper  meaning  of the struggles between Manaul and Tubluck Laui in the Bisayan myth. Perhaps, too, our conjecture may find herein some solid basis which may endow it with some measure of probability: namely, that the series of struggles between these two primordial beings of Philippine myth may  yet  be  concrete  expressions  of the theory of periodic return of everything to the state of chaos only to be refashioned into a new birth of newer forms.
It is well to note also that there are a number of  anachro- nisms and discrepancies in the above story. The earth  is  sup- posed to have its beginning from the rocks and stones which Captan hurled at Manaul and which  the  latter fixed  forever  on the ocean; yet in the  earlier  portion  of  the  story  we  are  told that both  the  sky  and  the  earth  spurned  Manaul  because  he had declared himself their enemy. However, these discrepancies  do not detract from  the  main burden  of  the  myth:  the creation  or formation of the earth through the struggle between the divine forces personified in Manaul and Tubluck Laui.
2. The next story, found in Gaspar de  San  Agustin’s  Con-  quista de las isles F(Iipi nes,1° tells of the origin of the island of Bohol, and of the first sky-woman to settle on that island. She

15. Madrid, 1698, p. 196.

48	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.
was the  daughter  of  a  chief  of  heaven.  She  fell  through  a  hole in the  sky,  and  was  salvaged  by  ducks.  Here  also  is  the  theme of the earth-divers  which  has  been  compared  with,  and  found very  similar  to,  the  North  American  Indian  (Iroquois)  earth- diver tale. I quote from a translation of the tale given by Baeil Kirtley.'6
“The people were living beyond  the  sky.  One  day,  the  chief’s daughter  fell  sick.  The  medicine  men  of  the   barangay  said,  ‘The  cure is in the roots of the wild ba Pete tree.... Dig around it and let  her  arms touch the roots.’
“They dug around the root and they placed the sick  girl  in  the  trench, when suddenly, the woman tell through tire hole  in  the  sky. Below the sky was big water. The ga kits (wild ducks) saw the woman  fall. They caught her lightly  on  their  backs  where  she  rested.  The yabtts found  Big Turtle.   When  Big  Turtle saw  the  woman,  he  called  a council of all swimming an imals. They said, ‘we must save the woman and make her a house.’ The leader  commanded  the  frog:  ‘Dive  and bring up dirt from the tree roots.’ The frog tried and failed. The mouse tried also and  failed.  Fina.lay  the  Big  Toad  volunteered:  ‘I will  try.’ At this, all animals jeered and laughed except Big Turtle who said, ‘You do well to try. Perhaps you will be lucky.’
“The  Old  Toad  took  a  long  breath  and  went  down,  down.   At  last a bubble of air came up and the Old Toad followed. In  her  mouth  she carried a few grains of sand which she spread around Big  Turtle’s  shell. Then an island grew on Big Turtle’s  back,  and  it  became  Bohol  Island, and the woman lived upon it.”
Then there follows an account of how the  Toad  I ooked  for light in the upper world. And the story of the good  and  bad creatures, born of the woman, follows.

Comment

For the student of folklore, this myth contains a number of interesting motifs. We regret that  we  cannot  in  this  paper engage in a detailed study of each  of  them,  and  that  we  can only mention them and make some cursory remarks.  Most  of these motifs have been classified by Stith Thompson. The earth- people are descended from the sky-people (A1231; T111.2) ; the myth also makes both the good and the bad people sons of the sky-woman. The celestial tree  (A811,  812)  which  is  identified as a wild bnlete; the tree growing at the bottom of the primordial waters from  whose  base  the  dirt for  the  formation  of  the earth

16.   Cf.  his  note in JOttrnol  o} American f’oikiore, 70  (1957) ,  362-363.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	49

was to be secured (A814.4) . The shamans  or medicine  m.en  of the heavenly boran9ap  prescribing  the cure for the sick daughter of the chief (A1438.1) ; the cure being to lay  the sick girl inside the trench which had been dug around the root of the wild bolete and for her to touch  the  roots  with  her  arm.  The  hole  in  the sky through which the woman tell (A21.1) .  The  primordial waters (A810 ff) . The friendly  animals  (the  ducks.  B300 If.) ; the earth-divers, especially the Old Toad. And the earth formed over the back of Big Turtle. (A844.1; A815) .
The sky-woman giving birth to the race of men, may be *n instance of parthenogenesis, or conception without benefit of husband. How this came about is not  told.  Her  contact  with water might have caused her to conceive. Folklore is rich wi*h instances of unmarried women made pregnant through bathing (T523) .
As in the case of the previous myth, there are a number of details which may not easily be accounted for by logical reason.  We do not know for instance what was the manner of the sky- woman’s sickness (although we are at least given a hint  of  the kind of remedy suggested: laying her inside a trough scooped around the roots of the wild delete  which  is  reminiscent  of  a very common ancient belief, namely, of recovering strength through. contact with Earth (D1778; D1833; G221.2) . We ai e not told who created the sky-people, nor the  sky,  the  sky-tree,  and the tree  under  the  primordial  -caters  and  the  ground  in  which it  was  rooted.		These and a thousand other details tease the logical mind.	It would be fatuous to find answers to all these questions.	The primitive mind prefers to leave  them  unasked  and  unanswered.		No matter.	The abiding truth  is  what  myth is  at  pains  to convey:	there is an affinity between the earth- dwellers and the people who inhabit the sky: they are blood relations; the animals are benefactors of mankind since the very beginning.		The ducks saved man’s ancestress  from  drowning, the Toad secured the dirt for the building of  the  earth  to be her and their home, and even today the back of Big Turtle is the support of the wide earth.
’this  myth  seems  to  be  very  ancient.  It  perhaps  attests  to a primordial period when the sky-people and  the  earth-people were friendly and helpful to man. It has echoes of a long lost paradise, in “those early times,” before the earth was formed.
In other words, it seems to attest to a primordial  state  of  bliss now lost.

50	£'’RANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.

The myth also serves notice that events and happenings and the social institutions on earth  have  their  counterparts  in  the sky. For instance, people in the sky get sick even as the earth-  lings do; just as there are shamans and medicine men here below, so also are there such persons in heaven; as here so there, the shamans are responsible for  prescribing  the  cure  for  sickness. As the tree (wild  bntete)  grows  in  heaven,  so  there  are  trees  in the sea as well as on land. There are  bornnqaps  in  the  sky even as there were among the Malays. Every barangay  had  a chief whether on earth or in heaven.
We see, then, that this tale answers very well  to  the  descrip- tive definition of a myth:  a  story  told  of  the  divine  or  semi- divine beings,  whose  setting  is  back  in  the  “first  times”  when  the world was not yet formed, and what  were  “given”  in  those times  have  become  exemplary  for  all  times  alter  the  formation o1 the world.
3.	A third tale reports how in the beginning there was only darkness. Then the heavens covered the earth so that the two together looked like an immense tabo or coconut shell-bowl. Within the  bowl a rat  was born.  It  gradually  grew  in size until it transformed itself into the giant Angngalo, the Bisayan Atlas who carried the heavens on his shoulders. One day he leased himself, and from his faeces and urine were born  the  islands, lakes and rivers, of the archipelago. God who saw him thus oecupied gave him a kick which sent him to China by way of Mariveles. They say that in the Mariveles  mountains  there are two very large footprints.
4.	A less crude version of the same anecdote tells of a great giant  who  supported   the  world  on  his  shoulders.   In  a  moment of weariness the giant shifted his  position  so  abruptly  that  the world tell into the ocean in a thousand fragments,  which  then  became the numberless islands of the archipelago. [W. E. Retana. Appendix to Martinez de Zuñiga’s Estadismo de  has  isles  f'ili- pinas. (Madrid, 1893) .  Quoted  by  Fernandez  Lopez  in  Religioii, p. 40].

Comment
These two tales are evidently etiological, that is, they are meant to account for at least one very  evident  fact,  the  more than 7000 islands of  the  Philippine  archipelago.  This  is  the least common denominator between the two tales. But in both

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	51

we see also a typical phenomenon of the heavens and the world. Whether it was the heavens or the world which the  giant carried  on his shoulders, the  effect  is  the  same:  the  coming  to  be  of the islands and islets of the archipelago.
In both tales we might  infer  that  the Philippine  Islands  are of divine or semi-divine orig°in, also, that the giant, a semi-divine being, has very human needs; and that it is in attending to these needs that the formation of our present “world”, the archipelaqqo came about. One gets the impression that it is almost by accident that the Philippines came to be.
In  the  first   tale,  God  is  made  to  appear  as  though  he  were a prude  of  the  first  order:  punishing  the  poor  giant  for  attend- ing to the  needs  of  the  nature  which  in  the  first  place  God  (in the supposition  that  he  was  the  Creator)  had  given  to  the  giant. In the  second  version,  it  was  his  weariness  in  supporting  the huge  world  that  made  him  let  the  burden  fall.  What  the  rela- tion  bet•veen  the  giant  and  mankind  in  the  Philippines   is,  we are left to conjecture. But one thing is sure:  man’s  mores  no v- a-days are no different from the mores of the huge giant whose weariness was accountable for the numerous isles of  the  Philip- pines.  Here  again  therefore   the   mythic   mentality   is   evident: the deeds of  semi-divine  beings  in  illo  te ar poTe  are  exemplary for mankind. The rough treatment God is made to deal to the all-too-human giant is  perhaps  also  a  mirror  of  the  “hiya”  or sense  of  embarassment  with  which  Filipinos  even  today  regard the necessary, natural  attention  to  the  needs  of  nature.  The mention  of  China  is  also  significant.   It   is  a.s  though  the  teller of the myth is saying  that  China  is  where  the  “wiilanp  ñ.i¿ta” giant  belongs.  And   that  China   is  God-forsaken   land.   Perhaps an instance  of  Filipino  prejudice  against  the  industrious  china- man  who  makes  his  garden  crops   grow,  to   the   embarrassment of the native Filipino gardener, by the scientific  use  of  human excreta as fertilizer.
The two huge footprints said to be found in the Mariveles
mountains may be actually there  or not.  In  any  case,  there  might be more than  two footprints  there.  Again,  the  story  is  etiological of one or more indentions on the surface  of  the  mountain  which may look like two huge footprints. I have had no time  to inquire about the historicity of these alleged prints.'7

17.	The existence of giants in  times  past  seems  to  be  attested  to  very  widely.	Blumentritt in his Dictioiiorio under “Angngalo” refers

52	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.I
There are other motifs in these two tales, however, z•hich situate them among the most  ancient  myths.  I refer, first of  all, to the motif o1 the hierogamy or divine marriage between  the earth and the sky or  heavens  which  I  believe  is  hinted  at  in  the words: “the heavens covered the earth.” Various traditions, Egyptian, Indian, Greek, etc., also have myths telling of the marriage  between  the  heaven  and   the  earth.1	Any misgiving as to whether a marriage is meant or  not  when  the  heaven  is said to cover the earth is, I think, dispelled by the fact that, this coverings becomes fruithful. A rat is said to be born within the- “bowl,” that is, the heaven and the earth joined together.
What is quite unique in this myth, however, as tar as my knowledge goes  to  date  in  these  matters,  is  the  combination  of the  hierogamy  and  the  mountain  motifs.  The  earth  covered  by the sky looked like an immense tobo or coconut shell-bo w1 turned backside  up.	An immense coconut shell turned upside  down cannot   but  look  like a  mountain.		And the mountain in mythic thoug’ht  is  closely  related  to  the  time  and  place  of  creation.	It is the center of  the  universe,  the  particular  point  wherein  pas- sage  is  possible  between  the  three  cosmic  layers:  the  heaven,  the   earth   and   the   underworld.	The mountain, too, is closely linked with  the symbol of  the  pillar of  the world.  It  is  bGth  in  this  world  and  out of it.	Its base is immanent with  human  life, but its summit is hidden  high in  the  clouds  where  the  gods dwell. It is therefore very  appropriate  as  the  ladder  connecting  th.e earthly   region   with  the  heavenly.		Next, there is the motif of transformation. The rat  born  of  the  union  of  earth  and  sky,  is said to grow in size until it transformed itself into a  huge  giant named  Angngalo.	Transformations of this sort are  not  uncom- mon  in  myth.		thirdly, there is the implicit motif, too,  of  the raising  of   the    sky  high  above  the  earth.	The g•iant Angngalo is said to carry the heavens on his shoulders. So it is implicitly affirmed by the myth that the union  of  earth  and  sky  was terminated by the birth of their offspring, the giant, Angngalo,

to  the  Peak of  Adam on the  island  of  Ceylon.  On  its  summit  there is a gigantic footprint which some say belongs to Buddha, others to Adam. The footprint is said to have originated from the weight of either Buddha or Adam when they stepped upon the summit of the  mountain  and jumped to heaven.
18.	Cf. Eliade, Patterns, pp. 241-242 where  he  gives  ample evidence of the hierogamy between earth and heaven  from  Oceania,  Indonesia, Africa, North America, Greece, Japan, China, Germany and Egypt.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	53
and this  termination  is  coneretely  depicted  by  portraying  him as carrying the weight of  the  Armament  on his shoulders  after the manner of Atlas.
From Hesiod among the Greeks we know that the gian*s
are offsprings of Gore  or  the  earth.1•  Here,  however,  it  is  not earth alone that gives birth  to  Angngalo,  but  the  Earth  embraced by the Sky.
The picture of the giant easing himself and his excreta be-
coming the islands and his urine the sea of the archipelago, may seem crude and vulgar at the first blush. But this is the  point  where we must not let our own particular modern, western and Christian sensibilities distract us from seeing the myth in its lull reality. The giant is, after all, a semi-divine,  or  ev’en  divine being. And, although he has  b.uman  needs,  nevertheless  these are satisfied in a manner that is superhuman. For his waste  becomes creative of our  earth:  the Philippine  Archipelago  and the seas which wash the shores o1 our islands. In a sense. there- fore, our land and our waters are by origin divine, or at least semi-divine: gigantic. Perhaps this was  a  deliberate  design  among the mythmakers of this particular  myth  to  at  least magnify what  in themselves  are  minute:  by at  least postulatinp• a divine origin to them, although  they  be  originally  no  more than divine waste-matter.
Lest our readers be revolted by this, they should realize that even the most rational and  aesthetic Greeks had  myths  that  are no less revolting than this. We only have to recall Hesiod’s ac- count of how Ouranos was castrated by his son  Cronos  through the  connivar.ce  of  his  own mother Gaia.	For Ouranos had. the cannibalistic habit of devoring every new son of  his for fear that he  might  be  dislodged  from  his sovereign position.°0	We also know that in this same myth, Aphrodite  or  Venus,  the  god dess of love, was born out of the saline foam which gathered  around  the penis of Ouranos which Cronos  had  cast  into the  sea  near the island of Cyprus.21 We need not also mention how the crea- tion  of  the	universe was brought about, according to th.e Babylonian myth “Enuma Elish,” by the dismemberment of the body o1 the saltwater goddess Tiamat by the hero Marduk; an‹4


19.	Theogony, 147 ff.
20.   /bid.,  165 fI.
21.    ibid.,  188 ff.

54	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.

how mankind was formed out of clay and the blood  of  the  giantess’s vizier Kinger-zu.°2

CREATION MYTHS AMONc Now-CHTt ISTIAN TRIBES

The non-christian tribes of the Philippines also have  stories which  tell  of  their  belief  in  the  creation   of   the   world.   Here, as in the  case  of  the  lowland,  christianised  peoples,  creation  is not taken in the strict theological sense, but  rather  as  the  forma- tion of the world, or of man  and  woman,  through  the  inter- mediary of some pre-existing materia.
5. The tribal historians of  the  Tagakaolo  tell  us  that  they are descended from Lukbang, Mengedan and Bodek, his wife. These three persons lived on a small island. Two children were born to Mengedan and Bodek: Linkanan and Lampagan. These two, in turn, became the parents of two birds, Kalau and Sabitan who flew away and brought back bits of soil which the parents moulded with their hands until they formed the earth. Other children were born and through them the world was peopled.2"

Comment

The myth is  interesting  among  other  things  for  the  triad which it posits. We know that  two  of  these  were  husband  and wife:  Mengedan  and  Bodek.  We do  not  know  what  the  relation of these two is to  the  third  party:  Lukbang.  Were  they  semi- divine  being•s,  we  can  only  guess  at  it  because  of  their  power to form the world. Interesting,  too,  is  the  fact  that  these  three lived  on  a  small  island.  Once  again,  we   come  face  to   face with a motif very  common  in  myths  connected  with  the  creation of   the    world:    the   island,   or   the   mountain   [Eliade, Patterns,
37.5 f. th e Mptfi o/ the Eternal Return, (New  York, 1954) ,  p. 12 f.]. The  motif  of  incest:  the  marriage  of  brother  and   sister,  is  also  seen  here.  But  what  is  surprising  is  the   next   motif   of   birds  as the fir.*  offspring  of  the  two  incestuous  beings.  It  is  these  birds who flew away  and  brought  back  the  piece  of  earth  out  of  which our earth  was  formed  by  their  parents.  We  know  elsewhere  that birds  1s ave  a  great  deal  to  do  in  the  folkbeliefs  of   early Filipinos.

22.	Cf. Alexander Heidel (ed.) Th e Ba b pionian Genesis: Th e Stor z
o| CTeation (Chicago, 1963) , p. 47.
23.	Cole, '/’ribes ot Douoo, pp. 159-60.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	55

(Cole, Tribes o Darao, 173, 108, 137) . Might it  be  that  some species of birds like  the  lirnokon  or  the  cuckoo  are  looked  upon as relations or ancestors of human-kind?  That  is  why  they  are relied upon to have particular care for people, a care  which  they show  by  supplying  men  with  signs  and  warnings  to  alert  them  of on-coming danger.
It was only after the earth had been formed that other chil-
dren, presumably, now human beings, were born  of  both Linkanan and Lampagan.
It is interesting to note  that  the  motif  of  earth-divers  in  the tale of the Boholanos (Old Toad) is played  by  the  two  brother- birds. They are  not  said  to dive for  the  piece  of  soil.  They  are said however to fly to a very distant place  ancl  thence  fetch  the piece of clay  for  the  earth.  The flying  over  long  distance  is  just as hazardous as the  diving  into  the  bottom  of  the  primordial  ocean in order to retrieve  a  few  grains  of  sand  or  soil.  Here, again, it seems that the close affinity between the  animals  and  human beings is  highlighted.  In  fact  the  animals,  i.e.,  the  birds are said to be blood brothers of the human children of the  first parents.   These  ideas  are   clearly   portrayed   despite   the  demurs of the rational  intelli gence  which  would  like to  ask  questions  as to where the birds got the piece of clay, who  made  that  piece  of clay, and why  by  moulding  by  the  hand  it  could  become  the earth.
6.	The Bilaans say that Melu, being of a cleanly  disposi- tion, kept rubbing his hands white.  He piled  the  scurf  on  one side until it became so high that it annoyed  him.  Thereby  he made earth out of it.°'
Here again we notice that the earth is said  to be in some way or other  connected  with  some  divine  or  semi-divine  being  in its origin. Again, the creation of the earth is portrayed as a fortuitous event:  here, as a  result  of  an  annoyance  on  the  part of Melu.
7.	The various Manobo tribes have differing accounts of the creation of the world. Those around the Talakogon district be-  lieve that Makalindung is the  creator.  He is said  to have set  up his work on posts (some say they are of iron) , and that  there is  one  central  post.		He dwells at the central pillar in company  with  a  python.	The Manobos o1 Argauan and Hibung river districts believe in Dagau, a female deity, as the creator, or, at

24. Cole, *bid., p. 135.

56	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.
least,  the  controller  of the  world.	A python, too, is her com- panion.	The Manobos of Upper Agusan  around  the Simulan and Umayan river, on the other hand,  believe  that the world is like a huge mushroom supported in the center by an iron pillar which is under the control of higher and more powerful ditoetos.^ Despite the varying sex of the deity said to have created the world in the above versions of Manobo creation myths, one thing is commonly held  by  them:  the belief  in  a world pillar situated at the center of the world. In this regard, these myths may be counted among the ancient myths which  also tell first of a center of the world and, too, a world pillar. We know that the center plays  a  great  part  in  these  creation  myths.	It is not unusual then that these Manobo versions would  postulate  that  the creator, male or female, should reside at the central pillar. The central pillar as we have pointed out above could  be substituted by a mountain, by a temple  or by a  tree. Why  a  python  is said to dwell in company with  the  creator  at  the  central pillar may be due to  the  fact  that  when  the  earth  quakes this movement of the earth can be explained as an action of the python who
g•uards the center of the earth.
8.	Other tribes, like tire Bagobos,  believe  that  Eug- pamulak Manobo, the great Diwata, made the sea, the land, and planted trees; he is also said to have created the sun,  the  moon an.d the stars. And the great eel (Kastli) , a fish, snafielike in appearance, which he “wound around the world.”  He also made the great crab (Kuyamang) and put it near the great eel, and allowed it to go wherever it pleased.°"
The world ringed round by the great eel recalls a siiuilar though not quite the same conception in  Greek  mythology. Homer believed that the world was also hemmed in by some- thing. But for him it was not a fish or  a  snake  that  had  tire world around its folds, rather it was  the  ancient  Okeanos  or ocean that ringed the world round.  Okeanos  was  a  river-god with an inexhaustible power of begetting. For Homer, Okeanos was “the origin of everything” [I mad 14, 246; and Kerényi, Gods

25.	John M. Garvan, The Manobos oJ Mindonao. Memoirs of t.b.e National Academy of Sciences, Vol. XGIII. (Washington, D.C., 1941) ,
p. 224; Cf. also H. O.  Beyer’s  “Origin  Myths  Arr'.on g  the  Mounts in  Peoples of  the  Philippines,”  Philippine  Jotirnnl  o{  S!cience,  VIIII,  Sec- tion D, 88-89.
26.	Laura Estelle Watsor. Benedict, “Bagobo Myths.” Journal oJ
American f''olkIore, 26 (Jan.-March, 1913) , 15-16.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	57

oJ the Greeks, (New York, 1960) ,  p.  15a .  But  Kasili  was  not alone,  he  had  near  him  the  crab  Kuyamang.  Even  as  Okeanos had his consort, the goddess Thetys, rightly  invoked  as the  Mother, by whom Okeanos begot everything (Kerényi, op. cit., 15) .
One interesting feature of the Manobo tale, however, is the belief in a great Diwata who was responsible for everything that exists,  Eugpamulak  Manobo.  The  Greeks   refer  everything  to the action of Okeanos and Thetys.  Zeus  the  supreme  God is  a late comer on the scene. But the Manobos  believe  in  a  creator who is supreme over  all  that  he had created.  The great  eel  and the great crab are both subject to him, and they follow his bidding.
9. The Manobo  beliefs  as  reported  by  Garvan  tell  of  the world pillar, a motif quite common in  folklore  (A841,  A841.3,  A843) , and which is linked with the notion .of the Center of the Universe  where  the  first  creation  is  supposed  to  have   taken place.	Like  the  world  tree  or   the   world   mountain.   the   pillar is where commerce between  earth  and  heaven  used  to  take  place in iIIo tenipore, that is to say, in “the early times” when gods deigned to consort with men, in the  aetes  ouren  rnu ridi,  or the golden age.°'
The various female goddesses said to guard  the central  pillar of the world in company with a  python  or  some  other  animal may yet be a survival of a still more ancient belief of the associa- tion between the Great Goddess and the Tree of Life, especially

27.	Prof. Mircea Eliade  has  written  some  very  interesting  pages on the symbolism of the “center” or “axis of the world” with which are linked the Cosmic Mountain and the Cosmis Tree (H 619.3) . According  to him, it is  at  the  “center”  that  the  three  cosmic  regions  meet,  the sk3• above, the world below, and the earth; it is also there that a “break- through can occur, a passing from one cosmic zone to another.” (Pat- terns, p. 111) . It is also tiiere at  the  “center”  where  the  world  tree grows that one comes upon “absolute reality, the course  of  life  and  sacred power.” (Ibid., p. 380) . That is why the shamans in their mystic flights either in search of the souls of  the  sick, or, as psychopomps  for  the souls of the dead, repair to the cosmic mountain, pole or tree which they climb to reestablish the “easy communications as in into ternpoze between Heaven  and  Earth.  For  him  (i.e.  the  shaman)  the  Mountain or the Cosmic Tree again becomes the actual method of attaininp• Heaven, such as it was before the ‘fall.’ For the  shaman,  Heaven  again comes close to Earth; no higher than a house, just as it was before the  pri- mordial rupture....” (“The Yearning for  Paradise  in  Primitive  Tra- dition,” in Myth rind M yihmaking [edited by Henry A. Murray), (New York: George Braziller, c. 1960) , p. 67.

58	FRANCISC O DEMETRIO, S.J.
as seen in the ancient Near East, occurring also in Egypt.22 Of course, the Philippine non-Christian beliefs do not have all the elements which usually went with the complex of beliefs which made up the theory of the Great Mother and the Tree of Life. Certainly we can very well  recognize  the  motif  of  the  Center  in the Philippine beliefs. But the central pillar supporting  the world does not necessarily carry with  it  the  notion  of  the  Tree of Life. The idea o1 the World Tree may be seen in it, however. But the notion of the Tree of Life is not there, nor is the other concomitant notion of “immortality.” The other notion usually found in  the  ancient  Near  Eastern  stories,  namely,  the  Tree of T ice as being “hard to get at” or its “difficulty of access” usually associated with the Tree of Life and the Center is, I  think, im- plicit in the fact that the pillar is said to be guarded  by  a  python or some other monstrous being.




























28.	Cf. Eliade, Pal terns, pp. 283-290.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPIh'OS	59

II.	THE CREATION OF THE FIRST MAN AND WOMAN

A.	MAN AND WOMAN EMERGE FULL BROWN FROM BAMBOO ITALY AccoeDiNG TO THE LoWLAND BRIBES

1.	The Bisayans, Loarca  writes,  had  a  legend,  according  to which
“ . the  land  breeze and  the sea breeze were married; and that the  land breeze brought forth a reed, which was planted by the god Captan. When the reed grew, it  brohe into  two sections,  which  became a  man and  a  woman.  To  the  man  they  gave  the  name  of  Sicalac,  and  that is the reason why men from that time on have been called laktc,  the woman they called Sicauay, and thenceforth women have been called behaves.”*

2.	Povedano, on the other hand, gives a version with some in_teresting details. Maca-aco “was the father of the first people whom he shut up in two joints of  the  bamboo  tree.  Then came the King of Turtle-doves. When he  alighted  on  the  bamboo, there came forth from the joints a man, who was very  dark but very handsome, who was named Silalac; and one other, a woman, who was named Sibaba-ye.”°
3.	A much longer account is  given  us  by  Pavon.  Here  is an abridged version.
The first man and the first woman were the result of a  romantic encounter  between  two  very  powerful  spirits,   Captan,   the   handsome and powerful god of the land (sky)  breezes,  and  of  Maguayen.,  the beautiful and powerful goddess of the sea breezes. During their  first encounter, which was also their last  on  earth,  they  both  tried  to  outdo  each other in displaying their  powers.  Both  showed  how  they  could  control the elements over  which  they  had  charge:  Captan  over  the  key and earth, by his lightning  and  peals  of  thunder;  Maguayen,  in  turn, almost swept Captan off  his  feet.  Hardly  had  she  commanded  him  to leave her presence,  when  a  huge  wave  broke  at  his  feet,  but  in  his agility  he  escaped  being  carried  into  the  deep.  At  this  show  o1  power by  Maguayen,  Captan  begged   pardon,   asserting   it   was   not   in   order to vex her that he showed her some of  his  servitors,  but  to  m.ake  her realize  that  all  these  are  hers  because  of  his  love  for   her.   Maguayen, on  the  other  hand  impressed  by  t.he  agility  of   Captan  confessed   that for a long time now she had been longing to meet him who was not
1.	Relncion, Blair and Robertson, fstotide, 5, pp. 121-123.
2.	Robertson Text, pp. 34-35; in Hester’s edition, p. 46.

60	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.
only handsome, but  powerful  even  as  she  was.  After  another  mutual show of  power,  and  Captan  laying  all  his  servants  at  the  feet  of  his lady love, they both  clasped  hands.  Then  they  dived  into  the  sea;  and thus  the  genii  of  the  winds  o1  the  earth  and  of  the   sea   were  united. In conclusion,  Pavon  adds:  “Nothing  else  was  known  of  this  event, which  according  to  belief  led  to  the  origin  of  the  first  man  and   the first  woman.  The  place  where   the  first  idyll   occurred   is  pointed   out as a  diminutive  herb,  which  vaunted  itselt  gaily  in  the  horizon  and whose tiny green leaves are set a-quiver by the first zephyrs  which accompany the departure of the star king at the break of dawn.”*

Comment

The tale  has  many  interesting  details  which  would  require a longer treatment to exploit,  especially  if  one  cared  to  go  a little deeper into the meaning  of  the  myth.  Suffice  it  for  the time being to point out that here is the proto-type of love and marriage taking place “in the early times” before the birth of mankind. The dramatis persons e are ancestral gods and may be regarded as the founders of conjugal union among the Bisayan. Here, too, is evident the motif of conflict between two primeval powers, and their reconciliation seem.« to put a close to the older order ot things when  hostility  and  irrational  instincts (chaos) ruled,  and  to  mark  the  beginning  or  a  new  phase  in the life of the universe, that  harmony  between  the land  and the sea breezes which prepared the way for the coming of  the  first man and woman, through whose union the world would be gradually peopled. In  the  unabridged  version  Captan  is dressed in the  garment  of  bird’s  plumage,  while Maguayan’s  body  was a collection of pearls and mothers-of-pearl, her hair like a bit of pure gold thread. These symbols, too, may be leads to deeper understanding of the early religious beliefs of the Bisayans.

B.	CONTINUATION OF THE SAME TALE OF MAN’S ORIGIN FROM THE BAMBOO

1.	Povedano, rather sketchily, continues his narrative thus:

“As soon as they beheld each other, they  fell  in  love;  but  she  re- jected him saying that it could  not  be,  since  they  both  issued  from  one and the  same  hollow  stem.  Then  they  agreed  to  speak  to  the  king  of  the earthqu'ake, Macalinog. As soon as he saw them, he said that it
3. Pavon MSS Transcript 5-D, pp. 5-8.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	61

was very good, ar-d that they should marry, for there  were  not  enough  people .’•4

2.	Pavon supplies many interesting details to the above
incident.	The following is a brief summary of it.

A beautiful bamboo tree grew on tire spot where Captan and Maguayen held their idyllic love. Then one day, King Manaul, still wandering over the watery  wastes,  came in  search  of  a  place whereon to alight. “For until then there was no other tree in all the world ”
Lulled by the  quiet  of  the  place,  Manaul  was  about  to fall  asleep  when he  heard  from  between  the  joints  of  the  bamboo  a  sound,  “pec,  pec, pec,  tec, eec,  tec,” and  the  voice  as  of  a woman’s:	“Open rue, oh lord, king  of  the   air.”	Manaul   flew   away   when   he heard  this.	But once again   wearied   with   flying   he   returned   to   rest   on  the   branch.	And again he heard the noise, this  time  the  voice  of  a  rrian  saying:  “Look thou, king of the air,  and  lord  of  oirds,  i1 with  only  two  pecks  of  thy beat thou givest us freedom, thou wilt  be.  joyful  at  seeing  us,  and  we  shall   thank   thee  so.	And with  a  mournful  plaint  was  resumed  the pick, pick, tick, tick.
Curious and desirous to catch a chick which may be hid.den within  the bamboo, Manaul bent toward  the  trunk  and  listened.  He  was  not for letting go what he  could  devour.  Sicauay,  the  astute,  knew  very well the taste of Manaul; so she simulated the sound of a chick from within. This aroused his curiosity all the more.  Just  then  a  beautiful lizard appeared on  the  tree trunk.  Manaul  lunged  forward  and  pecked at it; but the  lizard  escaped.  His  peck,  however,  cracked  the  trunk;  and what  a  vision  Manaul  saw.  His  eyes  were  pinned  on  the  two very beautiful figures issuing from the cracked bamboo, and were now gracefully  bowing  to  him.  With  joy  they  greeted  and  thanked  him  for  their  being.  Soon afterwards, Manaul once again flew  away.  And  the pair raised their eyes skywards as though in prayer.°

3.	Alzina in his HistoTta has only a short remark on the Bisayans’ belief concerning the creation of the first man and

4.	Robertson Text, p. 36; in Hester’s edition, p. 46.
5.	Pavon, MSS 5-D, pp. 9-10; Quirino-Garcia, Manners, p. 399.  With regard to the Bisayan belief that the first man and woman  issued forth from a bamboo tree, one  might  compare  this  notion  with  the  belief of the Borneo Kayans that the first man and  woman  were  born from a tree which had been fertilized by a  creeper  swaying  backwards and forwards in the wind (A 1221.4) . The man was Kaluban and the woman Kalubi Angai. But they were both said to be incomplete,  with  their legs and the lower half of  their  trunks  missing,  so  that  their entrails protruded. Still  they  were married  and  became the  progenitors o1 mankind (Sir James Frazer, f’oIklore in the Old Testntnent,  I,  34) . Also at Amboyna and neighboring islands, some inhabitants claim they

62	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.

woman. They ascribed, he tells us, “a very contemptible begin- ning to the first man and woman, since  they  were  two coconuts or   two   stalks  of   bamboo....”6	Loarca also reports that the Bisayans took the first human pair  to  have  been  created  from the bamboo. He tells besides of another group of Bisayans, the Tinguianes, who say  that  a  kite  perched  upon  a  reed,  pecked at it, and man and woman came out°  Catalina  Villaruz  records the belief of Tagalogs of southern Luzon in the first  quarter  of this century saying that “The first man was supposed to have sprung from a bamboo pole. He became so big that the bamboo could no longer hold him and so it  cracked  and  out  he  came. The  same  story  is  told  of   the first  woman	Once out of the bamboo matrix, they looked at each other, tell in love, and then lived together as man and wife.””
4.  The  following  tale  was  collected  late  in  the  second quarter o1 this century by an anonymous worker in Balingasag, Mindanao, for the Bureau of Public Schools. The  tale  has  a christian, or to be more exact, a judaeo-christian  coloring,  and sounds very much like the account in  Genesis.  What  is  mean- ingful, however, is the interpretation given by the raconl ettT Of woman’s origin from the rib on  the  left  side  of  man.  Very probably  the  storyteller  belongs  to  Eve’s  own  sex.  There  follow a summary and a quote.

Adam was the first man to whom some of the wisdom of  God  was given. He  could  talk,  think,  and  reason.  A  companion  too  was  given him so that he might not be lonely. While Adam  was  asleep,  God  ex- tracted  Eve from  the  left  rib  or  Adam  just  underneath  the  heart.   “With a  significant  meaning,  God  did  not   extract  her  from  the  feet  of   man so  that  she  might  be  stepped  upon;  nor  was  she  taken  from   the  head so that she will be under the  will  and  control  of  man’s  power;  but  she was taken from the rib near the heart, to be loved, adored, and pro-

are descended from trees like the Capellenio  Moluccono  which  was fertilized  by  the  Pandion  Halioetits  (ibid.  I,  36) .  The   Parsees  are  said to have a tradition that a tree gave birth to the  primeval  man,  Meschia, whose body was afterwards divided, one  part  being  male,  the  other, female, Meschia  and  Meschiana  (C.  S.  Wake,  Serpe'nt  Worship,  and other  Essays  with  a  Chapter  on  Toteinism,  Lor-don:  G.  Redwig,  1888, p. 38.)
6. I, 3, p. 182.
7.	ftelncion, Blair and Robertson, islands, ñ, pp. 120-128.
8.	“Bisayan Folktales,” Vol. 2, Paper No. 44, in H. Otley Beyer Collection, Manila, P. I. Typescript.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	63

tected by man. This woman was Eve, the first woman.”°

C.	THE WITNESS OF THE NON-CHRISTIAN PEOPLES

1.	Among the non-christianized peoples of the  Philippines are found a variety of beliefs concerning the origin of man and woman. As far as one can ascertain, the Tinguians  do not  have any definite beliefs concerning the creation of the first man and woman. Kadaklan is said to  have  created  everything,  the  sun, the moon and the stars. But among their myths there is nothing  that tells of the origin of man and woman. The Bagobos, on the other hand, believe that Eugpamulak  Manobo  or  Diwata  took two lumps o1 earth, shaped them into human figures, spat upon them and they became man  and  woman.  But  they  were  very old;  they  married  and  lived  together.  Tuglay  was  the   man and Tuglibong, the woman. He built a very  big  house,  and planted seeds of various kinds who ch Diwata had given him.10
2.	Cole  furnishes  us  with  interesting  details  of  the   beliefs in the origin of man and woman among the  mountain  tribes  of Davao Gulf in Mindanao. He  reports  that  the  Bagobos  believed that a race of monkeys once possessed the  world;  but  the  first human beings dispossessed the monkeys  of  it.  The  entire human race  is   derived   from   the   first   pair.   (Cole,   bribes   o   Davao, p. 125) .
3.	The Bilaans say that Melu-a, after he had made the world  from  the  accumulated  heap  of  dead  skin from  his  hands$  lR was much pleased with  his  work,  and  then  decided  to  make two beings like unto himself, but smaller in size. For this he
used the remnants of the material he  had  used  to  form  the world. He was about through  shaping  both  figures  except  for the nose of one, and the nose and some other part of the other. Then came Tau-Tana or Tan Dalom Tana who demanded that

9.	Report or Balingasag . TypesCr1}3t, Manuel  Gapuz  Collection (MGC) , Xavier University, Cagayan de Oro, Philippines.
10.	Benedict,  Bnpobo  Mmths,  p.  15.  According  to  her  (ibid.  note 3,)  Tuglay  and  Tuglibong  ar.  generic,  not  specific  names,   They  are also  identified  with  the  Mona  who,  in   Bagobo   myths,   were  supposed to  have  inhabited  the  earth  before  time   began:  and   they   knew   only the crudest of Bagobo  arts  and  industries,  were  extremely  poor.  their  dress was the soft sheath torn from coconut trees.
11.	Cole, Tribes oJ Diiroo, p. 106.
12.	Cole, ibid., p. 135.

64	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.
Melu-a leave him the  noses  to  make.  After  much  argument, Tau Tana gained his point and so made  the  noses  of  the  first two people, but he made them upside down. Because of the arg•ument on the noses, Melu-a forgot to finish the  missing  part o1 the other person and went home instead to his abode in the clouds, while Tau-Tana returned to his dwelling under the earth. Then the rains came, and  the  two  people  on  earth  were  about to perish because of the water that ran off their heads into their upside down noses. Melu-a, seeing this, came to their  rescue,  reset their noses, and told them  that  they should save the  hair  that fell from their heads,  and  the  scurf  that  came  off  from their bodies, in order that when he came again he could make many more people. And they lived  in a village  with  plenty  to  eat and did not have to labor, but simply to pick the fruits they desired from the trees.1"
4.	The Tagakaolos to whom we have referred above'* have Lingkanan and Lampag_an, who  gave  birth  first  to  two  birds Kalau and Sabitan,  as  the  parents  of  all  peoples  of  the  world. The Atas (or Aiitas or Etas) , the Bataks and the  Mamanuas  be-  lieve that the g•reatest of  all  spirits  who  is  Manama  “made  the first men from bla.des of grass, weaving them together until they resembled a human form. In this manner he made eight pcrsons
—male an.d female—who later became the  ancestors  of  the  Ata and of all the  neighboring  tribes.'"  The  Bilaans  tell  us  that  the first people created by Melu and Fiuweigh  were  Adnato  and Andawi, male and female. Their children were  Tafi  or  Mastafi, male, and  Lakarol,  female.  (Cole  notes  that  some  informants claim  that  Mesa,  Lakbang  and  Mangarang  were  also   original first people.) The descendants of Tafi and Lakarol were Sinudal (female) , Moay (male) , Limbay (female) , Madenda (female) , Sinam.oway (male) , Kamansa (male) , Gilay (female) , Gomoyau (male) ,  Salau  (male) ,  Salayane  (female) ,  Baen   (female) ,  Kanfal (female) , Latara (male) .'6
5.	A second version gives Melu and Dwata as the first creators who made Fiuweigh and  Seweigh.  The  last  two were the real ancestors of men because they took  earth, made it  into  the form of people, and then whipped them until they moved.

13. Jbtd., p. 136.
14.	Cf. supre, p. 55.
15.	Cole, op. cit., p. 164. 16. Ibid., p. 137.

CREATION MYTHS AMON G THE EARLY FILIPINOS	65

Otis and Lakbang, male and female, were  the  two people made  by Fiuweigh and Seweigh. From them two  children,  also male and female, were born, namely, Mastafi and Lakarol. These two lived in a distant place together with their one animal, a  bird, called Baswit. They sent him on a long journey and  upon  its return it brought back a piece of earth and a fruit of the pandag tree. Lakarol  planted  the  fruit  on the  piece  of  earth, and  when it grew the leaves that fell from  its  branches  gradually  formed the earth. (Cole, 'Pribes oJ Dado, p. 137) .
ñ. A third version tells  how  there  were  in  the  beginning four beings: Melu and Fiuiveig* who were males, and two  females, Dwata and  Saweigh.  Tliey lived  on an  island  as large as a hat which was called Salnaon.  There  were  no  trees  nor grass on the island. And they also had a bird called Baswit who went across the waters to secure some earth,  the  fruit  of  the rattan and of other trees. The bird returned and Melu  beat  the earth it brought like the way a woman beats  the  pot  until  he made the land; then he planted the seeds in it and they  g•rew.  After some time he said, “of what use is the land without people?” So the other three replied, “let us make  wax  into  people.”  So they did. But when they placed them near the fire they melted. Therefore they decided next to make men out of dirt. Melu and Fiuweigh began to work on man. All went well until they were ready to make the nose. Fiuweigh who was doing it placed  the nose upside down; when Melu suggested that the people w•ould drown if he left the nose that way, Fiuweigh became very angry and refused to change it, then left in a hull. Melu  quickly seized the nose and  turned it  the way it is now.  But  you  can  see  that  in his haste the creator pressed his fingers at its roots."

17. I hid., pp. 136-137. Of the  Tiruray belief  on the  origins of man and woman. Datu Piang in his Mono  ottd  Popan  Legends, reports  tfiat the first woman was formed by Sualla  from  the  rib  of  the  first  man who was very lonely. Although the first child of the first couple died, nevertheless his death was the occasion of many benefits: the soil which the creator used to bury  the  child  became  the  broad  earth;  the  first corn grew from the teetii of the aead child, rice, from his navel, and bananas, from his hands. But Sualla had a sister  with  an  evil disposi- tion.  Envious  of  her  brother’s  creations,  she cast  her  comb down  and it turned into the first pig to devour the banana plants, her bttpo-spittle from her high home in Bonggo, became the rats which prey upon  the  crops of corn and rice (E. Arsenio Manuel, i"olk  Literotttze,  p. 149) . After I had written these pages, I was informed by Mr. Trn.nquilino

66	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.

Comment

From the foregoing accounts one may conclude that among the early Bisayans and Tagalogs the  belief  was  prevalent  that the first human beings came from a tree, in particular.  the  bamboc; a motif rather common in folklore (A1251) .
Among the non-Christian tribes of Mindanao the following motifs  are  attested:  that  monkeys   were  the  first   possessors  of the earth (Bagobo) ; that bad creators, Tau Tana or Saweigh, interfered in the creation of man (Bilaan, A60) ; and that the primordial  parents  first  gave  birth  to  animals  like  the  birds, Kalau or Sabitan, and only afterwards to human offsprings (Tagakaolo) .  Moreover,  one  learns  that  birds   were   ii.stru- mental in securing  the  piece  of  earth  for  the  forming  of  this world   (Tagakaolo   and  Bilaan) ,  that  the  early   peoples  lived   in a kind of paradisiac existence (Bilaan) , that  clay  figures st-.aped  like  men  were  whipped  until  they  moved  (second   Bilaan version) , and that the creators spat upon  the  two  lumps  of  earth and made them man and woman (an action  quite  analogous  to  God’s in Gen.esis when he “breathed  into  the  face”  of  man  in order to make him a “living soul”) . This spitting motif  obtains among  the  Bagobos.  One  learns  finally  that  the  first   parents were living on a small and distant island with a  bird  for  com-  panion (two versions of the Bilaan) , and that the first man  and woman were created before the formation of  the  earth  (second Bilaan version) .









Sitoy, a  native  Bukidnon,  that  there  are  at  least  two  creation-myths which  he  had  heard  in  Malaybalay  and  the  surrounding   areas.   These are said to be very  ancient.  One  version  tells  of  a  ball  of  light  which they cam tnlobtinpco, out of which the first  man  and  woman  emerged.  (The “ball” is perhaps homologizable with the egg motif to be discussed below in chapter  III) .  The  second  version.  makes  Magbabaya,  the creator,  fashion  the  first  people  out  of  clay.   For  a  fuller  account  of  this second version, ct. chapter III, note 24) .

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	67

III.	OTHER MOTIFS

Before closing, I would like to pick up again some motifs which though alluded to earlier in the paper deserve further comment. There are at least three of these: the egg motif in connection with the creation of the first man and woman, and in connection with the creation of our “world;” the animal motif (python and  pig)  at  the  central  pillar  of  the  world,  and  the bad creator motif.

1)	The Egg Motif

Historians of religions ‘reform us that in many mythologies  the egg is an archetypal symbol of world creation. Classical students are acquainted with the Orphic cosmic egg which was fashioned in the aither by Time, and out of which emerged  the first great God Eros or Love (Phones) who, as the principle of generation, became the creator of the whole world.  But  Planes was swallowed in turn by Zeus who  thereby  became  the  ruler and creator of the world.  We  meet  such  myths  over  a  very wide area: in Polynesia, India, Indonesia, Iran, Greece, Phoenicia, Latvia, Estonia, Finland, West Africa, the central and th' west coasts of South America.
What  is  of  special  interest  is  the  fact  that  many  myth.s  of the creation of the first man and woman are patterned on the emergence of the cosmos from an egg.  Man  is  believed  to have been born from an egg,  among  the  Oceanians.1  Among  the Mandaya in Mindanao the egg as the  origin  of  the  first  man  and the  first  woman  is  also  found.    This  we  shall  discuss  more fully

However, it is not only the coming to birth of man that is patterned after the eosmogony from an egg. The symbols of the renovation of nature and of vegetation  (,Spring  and  New  Year) as well as the feasts and cults of the dead are  also  patterned  on the symbolism of the world egg. And we know that this symbol- ism is not to be seen in any kind of birth, but rather in rebtrth in imitation of the periodic recreation of the world.  In other words,  in  all  these myths  and  rituals connected  with  the  tree,  with the

1.	R. B. Dixon, Oceanic Mptholopif (Boston, 1916) , p. 160 i. for Indonesia; p. 109 for Melanesia; p.  109,  n.  17,  for  Micronesia.  Cf.  also Eliade, Pnttertts, pp. 413-414.

68	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.
coming of spring and the new year as well as the feasts of the dead—in all  these,  the  theory  of  eternal  return  to  the  beginning is exemplified. The beginning  is  the  mythic  time  of  creation. These myths  and  rituals  wherein  the  motif  of  the  egg  is  found, in  the  words  of  Eliade,  “cannot  be  explained  by  any  empirical or  rationalist  interpretation  of   the   egg  looked   upon  as  a  seed: it is founded  on  ltte  symbol  embodied  in  the  egg,  which  bears not so much upon birth  as  upon  rebirth  modelled  on  the  creation of the world.” 2 We cannot now go into a discussion of Eliade’s conception of a symbol. We  refer  the  reader  to  his  many  writ- ings on it.”

E gg MotiJ to Philtpptne Creation Myths
As  mentioned  above,  there  are  myths   which   exhibit   the egg motif in the Philippines. Two  versions  of  Mandaya  myth clearly  show  this.  The  first  version  relates   that   the   liinokon bird laid two eggs. Out of the one was  hatched  the  first  woman Mag, and out of the other the first man Begenday. In the second version, two eggs were laid at  the headwaters  of  the  Mayo  River.  A woman emerged  from  the first  egg.  A snake  was  born  out  of the  second.  It  later   went   downstream   and   at   the   mouth   of the river, it blew up, and  from  its  carcass  the  body  of  the  first man came forth.•
It  must  be  mentioned,  however,  that  the  various  myths  as
we have them do not  explicitly  indicate  the  symbolism  of  rebirth as  modelled  on  the  cosmogony.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  wherever the egg motif comes in, it is always  a question  of  two  eggs  (one  for  the  man  and  the   other   for  the   woman) ,  not   of   one  egg. It would  seem  that  the  Philippine  myths  would  be  much  closer  to the pattern of the  cosmogonic  egg,  did  they  portray  the  man and the woman as coming from one  single  egg.  There  is,  how- ever, an indication of the id,ea of rebirth in  these  myths  on  ac- count  for  the  fact  that  these  creation  myths  are  generally accom-

2.	Eliade, Patterns, p. 414.
Z. Patterns, pp. 8-11, 13, 26, 31, 32 f., 39, 46, 111, 437-58 pesston.
Images end Symbols: A Study  in  Religiotis  Sirs bolisrri.  Trans.  Philip Mairet (New  York,  1961)  passion;  “Methodological Remarks  o1 the  Study of Religious Symbolism,” in : Tate History oJ Reli{fions: Essais i ti Methodolopp, eds.  Mircea  Eliade  and  Joseph  Kitagawa  (Chicago,   1959) ,  pp. 86-107.
4.	Cole, Tr*bes oJ Deuco, pp. 173-174.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	69

panted with flood myths. And invariably the flood myths contain reference to a bird of birds either as the first sons  of  tb.e survivors, or as bringing in the matter for the formation of  the earth from far distant places, or as messenger of a  god  of  the dead.	We shall discuss the flood myths later.
There is, however, perhaps a Philippine myth which is pat- terned very much like the cosmogonic egg, but portrayed under another symbol. I refer to the early Bisayan myth  which  makes the first man and woman emerge full blown from  the  same bamboo joint, thanks to the accidental peeking by Manaul. Al- though it is not an egg laid by  Manaul  out  of  which  the  first man and woman are hatched, there is however a very positive action of the bird in regard the bamboo pole.  First  of  all  he alights upon it to  catch  his  breath  after  his  long  fligL.ts,  then he actually pecks at the  bamboo  when  a lizard  shows  itself  on it. The actions of  Manaul  perhaps  could  be  analogously  taken as an act of hatching. And the  one  joint  of  bamboo  wherein were concealed the first man and woman could also be homologis- ed with an egg shell containing within it two contrasting or opposite beings: man and woman,  the  masculine  and feminine.  In this way, the myth seems to approach more closel the cosmogonic egg, which before its “breakage” or creation, con- tained within itself the opposites: white and black, heaven and earth, night and day, death and life, masculine and feminine.°
Nor is that all. The Bisayan seem also to have another myth which again runs along the same pattern of symbolism as the cosmogonic egg, with a difference. I refer to  the  myth  of  the giant Angngalo and his birth from the earth covered by  the  sky and which looked like a giant tobo or coconut shell-bowl, turned topside down. In a previous chapter we have explained this as analogous to  the  mountain  motif  and  have  connected  it  with the symbol of the “center.” Perhaps we could also explain this myth, particularly the giant tabo or coeonut shell-bowl as another variant of the cosmogonic egg, the breaking of which, meant the separation of the cosmogonic egg into two halves, the earth below and the heaven above. And the cosmic separation of the pri- mordial feminine and the primordial masculine also establishes once and for all the dichotomy of male and female among human‘ beings, animals and plants.

5.	Erich Neumann, The Great Mother: An Ana lysis o the Arch.e -
type (New York, 1963) , pp. 42-45.

70	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.

2)	The Flood Motif and the Symbolism of Rebirth
We said above that the egg motif the world over is generally linked with the symbolism not of birth, but of rebirth, or the repetition of the birth of the world  at  the  moment  of  creation. We said too that the egg motif, either in myth or ritual,  has  definite connections with  the  symbols  of  the  renovation  either of nature or of vegetation as well as with the cult of the  dead.  Now Spring and the New Year themselves,  in mythic  thinking, are symbols of the first emergence of tne world from chaos and unformed existence or the great round, before it became frag- mented. In other words, the coming of Spring and the New Year themselves are symbolic of the eternal return  to  the  state  of chaos and the state of latencies or  of  seeds  in  the  beginning. This return (according to archaic theory)  can  be effected  either by an ekQfiTOSis, general conflagration, or by a cataclysm in the form of a universal deluge. This return to the original state is necessary in order to  renew  the  exhausted  forces  and  energies of the  entire universe,  and  thus secure its continual  existence."  In this way the eternal  round  of  existence  in cycles  is secured. In tb.is connection, the egg motif, whether on the cosmic or the human level is a symbol not so much of  birth,  but  of  rebirth. Like the tree, the egg is also a symbol of nature and its con.tinual renewai through death unto new life.'
We mentioned that this renewal could be effected by a universal flood. Now we have flood myths  among the Ifiigaos  and other pagan tribes of the Philippines.
The Ifugaos tell of a great drought which dried up all the rivers. The old men suggested that they dig up  the  river which had sunk into its grave in order  to  find  the  soul  of  the  river. For 3 days they dug when suddenly a  great  spring  gushed forth. Tt came so fast that many died before they could get out of  the  pit. In their joy over the waters, the Ifugaos  celebrated  a feast. But while they were rejoicing it grew dark; the rains fell,  the rivers rose up so that the old men finally advised the  people  to run to the mountains for the river gods were angry. The people were all overtaken by the waters except two, a brother  and  a sister: Wigan and Bugan. Wigan  was safely  settled  on  top  of Mt. Amuyao and Bugan, on the summit of Mt. Kalawitan. The

6.	Eliade,  Pattern,  pp.  212,  254. 7. ibid., pp. 324-26; 414-416.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	71

waters continued to rise until  the  entire  earth  was  covered except the tops of the mountains. For 6 months the flood covered the earth. There was plenty of fruits and nuts  on  the  mountain tops for the survivors.  But  only  Bugan  had  fire.  Wigan  was cold because he had no fire.
The story goes on to tell how after the waters had receded, Wigan journeyed to Mt. Kalawitan and was reunited with  his sister.	They settled down the valley where the  Banaual  clan  now  life.   Bugan  realized  one  day  that  she  was with child.	In her shame she left her home and  followed  the  course  of  the river. Exhausted and faint after the long journey and consumed with grief. she sank to the ground only to be comforted by the appearance of the god Maknongan who came to her  in the  guise  of a benign old man with white beard. He assured her that her shame  had no foundation.	What she and Wigan had done was right because it was through them that the world would be repeopled."
In this synopsis it is clear that there was a belief among the Ifugaos of the successive existence of  races of  mankind.;  that  the old race was wiped away by a flood, and  that  a  new  generation came  into  existence  through  the  survivors  of  the  flood.   Rebirth is implicit in this flood myth.
Among the Ata we have this report from Cole."

“Long after this  (the  creation  of  the  first  male  and  female) ,  the water  covered  the  whole  earth  and  all  the  Ata  were  drowned  except  two men and a  woman.  The  waters  carried  them  far  away  and  they would  have  perished  had  not  a  large  eagle  come  to  their  aid.   This   bird offered to carry them to  their  homes  on its  back.  One  man  refused, but the other two accepted its help and returned to Mapula.”

Here again we see presupposed a new generation of Ata, sprang from the two remnants of the flood who  were flown  to their home by the bird.  This tale also  presupposes  the  existence of a previous race of men who perished  during  the  cataclysm. The notion of the rebirth of mankind through the survivors helped by the bird is quite clear.
Among• the Mandaya we have it reported that many genera- tions ago a great flood occurred  which  killed all  the  inhabitants of the world except one pregnant woman. She prayed that her

8.	Beyer, J\fyt/Is a( Ortgitt, pp. 212-213.
9.	’I’ribes a} Douoo, p. 16t.

72	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.

child might be a  boy.  This  was  granted  and  the  son  who  was born of her she  called  Uacatan.  When  full  grown,  he  took  his own mother to wife, and from their union came all the Mandaya. (Shades of the Oedipus complex) .10
Again  in  this  tale  there  are  two   things  presupposed:	the previous existence of a race of  men  now  extinct  on account of the flood, and the existence of a new race from the two survivors. As for the Bisayan, one may not agree with Alzina when he says “Concerning the flood which they now call in their tongue ang paglunup sa cclibuton (lit. ‘the inundation  of the  wc›rld’) that   they   knew   nothing about  it.”1'	Fansler at least has a Bisayan story of a flood, supplied by Vicente L. Neri of Cagayan, ldisamis,  which  he  had  heard   from  his grandmother.	A flood took place on account of the quarrel  between  Bathala  and the god  of  the sea, Dumagat.	It seems that Bathala’s subjects the crow and the  dove  were  stealing  fish  which  were the subjects of Dumagat. He asked for retribution from Bathala and he got nothing.	In return he opened the big pipe through which the water of the world passes and flooded the dominion of Bathala
until nearly all the people were drowned.1"
And Pavon tells a story of how the crow  got  its  black  color. The story in short goes this way:  In  very  remote  times,  God thought it good to send a great punishment  to  men.  There  fol- lowed a great internal war which took away  the  lives  of  many. Then a river overflowed its banks  and  took  the  lives  of  many more. The judge of the dead Aropayang alarmed over the  mis- fortune that had happened sent out the crow and  the  dove  to examine and count the dead. The dove came back and  gave  a  faithful account of the disaster. The crow who came  much  later could not do so because it forgot to count  the  dead  in  its  eager- ness to peck at  the  eyes of  the  dead.   Furious,  Aropayang  hurled  a bottle of ink  at  the  bird  and  thus  stained  the  leather  of  the crow forever, and he cursed it to be lame on one foot where it

10.	I bid.. p. 173. Generally the survivors or the flood  are  a  brother and a sister. There is another  instant  of  a  mother-son  partnership.  This  was brought to my attention by Dr. Juan Francisco of U. P. after  I  had written  these  pages.   He  says   that   the  Flood-myth   of   the   Higaunons of Magsaysay in northern Misamis Orieiital tells of  a  mother  and  a  son who survived the great flood.
11.   ff*stor*a,   pp. 191-192.
12. Dean S. Fansler, ftl*ptno Popular Ta fee I New York, 1921) , pp. 420-421.

CREAMON MYTHSAMONGTHEEARLYMLIPINOS	73
was hit by the inkwell.'°
In these two tales, we have the motif of a flood if not of a universal deluge. The passing away of one  generation  of  men who perished in the flood waters and the coming of another generation after the  flood  are  at  least  hinted  at.  The followers of Bathala and the people in the Pavon tale were not altogether extinguished. So we can suppose that at least two or  more survivors remained to repeople the  world.  And so, too, we  can say that the notion of rebirth is implicit. In both  stories  again, there figure two birds: the crow and the dove.  In  these  tales which are more folktale than myths, the  birds  do not  lay  eggs. But it  is  interesting  how  they  are  sent  to  count  the  dead.  So it seems that the many motifs common to earlier myths of cosmic rebirth reappear in these tales: the flood, the survival of some people, the birds, the dead. The rebirth is not for the individual dead, however, but for  the  new  race of  men  who  will be  born to repeople the world Trom the survivors.
Now for a brief comment on the other two  motifs:  the animals at the central pillar, and the bad creators.

2)	Animals at Central Pillar

The animals at the  central  pillar  are  either  a  python  or  pigs  or  an  eel  and  a  crab.  The  Manobo  of  the  Talakagan  district in the Agusan Valley believe that the world  is set  on posts,  one  of  which  is  at  the   center.   The  creator,  Makalinduñg,  lives   at the  central  post  in  company  with   a  python.   In   like   manner, the Manobo of the Argauan and Hibiing Rivers say that a female deity,  named  Dagau,  lives  at   the   four   fundamental   pillars   of the world in  company  with  a  python.'4  The Bisayan  and  Bukid- non in northern Mindanao  affirm  that  there  are  pigs  stationed  close to the  pillars  of  the  world.l °  The  Manobo,  however.  say that  the  Creator,  Eugpamulak  Manobo,  made  the  great  eel (Kasili) , a snakelike fish, and he “wound it all around the world.” He also stationed  the  great  crab  {Ktigamang)  “near  the  great eel and let it go wherever it lilced.”16

13. MS 1838-1839, Trnnscript N o. 5-C, pp. 27-28.
14.	John Garvan, Unpublished Notes,  referred  to  by  Beyer,  op.  cit., p. 89.
15.	fteport on the Lux bfe Distz3Ct by Public School Teacher. Type- script.
16.	Supra, p. 22.

74	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, Sl
Let us note in passing that only 3 of the 4 accounts refer specifically to the central pillar or pillars and  the  animals stationed there. The Bagobo belief does not tell  of  a  central pillar, but considers the world as encircled in the  folds of  the great Knsiii. As with the 3 accounts, the Bagobo gives an etiological explanation for the earthquake. Periodically the great Crab bites the Eel, and its wriggling  causes  the  earth  to move.  In the Bohol creation myth above cited, earthquate could be easi- ly explained also by the mobility of its foundations:  the  broad back  of  big  Turtle.  The  Manobo  beliefs  explain  the  quaking of the earth by the movement of the pythons wound around the pillars. And the Bisayan and Bukidnon  versions  attribute  the earth movements to the pigs’ running around, or rubbing  their sides against, the earth-supports. That is why the Bisaya.n say when the earth quakes: “Bowa, Bowa, Bowa !” The cry  for shooing away pigs.'7
We have pointed  out  above  that  the  central  pillar  of  the world is analogous  to  the  motif  of  the  center  of  the  universe. And that one of the characteristics of the center in mythological thought is that it is “difficult of access;” because it is there that passage is  made  possible  from  one  cosmic  zone  to  the  other;  it is there, too, that the tree of life is located, and the food  of immortality secured. The tree of  life  is often  depicted  as  guarded bv  a  monster,  a  snake.	We might see a faint remnant of this theory  in  the  Subanu  tale:  “A  Story  of   Punbenua,   Who  Went to  the  Navel  of  the  Sea.”'”	He went in  search  of  the  liver  of the black snake which was  very  much  desired  by  his  wife  in  labor  at  childbirth.	The snake lived in the tree  Dangal  B‹ihol that grew in the place called Pusu Dnpnt, rooted on a rock.
But one more thing worth mentioning is a remark by .Ioseph Campbell.'" He is not referring  to the central  pillar of  the  world,  but rather to the labyrinth. It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the labyrinth and the central pillar are both  underground,  and  both  entail  hardship  in  getting  there;  and  therefore,  homologizable with the “center.” According to Campbell, in the historical development of  mythic  thinking,  pigs  took  the  place  o1 serpents as sacred animals of the labyrinth. The pigs in turn gave way

17.	Report on Luinbio.
18.	Christie, Subanuns, pp. 96 If.
19.	Joseph Campbell, The flfosks o} Gods,  Primit*ce  Mptholopp (New York, 1959) , p. 197.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	75

to the  bull,  and  the  bull  to  the  horse.  If  we  could  homologize the  journey  to  the  labyrinth  with  the  journey   to  the   center  of the world, then it would  be  seen  that  our  pagan  and  Bisayan myths about the center  are  very  old.  The  Manobos  have  the python  and  the  Bisayan  the  pigs  as  situated  in  the  sacred  zone of the center.

3)	The Bad Creator or Marplot Motif

In folk belief over a wide area of  the  world  (Central  Asia and South-Eastern Europe) , the creator-god is not seldom portrayed as closely associated with the devil in the act of crea- tion. The devil is presented as the blood-brother of God, or co-eternal with him, and  without  the  devil’s  help,  God  is  sald to be unable to complete the world.°°
Sometimes the devil is said to have  been  created  by  God. Rut the manner of his creation is interesting. In  a  way  God creates the devil out of his own substance.  Sitting upon  a  rock, the Mordvinians depict God  as  saying  to  himself:  “If  only  I had a brother, I would make  the  World !”  Then  he  spat  upon the waters  and  from  his spittle  a mountain  was  born.  He split  it with his  sword,  and  from  the  cleft  stepped  out  the  rlevil. The devil then proposed to  God  that  they  should  be  brothers and create the world. So they did.°'
The  Transylvanian   gypsies   tell   that  God   was  lonely and
that he did not know :fiow to make  the  world.  When  he  threw his wand down, the devil arose from it. The finns depict God looking at his image in the water and asking his image how to make  the  world.	The Bulgarian legends make  God  speak  to A.is  shadow  as he walks alone:   “Get  up, comrade !”	The devil arose  from   the  shadow  or  God.	The two then divided the Universe  between  themselves:	God would have control of the heavens and the living; the devil of the earth and of the dead. Besides  they  tell  that  it  was  through  the  advice  of   Satan that



20.	Daenhardt, Nntursopen, I (Leipzig-Berlin, 1907) , pp. 338 If. and Eliade, Ttuo otid One, p. 85.
21.	Daenhardt, op. cit., pp. 61 iT; U. Harva, Die relipio.men Vorstel- lungen der Mordtu*tieti, (Helsinki,  1954) ,  pp.  134-135;  referred  to  by  Eliade, op. cit., p. 86, n. 1.

76	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.

God knew where to place the waters in the earth.°2
Irt Gther traditions (Altai-Kizi, Buryats, Voguls and Tran- sylvanian gypsies) , the motif of  god’s  powerlessness  alone  to create is  joined  with  another  theme:  his  ignorance  as  to  where the devil comes from. It is understood that this motif  symbolises god’s noncomplicity in the existence of evil in the world.
On the level of religious folklore, therefore, the  Central Asiatic and European people have preserved a feeling  for  the need to “make a  place for  the  Devil,  not  only  in  the  creation  of the world—which could be understood as the need to explain the origin of evil—but  also close  to God, as a  companion  born  of  God’s  desire  to  escape  from  his  solitude....  What  counts for us is that the  popular  mind  has  been  pleased  to  irr.agine  the loneliness of God and his comradeship  with  the Devil,  and the Devil’s role as God’s servant, collaborator or even chief counsellor; to imagine, moreover, the divine origin of the Devil, for essentially God’s spittle is nothing less than divine;  to  imagine, in fact, a certain “sympathy” between God  and  the Devil. ”°3
Among some other traditions, especially the Oceanian and South Sea islands, as a counterpoint for the goodness of the creator, the devil, usually shown to  be equally  powerful,  is said to dampen the brig•ht work of the creator: spoiling it by introduc- ing  some  element  of  imperfection.	(Analogous to the tares shown by the enemy of the sower in the Gospels) .
It is in this connection that we take up a scrutiny of  our Philippine    myths.	The Bilaan myth, for instance, tells  that Melu-a, the creator, was just about  to  complete  making  the  first two human beings (save for their noses and another part of the anatomy of one of  them)  when  Tan  Tana  or  Tao  Dalom  Tana who lived under the earth appeared on the scene demanding that Melu-a leave the noses to him.  Despite  the  objections  of  Melu-a, he   prevailed  over  him.	But   Tau   Tana  spoiled  the  work.	He placed the noses upside down on the faces o1  the  first  human Deings.	This angered Melu-a who  at  once  left  for  his  home  in the sky, without finishing the still unfinished part of one of the original pair. \Yhen the rains came, the two were almost drowned
22.	Daenhardt, op. c*t., pp. 34 If. & p. 44; W. Schmidt, Ursprung der Goltesidee, vol. xii, pp. 49, and p. 123; ct. also A. Strauss, Die Bul9azen (Leipzig. 1898) , pp. 6 If;  Daenhardt,  op.  cit.,  p.  2 If.  as  cited  by  Eliade,  op. cit., p. 86, nn. 1-4.
23.	Eliade, op. C*t., pp. 87-88.

CREATION   MYTHS  AMONG  THE EARLY  FILIPINOS	77

because  water  ran  down from  their  heads  into  their upturned
noses. Melu-a in pity came down and reset their noses.
Again, in the third version oT the  Tagakaolo creation myth,  we come across two male deities who were responsible for  the creation of  man:  Melu  and  Fiuweigh.  We  can  easily  spot  the latter as  the  bad creator.  He  was  also  responsible  for  the  mak-  ing  of  the  noses,  but  he  placed  them  upside  down.  Nor  would he correct them at the behest of Melu. When Melu reprimanded him  on  the  score  that  this  would  jeopardize   the   lives  o1  the pair when it rained,  he  became  very  angry  and  left  in  a  huff. Melu seized the  noses,  reset  them;  but  he  did  it  in  a  hurry  that he pressed his fingers on the roots of them.
In these two myths the  presence of  the  bad creator  motif  is  quite  evident.  In  others,  perb.aps  the  motif   is  found   only in a very faint  and seminal  form.  We  might  detect  this perhaps in the Tagakaolo myth (also mentioned earlier in chapter two) which depicts the creators as a pair of husband  and  wife: Mengedan  and  Bodek,  together  with a third  party:  Lukbang, a male. The  myth, however,  as reported  by Cole  does not  g°ive us the relationship either  overtly  or  otherwise  of  this  latter  to the  former.  In  thi.s  regard,  we  might   be  permitted   to  hazard a guess which  though  a  guess  is  yet  educated,  that  whenever we have at least two male creators, with or without their female consorts, we might  have a faint  survival  of  this  motif;  although it may never rise higher than the seminal level.
Finally, it is worth noticing chat there appears to be no recorded effort of our Philippine mythmakers to account for evil (physical and moral) in man and in the world  at  large,  by  ap- pealing to the Creator’s (God’s) loneliness and incapability to create,  and  so  necessitating  the  introduction  of  the  bad   creator. In this point the myths of the Central Asiatic and  European peoples on the one hand, and our  own,  on  the  other.  vary greatly.
There  is  one  point  of  agreement,  however.24      The   good  and

24.	After these pages had been sent  to  the  Editor,  I  had  a  discus- sion  with  a  native  Bukidnon  informant,  Mr.  Tranquilino  Sitoy,  member of the National Commission for the Integration of Cultural  Minorities, Marawi City. He related to me a Bukidnon  creation-myth,  to  date  un- known  to  me.  It   goes  this  way:   The  creator,  Hari  ta  mga  Magbabaya or simply, Magbabaya who lived in the  7th  heaven  ‹ikapito  he  longtt) , came down to  earth  and  moulded  the  bodies  of  the  first  people  from clay.    He  wanted  them  to  be  possessed   of  a  sturdy  body  covering.   So

78	FRANCISCO DEMETRIO, S.J.

bad creators are portrayed as co-equal  in  power;  although  it might appear that the task given the bad creator is quite trivial: forming the noses  of  the  first  people.  Yet  upon  examination one realizes that this was a very critical job since the  proper position of thc noses on the faces of the first pair meant their survival  in  case  of  rain.  To  set  their  noses  upside  down  was to jeopardize their lives. This the good creator saw. (CA. also
p. 46, note 17, how Sualla’s sister spoiled his work in the Moro myth) .
3’he action of the  bad  creator,  then,  could  be  taken  as cast- ing  the  pall  of  peril  over  the  work  of   the   good  creator.   Why he  did  is  not  told.    Perhaps   the   mythmakers   were   playing   on a  low  key:  understating  a  very  vital  fact  of   human   existence: the presence  of  evil,  imperfection,  lack  of  harmony,  physical defect and so on. The myth fastens on the  obvious  fact  that Philippine  natives  generally   have   low  flattened   noses.   I*   this be a detect or imperfection (compared  with  the  finely  chiseHed noses of other races) , then it is attributed ultimately to the  pri- mordial  act  of  treachery  on  the  part   of   the   bad   creator  when he set  the  noses  upside  down.  But  the  actual  pressing  down  of the root of the noses (thus flattening them)  was, nevertheless, the result of the good creator’s hurried action in order  to  save mankind from perishing.
In a way, then, because this defect or imperfection is conse- quent upon the action  of  the  good  creator,  perhaps  we  should be allowed to  detect  ñere  an  indirect  effort  to  implicate  the good creator in the existence of defects and imperfections in
before breathing the gift of life into them he went back  to the  sky  in order to secure some hard material tor their  skin.  While he  was  away, his own brother, Mangilala, “the tempter,” came  up  to  the  earth  from the 7th tier of the Underworld where he lived. He spotted the  lifeless forms which his brother had made. .And he  was  pleased.  He thought  with himself: “Should my brother finish what he had begun, he would become more powerful than I.” So he at once  breathed  life  into  the forms o1 clay so that they began to live as human beings. When Mag- babaya returned, he found his creatures already  alive  and  their  cover- ing very trail. He knew it was his own  brother  who  had  spoiled  his work. Instead of destroying them, h• took pity  on  them  and  allowed them to continue as they were  thinly  covered  by  their  skin.  However, he saved the extremities of  their  hands  and  feet  by  providing  them with the covering he had brought down from heaven. This became the nails on their fingers and  their  toes.  But  afterwards  whenever  people are tempted to do what is evil, the Bukidnon say that  this is due  to  the fact that their life was breathed upon tiiem by the Evil One.

CREATION MYTHS AMONG THE EARLY FILIPINOS	79

man and in the world. In  this  way,  perhaps  the  mythmakers were equivalently saying that evil is somehow or other ithin thecompass of the good creator (he saved the first pair from drowning) , and yet not altogether contrGllable  by  him  (his saving action resulted in some evil, although lesser) . Here the mind of  the  Central  Asiatic  and  European  peoples  as  well  as of some of our native tribes seem to be at one.

CONCLUSION
This survey of the creation myths of the Philippines is not exhaustive.	The writer is conscious that there are many more items that could be gathered before a truly  comprehensive  work on  this  subject  could  be written.	But he believes that a start must somehow be made. He believes, too, that our students of folklore and mythology should, in the tradition of Fansler and Bartlett, exert efforts towards situating the body of Philippine myths against the background of comparative mythology and universal  folklore.	In this way, the Filipinos will begin to  realize that their ancient myths and tales, although colored with their own character and culture,  are  nevertheless  part  of  the more worldwide stream of mythology and folklore. That  is why we have expended some time on the analysis of the various iiaotifs throughout  this  study.	It is hoped that this realization of the universal fellowship which our folktales and  myths  enjoy  with the myths and tales of the rest of the world will help towards creating within the filipino soul, a sense of confidence and pride even, in these living mirrors of his past.  He will awaken  to the fact, it is  hoped,  that  his ancient  traditions  are  not  sonnet.hing to be ashamed of, but something to be cherished and valued because they mirror forth the history of the human  spirit  as  it rises up to higher conquests through the continual  struggle  with the forces of ignorance, meanness, and irrationality that has been our lot since the fall.






The Bukidnon Myths of Sickness, Death and Afterlife Author(s): Francisco R. Demetrio
Source: Philippine Studies , Fourth Quarter 1994, Vol. 42, No. 4 (Fourth Quarter 1994), pp. 415-430
Published by: Ateneo de Manila University
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/42633464


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms





























Ateneo de Manila University is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Philippine Studies





This content downloaded from
195.176.29.132 on Fri, 16 Sep 2022 16:21:03 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms



The  Bukidnon  Myths  of Sickness,
Death  and Afterlife
Francisco R. Demetrio, S.J.




The Bukidnon are the people in Central Mindanao whom the Spaniards, especially those who lived in Cagayan de Oro  and Misamis, used to designate as “los Monteses,” the Spanish  equiva- lent of “Bukidnon” or people from the mountains or hills. This same people call themselves Tala-andig or Higaunon. The folk history  of the Bukidnon links them as cousins of the Manobo to the east, the Maguindanao to the south and the Maranao to the west. It also connects them with the people of Misamis Oriental and Cagayan de Oro. As a matter of fact the culture hero of the Cagay-anon and the Misamisnon is the same, namely, Agyu. As a unit, the Bukidnon is found today in the present province of  Bukidnon  which  is bounded on the east by Agusan and Davao Oriental, to the west by the two Lanaos and Cotabato and to  the south  by Cotabato and  Davao,  and to the north by Misamis Oriental.
This article has three parts: the Bukidnon concept of sickness, the Bukidnon concept of death, and their concept of the afterlife.
Before we tackle these topics, allow me first to make this simple observation: sickness naturally leads to death; death also naturally leads to the afterlife. So by these topics we touch on what  theolo- gians ordinarily call eschatology, or the study of the last things (ta escilo). But to adequately describe the last things, we must also touch upon the first things or fa archaic. This is but right because when we touch the last things of a tribe, we cannot but make reference to the first things, because the spirit is what  is featured  in  the  beginning and end of man. For most believers, Christian or Muslim, God the Supreme Spirit, is the creator of the spirit of man. Allow me then to discuss first the following  points as  prcliminaries  to the discussion  of the three topics:
God in the concept of the Bukidnon,  good  and evil as conceived by the Bukidnon, creation as conceived by them, spirit as they

4i5


PHzwrmx s Its

conceive it, man as he is conceived by them and finally,  health  in  the mind of the Bukidnon.
Not all these preliminaries will be discussed separately. For instance when we discuss the concept of God, we shall also include their concept of good and evil; when we discuss creation man  will also be included; when we discuss the concept of spirit, health will also be touched upon.


The Bukidnon Concept of God

From the research of some Philippine scholars in the past sixteen  or more years it has been reported that the Bukidnon believe in three mapr deities who lived in “a circular space of absolute brightness surrounded by a rainbow.” The name of this circular space is the banking, or Bulbulusan Balugtu. Two of them sit inside the bandng, facing each other, while the third is suspended over them, with its wings constantly flapping, thus balancing the banting.  The first  of  the two sitting inside the banting has only one head. He is called Mulug Manguyaw-uyaw (One head and highest Planner) or simply Wagas ha Magbabaya (Pure Almighty). He is the god of good. The second does not look like a human  being. For he  has  ten  heads and a body. His name is Dadanhayan ha Suguy (the God from whom permission is asked) or Takinan Manawbanaw (chief who owns the drooling saliva from his ten tongues) or Gumagang-aw (ten-headed one). He is the god of evil. The third being  has one head,  a  body  and wings. He is hawklike. He too has various names: Takinan ha Tumanod or Bantay (the superior head of the guardian spirits) or Abukay Namintudan (the extremely white god) or Agtayaban Magbabaya (Pure Almighty). In him the power of good and evil are perfectly equal and inherent. He dominates both the good and evil tumanud. Again, as reported by Carmen Ching Unabia (1976) and Victorino Saway (n.d.) the one-headed human-looking god and the ten-headed god are of co-equal power.
Unabia also presented along with her thesis, three volumes of texts: Volume 1 comprising mainly poetry and other shorter pieces with Binukid and English translation, 212 pages, referred to in this article as Unabia 1976 I; Volume 2 comprising Bukidnon Prose Narratives with both Binukid and English translation, or the Mantu£eo or folktales in prose about the heroes and heroines of the tJlagirig which are in English with no Binukid texts; or folktales in Binukid without


BUKIDNON MYTHS

English translations, 621 pages, referred to in this article as Unabia 1976 II; and volume 3 comprising five episodes of the Epic Ulaging  as sung by four mountain bards: Pasal, de la Mance, Himaus and Saway. The text is in both Binukid and English, 829  pages, referred  to in this article as Unabia 1976 II.
This equality of power is quite evident in their act of creating the world, man included. For although it was Mulug Manguyaw-uyaw who planned to expand the banting so that the two would have more space to move about, and in order to give rest  to  the  hawklike  de- ity, for this act  meant also  the creation of  the earth and  the heaven,  it was Gumagang-aw who supplied the  materials.  The  ten-headed one was seated upon the earth material. To get some of it, the hawk- like being had to enter one of the open mouths, go under Gumagang- aw to scoop some earth. After the earth was created, in order to fash- ion the hills, mountains  and  contours  of  the  land, Magbabaya  had to ask Gumagang-aw to give him some of his drooling saliva. After Magbabaya blessed it, the rains fell in torrents, and the dry earth became variably contoured, with gullies and rivers, covered  with green grass plants and trees. They called it Haldan ta Paraiso.
Once again Magbabaya succeeded  in convincing  his companions to create someone like unto them who would take care of the newly made earth. So the three went to secure clay to fashion into man’s body, rattan for his veins and arteries, water for his blood, and the andalogong wood for his bones. Magbabaya told Gumagang-aw to fashion the forms like unto him, with one head. But the shape would not be molded together without the sticky saliva from the mouth of Gumagang-aw. After the ingredients began to mold, the One-Headed deity requested the Ten-Headed One to fashion seven forms after Magbabaya. And it was done. Then Magbabaya enjoined Gumagang- aw to let them lie around  while  he  returned  to  heaven  to meditate on how to perfect the forms. He enjoined his  companions  not  to touch them at all. But while he was away, Gumagang-aw started working on the forms and giving them life. He had just finished working on the sixth when Magbabaya looked down and saw them already living. He hurriedly returned and questioned  Gumagang-aw on what he did. The answer was: “Why, do you think that you alone can perfect these forms?” Magbabaya’s reply was: “Of course, be- cause I was the one who planned the thing, and  it  was  after  my image that they were cast.” Gumagang-aw answered: “True, but the materials that went into them all came from me. Nor would they be molded in your image without my saliva.” Since they could not sct-

417


PHILIPPINE STUDIES

tie the problem by argument, they decided to have a duel. He who wins will be the greater and will finalize the creative act. So they accoutred themselves with shield, sword, scabbard and belts and tried to hit each other with intense purpose and prowess. But  after  the fight, no one was able to inflict harm on the other. Seven times they went around the earth, still  to no avail. They  returned  to the Haldan ta Paraiso to examine any damage done to either. Their shields, their belts, their swords all melted and sank into the earth. But  neither could defeat the other. Finally reason prevailed. They decided to amicably settle the case. The One-Headed Being said to the Ten- Headed One: “Since you started working on the six figures, finish them, while I work on the seventh  one left.”  Magbabaya  endowed the seventh figure with the gift of intelligence. He was also given freedom to follow the path of good or evil (Unabia Thesis 1976, 198). He became the first human being. And he called him Adam. Seeing that Adam was alone and did not have a companion, he put him to sleep, took a rib from him, and turned it into a woman.  She  was called Eve. Then he gave them permission to marry each other and bring up offspring (Unabia thesis 1976, 199).
There are definite Christian vestiges  in  this  myth.  The  three  dei- ties seem to be  derived  from  the  Christian  Trinity.  The  third  Person is often depicted as a dove. In the Bukidnon  he is  like a  hawk. The  name of the first man is Adam and his wife, Eve. The  beautiful  world that resulted from the rains and flood was called Haldan ta Paraiso. Neither the Jesuit missionaries in the nineteenth century, nor the early twentieth century American scholar Cooper Cole depict a threefold godhead. Be that as it may, we can point to these elements as quite certain: first, that good  and  evil  for  the  Bukidnon  are  found  within the godhead; that  good  and  evil  are  co-equal  in  nature  in  that  both of them are capable of  producing  life;  and  third  that  man  is  there- fore subject to the influence of both good and evil.
In the Unabia myth, equality of power between good and evil lies  in the fact that both depend on the other to bring about the act of creation of the world, and of man. Gumagang-aw could  give life to thc six figures he was working on. When Magbabaya questioned Gumagang-aw for working on the six figures, the latter made it clear that he too had as much power to make perfect their creatures as Magbabaya. In the ensuing duel, neither of the  two  could  damage the other. Thus an amicable settlement was resorted to.
I would like to bring in another creation myth which I collected from a native Bukidnon; Mr. Tranquilino Sitoy, a qative of Claveria,

41a


BUKIDNON MYTHS

Misamis Oriental in 1969. Sitoy informed me that this myth was very ancient among his people.
Mr. Sitoy reports: The creator, Hari ta mga Magbabaya, or sim-  ply, Magbabaya who lived in the seventh heaven (ikapito ha langit), came down to earth and molded the bodies of the first people from clay. He wanted them, however, to possess a  sturdy  body covering. So before breathing the gift of life into them, he  went  back  to  the sky in order to secure some hard material for  their  skin. While  he was away, his own brother Mangilala, the “tempter,” came up to the earth from the seventh aer of the Underworld which  was his abode. He spotted the lifeless forms which his brother  had  fashioned.  And he was pleased. He thought to himself: “Should my brother  finish what he has begun, he would become  more  powerful  than I.” So he at once breathed life into the forms of  clay  so  that  they  began  to live as human beings. When Magbabaya returned, he found his crea- tures already alive and their body covering very  frail.  He  knew  it was his brother who had spoiled his work. Instead  of  destroying them, he took pity on them and allowed them  to continue  as they were thinly covered by their skin. However,  he saved  the extremi- ties of their hands and feet by providing them with the covering  he had brought down from his home in heaven.  This became  the nails  on their fingers and toes. But afterwards, whenever people  are tempted to do what is evil, the Bukidnon say that this is due  to the  fact that their life was breathed into them by the Evil One (Demetrio 1990, 79, note 69).
From this myth it is clear that there are at least two deities: Magbabaya and Mangilala; the god of good and the god  of  evil. These two are equally powerful: they can both create life; they are even said to be brothers. They are jealous of their equal power. Each seems to try to make his power greater. Magbabaya provides his creatures with thick covering so that they could not become easy prey of the machinations of the Evil One. The Evil One, on the other hand, when he saw that his brother  would  gain  an ascendancy  over  him by supplying a protection against his machinations, tries to mt›llify this potential ascendancy by breathing life into his  creatures  with their very thin skin as covering. Thereby he neutralizes his brother’s potential ascendancy.
However, the fact that  his brother  had  protected  the  extremities of their fingers and their toes is symbolic of an ascendancy of Magbabaya over Mangilala. There are parts of the Bukidnon  spirit that are impermeablc by the Evil One. This part is at the extreme of

419


PHIMPPiNE STUDIES

the spirit, namely, his freedom. Man’s freedom is only permeable from within the spirit of man himself, not from outside by the devil. This permeability is possible only if the human spirit itself willingly acquiesces to be influenced.
The six forms which the ten-headed god had fashioned and to whom he had given life became the six engRnlo who oversee the parts of nature that are related to the daily lives of the people: talofiugfa, is the guardian of the soil or earth; Jghahosul is the guard- ian of the plants; Bulalakaw takes care of the rivers and bodies of water and all living creatures they contain; Mamemelig watches over the forest and its trees; Lelnwig has care of the bees and their honey; and MamaRndi is in charge of whatever wealth man acquired in- cluding his cattle, carabaos, crops and farmhouse (Unabia thesis 1976, 199; Saway “Belief system,” 28).
Since these spirits are the products of both the good and evil gods, they also partake of their double nature. The engkanto who watch over the things of nature have to be implored by man, their permis- sion sought to avail himself of their goods.

The Bukidnon Concept of Man

Again from the research of Philippine scholars in the last seven- teen years, man not only has a body but he also has a spirit. In lact we are told that he has seven spirits, or makatu. When all seven makatu are found in his body, the man is well and healthy. In his sleep, some of the makatu may leave the body and undergo experi- ences both pleasant and frightening. These experiences are recorded in the dreams of the person. Some evil spirits may lure the makatu to go with them and be imprisoned in a balete tree. Thus the per- son becomes sick. It is the shaman who must perform healing ritu- als to rescue the makatu from the evil spirits. The Bukidnon believe that death takes place when all the makatu are no longer inside the body. They seem to merge into one makatu and proceed to Mt. Balatukan for judgment (Cole 1956, 91—92).

The Bukidnon Concept of Spirit

We can postulate five kinds of spirits. First, the three deities who created the world, the guardian spirits and man himself. Second, the minor gods or deities, namely the six guardian spirits who have

420


BUIODNONMYTHS

control over the soil, the crops, referral wealth, the forest and wild- life, the bees and honey, the waters and their resources. Third,  the other spirits. They are all part of creation and  are both  benevolent  and malevolent to human beings. The good spirits  belong  to Wagas ho Magbabaya; while the evil,ones belong to Gumagang-aw. Once a man becomes close to spirits of evil nature he will be entrusted with evil power. He becomes a sorcerer. These spirits may also be called tumanud (guardian spirits). Some are identified like Mulin-ulin who gives guidance and right direchc›ns to a person (Unabia 1976, I:144); Batuwa who is responsible for strength and good health; Balakat who also protects man’s health against evil spirits; Dumalandung, the constant companion and security of man; Talabusaw who  provides him with unsurpassed strength and courage against the enemy. Other spirits protect a person according to his role and function in the com- munity. Thus a datu has a tumalambung who provides him with dominating power in the community (Saway “Belief system,” 30).
The evil spirits that do harm to human beings  collectively  are called humahabay or agpuun. Other evil spirits who cause the endeavors of man to fail or accidents to happen are also collectively known as sumisigbat, sumasagelang and tumitigal-i. Though they do evil to man they can be controlled by performing a particular ritual (Saway “Belief system” 30).
Wagas ha Magbabaya is the origin of all good power; Gumagang- aw is the source of all evil power. Agtayabun Migbaya is the supe-  rior head of all guardian spirits. The power of the guardian spirits,  both good and bad, is dominated by Takinan hu Bantay. Powerful datus and hayI«n owe their power mainly to Agtayabun Migbaya through the benevolent tuma nud or leger. The tumanud of man is his immediate protector. He will not abandon man so  long  as  he performs his spiritual obligations.

The Bukidnon Concept of Health
Man is in the state of good  health  so long  as the pitu  ha  makatu or his seven spirits are dwelling in his  body.  When  some  of  them are lured by souls of the dead or by evil  spirits  who  imprison  them in their abode or in the balete  tree,  the  person  gets sick.  He  is also in good health if the guardian spirits of health like  Batuwa  and Balakat take care of him.  Rituals  like  agrnnRtu  are  meant  to lure the makatu to remain within the person’s body (Saway “Belief system,” 30; Banaynal 1978).

421


PHILIPPINE STUDIES

The materials of this part of the article were supplied by an inter- view with a native Talaandig chieftain of Sungko, Lantapan, Bukidnon, Datu Makapukaw, last 18 September 1992.
Sickness for the Bukidnon is caused by many factors. These fac- tors could be either by commission or omission. But before we take this up, there is another cause of sickness which I would call lack or absence. We said the human individual has seven souls or spirits. When all seven are present, he is in the state of good health.  But  when one or more are absent then he can get sick, especially if the absence is prolonged. How is the absence brought about?  During sleep the hiniatu go out of the person. They could be decoyed by  some spirit of a dead ancestor or relative and brought to the land  of the dead. Or they could be caught by the evil spirits and brought to their abode or imprisoned in a balete tree. The pagm«Rfu ritual or inspiriting ritual is performed to invoke the straying makatus to re- turn to the body. Once they are inside, the other potentially harmful spirits of the earth are asked not to harm them for they have already returned. This ritual is also addressed to the guardian spirits of the human body who are called pangunguyamu or panJiIiton to make the makatu return (Saway 'Talaandig,” 54).
There are factors of commission as causes  of  sickness. One can get sick if the soil is tilled without the necessary rituals. If one should take a bath without permission from  Bulalakaw  and  the other spir- its of water one is liable to sickness. One can get sick if he despises ugly persons or old people. Or for committing serious actions like killing a person without undergoing a husinj or settlement by the datu and elders. Or for taking one’s sister to wife without the necessary payments according to the tradition of the elders in order to appease the Minantay hu Batasan, the guardian spirit who watches man’s actions in regard to customary law. Sickness can also result from making fun of the heroes of the epic, like Walo.
In a story related by Carmen Unabia, people, during a get-together where there was eating and drinking, were joking about the hero Walo. He was so-called because when he was hungry his waist band could be wound eight times around. But after he has eaten, and  he was a voracious eater, it can go only once around. They were thus enjoying themselves at the hero’s expense. Suddenly a very bright rainbow shaped like a hammock appeared with the hero on it. He berated them for making a joke at his expense.  He told  them  to go on with their joking, but they should not be sorry for anything that would happen to them on the morrow. After the sun was up,

422


BUKIDNON  MYTHS

people saw many cracks on the earth and many  large pointing fin- gers were seen emerging from the cracks. Soon after this all the peo- ple became sick and died. Only a young man called Salamantaw who did not participate in the jokes remained alive (Unabia 1976, II: 34-35). Sickness comes when one repeats words which curse oneself, or when one curses (panghimaraotl the powerful spirits. Sickness can come from mentioning the name of tamanud  that  is forbidden to mention, or  to  mention its name in a  trivial  manner. Sickness,  too, can  come
from the sin of elders which have not been subjected to judgment.
There are also factors of omission as causes of sickness (from an interview with Datu Makapukaw). Failing to ask permission from Bulalakaw and the other spirits of water can render one liable to sick- ness. Sickness can also be due to failure to follow and respect the elders, which can lead one to make serious mistakes.  It  can  also result from failing to help another who is badly in need of help, and also for failure to pray to the powerful Magbabaya.
Sickness can result from neglecting to  perform  the  yearly  prayers: for the remission of sins; the  yearly act of  thanksgiving  to  the spirits  for blessings received; or the yearly ritual of pagpamahandi to the guardian  spirit  of  wealth  and  good  harvests;  and  finally  for  failure to give thanks on one’s birthday. Often  sickness  is  the  result  of  fail- ing to give the bride price in marriage; or failure to pay a debt of conscience I utang sa Rhuhiit-on). Also sicknesses can come from sulk- ing, from sadness,  from  anger.  Or  sickness  can  be  due  to  the  curse of the elders.
Sometimes a person can also get sick (tungod kay ang  tawo salsalon sa Magbabaya sa tuyo nga palig-onon siya. O usbon  ang iyang kinaiya moagi usab siya sa sakit.) This is indeed “a testing on the part of the  Almighty of  a  person  in order  to strengthen  him or to bring about a change in his nature.” This can be verified in the  myth of Juan Pikas or the One-Sided Man. He was born only a halfman from head  to toe. Growing  up and  finding  himself  in such a condition, so different from his companions, he asked permission from his parents to go and seek God in  order  to  find  out  why  he was thus created. On the way he met a horse with a very short tether but which was very stout; and a horse with a  very  long  rope,  but very thin. Having heard from Juan that he was going  to God,  they also requested him to ask God why they  were so. Afterwards Juan  met two persons: one who lived by the crossroad and who was kind and good to everyone  who  passed  by, and  another  who  lived  near a high waterfall and who killed the people who pusscd by. Both men

42D


PHIMPPINE STUDIES

wanted Juan to ask God if they would reach salva0on  acang the way  they both did. Once Juan reached  the land  of  God  he asked  him  why he was created only a  halfman.  God  replied  that  he  did  so  only  to test if Juan had  a  good  mind.  His  coming  to  God  in  order  to  find out the reason was an instance of possessing a  good  mind. Thus God then and there made Juan into a complete human being (Unabia 1976, II: 112).


The Bukidnon Concept of Death

In general we can say that death is the permanent  absence  from  the body of the seven makatu or spirits. From the creation myth as reported by Unabia, the good and evil god creators had an agree- ment: any person who would not conform to the laws and order of creation would become the subject of the evil god. When he dies he will become the subject of Gumagang-aw. The ten heads of Gumagang-aw, the evil god, symbolize the unstable state that a per- son who becomes his subject will experience.
We have at least two oral traditions telling of the Bukidnon’s idea of death. The first was supplied by a certain Mang Poldo Vega, a native of Balingasag, Oriental Misamis, in northern Mindanao, which was collected sometime in 1946. The elders of the Bukidnon main- tain that when a man dies, his soul must make its way to Mt. Balatukan. This purney is long and tedious, full of many obstacles. Some Bukidnon beliefs say that it takes at least a week for this jour- ney. First the soul must pass through Liyang, a huge rock, in upper Napaliran. Thence, it proceeds to Binagbasan where the Tree of Record grows. Here the soul  makes a notch on the tree  to show  that it has arrived. Then it goes to Pinagsayawan, where it dances  the ritual dance of atonement for sins. It does not stop dancing until it begins to sweat profusely. Next it undergoes a haircut by Panam- paran; thence it proceeds to Kumbirahan where it partakes in a banquet to satiety. Then the god Andalapit conducts the soul to Kadatuan which is at the foot of Mt. Balatukan. Here the gods pass judgment on the soul. If it is adjudged good, it is sent to Dunkituhan, at the summit of Balatukan,  the cloud-capped  stairway  to heaven. If it is adjudged wicked, it is sent to a river on the other side  of Balatukan where it is punished.  Along  with  the other  wicked  souls it is made to fetch water night and  day  with a bucket  whose bottom is perforated (Demetrio 1990, 100).

424


BUKIDNON MYTHS

The second oral tradition reports: When a person dies his seven makatu or girnuRd converge into one and begin to  make  the  jour- ney to Baya, the abode of the dead which is governed by Gemogunal, the governor of the dead. Before arriving at Baya, the makatu passes several places where he indicates the proof of his journey. The first place he arrives at is called Panampad, the place where he cuts a portion of his hair. After cutting his hair, he may proceed  to Panigbasa, the place where he stabs something  to  indicate  that  he has passed by there. This particular belief reflects the practice of the Bukidnon of providing the dead person with a  bolo  inside  the cof- fin. Others believe he must make a mark on a tree or on a soft lime- stone. After Panigbasa, he proceeds to  Pangandeay.  It  is here  that the person who died may express his farewell by singing  the staging or any other song. In case the dead person does not know how to express himself by any artistic means, he may do so in any other manner he knows. As soon as the traveling makatu passes by Pangandeay, he arrives finally at Balatukan or Baya, the land of Gemogunal or Gememba, director of the land of the dead. He may spend the rest of his life here (Saway “Belief system,” 36).

The Bukidnon Concept of the Afterlife
From what  we know of  the Bukidnon, it appears that  the afterlife is a continuation of the kind of life one has led while living on this earth. We are told, for instance, that the social status on earth will continue in the afterlife: the datus will continue to be datus; the slaves and the lower classes will continue  to  be so;  the rich  will  continue to be rich and the poor to be poor (Saway “Talaandig,” 56).
However, there is a tale that tells of a  rich  and  greedy  woman who died. When she reached the underworld  she was always  hun- gry. No one offered her something to eat. Only the peels, bones and feathers and hair of the food and meat she ate on  earth  were given her. When she complained of this treatment, she was reminded that while still living she never shared her wealth with others. She was given another chance to mend her ways. On the  way  to  the cem- etery those following were surprised because the bearers of the bicr stopped. They heard someone from  within  the coffin. They  opened  it and the dead woman was alive, asking for a glass of water. They gave it to her. She returned to her house and from a greedy selfish woman she became most generous, sharing her cattle, her granaries with the poor and the needy (Saway “Belief system,” 38).

425


PHILIPPINE STUDIES

We have also mentioned above that those who follow their reli- gious and social obligations upon dying become  subjects of  Wagas ha Magbabaya; and those who live against the order of creation and neglect to do their spiritual obligations become the subjects of Gumagang-aw, or the ten-headed god of evil. How, one may ask, is this separation brought about? Again, from the myth we know that upon arriving at Kadatuan at the foot of Mt. Balatukan,  the  judg- ment is made. Here it seems that  the departed  souls  judged  worthy of heaven are either sent to Dunkituhan, at the summit of Mt. Balatukan which is  the stairway  to heaven, or  else  the  soul is sent to the other side of Mt. Balatukan to a river where  it is  made  to  draw water from the river by  means of  containers  whose  bottoms ore perforated. In this task the souls sweat profusely and the river smells fishy because of their sweat (Saway “Belief  system,”  38). After they have expiated their sins, they can become subjects of Gemogunal, the director of the land of the dead. This  is, however, only a conjecture. From the above discussions, perhaps we could conjecture that those sent to Dunkituhan become subjects of  the god of good; and those sent to the other side of the Mt. Balatukan and punished become subjects of Gumagang-aw. However, are  the souls of the Bukidnon once deaned of their sins then deserving to become subjects of the good god, or do they remain subjects of the god of evil or of Gemogunal? This is not clear at all. From the Olaging we know that Lagonga, Agyu’s father, now dead and filled with intense long- ing to visit his relatives in Nalandangan, was permitted by Gemogunal, governor of the dead, to come back disguised as an enemy warrior. He and Agyu fought. Langobaan, god of thunder, mediated between them. They recognized each other as father  and son. They both went to the alel for a general reunion with the clan (Opeña 1979, 2450-2538).

The Afterlife In the xplcs
In this regard the term “afterlife” is a misnomer. Why? Because ordinarily, the afterlife refers to life “after death.” In the Bukidnon epic, the Olaging, the clan of Agyu, the Bukidnon hero, became im- mortalized, that is, they became in nature like the diwata. They were no longer subject to death, nor to hunger. They became so after they had partaken of the food of immortality: namely, chewing the mamaen given by Magbabaya or partaking of the meat of the myshcal pig Makadingding which was sent by Magbabaya in order to kill the

426


BUKIDNON MYTHS

people who were eventually resuscitated by Agyu. The pig was over- come eventually by  Agyu. From being a very  huge swine,  it became a very small one. Agyu cooked  it and  distributed  a slice of  its meat to all his followers, thus rendering them immortals. We know how Agyu himself when he died at the hands of  the  daughter  of  his enemy Sawalan who cut off his head  and  threw  him  into  the  sea and was eventually brought to shore by kindly crocodiles,  was restored to life by his son Anilao Mayan Anlao who placed a betel chew prepared by his mother in his mouth and prayed  that  it  may find the seat of his life in order to bring him back to life. And this happened (Unabia 1976, III: 746-48).
We have another case of Insay or Mungan, the wife of Banlak,
the brother of Agyu, whose rhythmical body was fashioned by  a witch, and who left his wife and no longer  cared  for  her after  she had contracted leprosy. Because of her misery, Magbabaya took pity on Insay. The god sent her guardian spirits who gave her mamaen. This cured her of her sickness and she was also immortalized. As a sign of this tremendous  event,  Lena,  her  brother-in-law, who came to bring her provision in her lonely hut,  was surprised  as he neared her place because the piece of venison he brought jumped out of the basket and ran away as a whole deer. The honey he was carrying spilled and a swarm of honey  bees flew  away. When  Lena  bchcld the hut, it was no longer a makeshift lean-to, but a  huge  palace, arched by a rainbow.
Finally the spirit boat or salimbal was lowered by the ditrata from heaven to fetch the clan of  Agyu.  The  whole  clan  was brought  up to heaven. Upon arrival there, they could not see the Magbabaya because one of the clan had broken the taboo. Before boarding the salimbal he had bitten off the iron tip of his kampilan which he kept inside his mouth. As a result the whole clan were sent back to earth. But they were assigned a special spot on earth called Nalandangan. There they settled after constructing once again a village and the large tulogan. There they do not have to eat  like ordinary  pcoplc. The be- tel nut chew would be their food. They can be invaded again, to to  war, fight and be killed. But they can be resttired to life by magic  rites. They can marry and be given in marriage. Like Agyu ‹and his clan they practice polygamy, but with the rules and requirements of Malay conjugal union: the first wife is likc the older sister of all the wives of her husband; she should be consulted and should give her consent when he wants  to marry  again; he  must  treat  them equally in regard material goods, and other things.

427


PHILIPPINE STUDIES

By way of complement to the Bukidnon afterlife, I append two reports on the Bukidnon heaven. The first by Luis Pasal and collected by Unabia and the other by Datu Kinolintang and collected by Victorino Saway.
Pasal claims that the heaven is supported on two trees. It has seven layers. The first is the heaven of happiness and joy, the home of the diwata. The second heaven is that of beautiful designs which beau- tiful girls copy on the clothes of their brothers. The third is the soft heaven, home of the witch and troublemakers. The fourth is the technicolored heaven, abode of Lemandeb the war-spirit (Talabusaw). The fifth is the horizontal heaven, home of Lintugut, director of thun- der and lightning. The sixth heaven is the domed or circular heaven where Tinambulong, patron of Olaging singers lives. And  the high- est heaven on the seventh level is the abode of the Almighty (Magbabaya) who wills everything (Demetrio 1986, 48-49).
We could compare this with the heaven as zepozled by Victorino Saway from the account of his late father, Datu Kinolintang. He says there are also seven levels to heaven. But it  seems  that  he  mentions only the last three upper levels: the topmost heaven known as Luwayluway hu Langit or Ugbusan hu Malayen, dwelling place  of Wagas ha  Magbabaya,  the  sixth  heaven,  or  Nanangenen,  abode  of the heroes of the folktales; and the fifth heaven called  Ulagingen heavenly dwelling of the immortal epic heroes like Agyu, Pamulao, Banlak, Lena, and others (Saway “Talaandig,” 2—3).
We must keep in mind, however, that in Pasal’s version, the pa- tron of the Olaging singers is found on the sixth level; while in Kinolintang's version the sixth level is given to the folktale heroes, and the epic heroes are consigned to the fifth layer.
We should also mention that Agyu  and  his clan did  not  remain  in heaven but were sent back to the village of Nalandangan where they are still dwelling today. However, before boarding the snlirrihal they had already been linibong or immortalized. They therefore did not experience death.
Again from the Olaging we know that  just  men  who  have died do not necessarily go up to heaven. In the episode of the Battle of Nalandangan, Agyu fought with the spirit of his own father, Langonga. He had returned disguised as an enemy warrior. He returned because he could no longer sustain the longing  he felt  for his offspring in Nalandangan. It was from Gomogunal that  he obtained permission to return in disguise.


428


BUIODNONMYTHS

Kinolintang mentions two other layers of heaven which are lower than the first three levels. Malayen ha Imbunsud or Langit  ha Nakatana is the heaven that touches the earth. This should  corre- spond to Pasal’s first level, the home of the diwatas. The other heaven mentioned by Kinolintang is called Malayen ha Insibay or Langit ha Inkusina or extended heaven. However,  it is not  stated  which  layer is occupied by this heaven (Saway 'Talaandig,” 5).
From the Olaging it also appears that the just  who die remain  in the land of Baya and that they do not go up to heaven. This is clear from Langonga’s visit to Nalandangan disguised as an enemy.


flORCiUSiOR

We have given a brief glimpse of how the Bukidnon in Central Mindanao regard the last things. We have also seen by way of pre- liminaries their first things, which are implied in  the last. The con- cept of God found in the versions of  Tranquilino Saway  has obvi- ous Christian influence in his three-personed Godhead: a one-headed, a ten-headed and a hawklike being balancing the banting where the two are seated by continually flapping his wings. On the other hand Tranquilino Sitoy’s godhead: the creator God Magbabaya and his younger brother Mangilala, the tempter, appear to be more natively original, equally powerful and with dualistic implication: the one a good creator, the other a bad one. This is more in keeping with the concept of the good and bad creator, a motif very common in folk- lore all over the world. Their equality in power is seen  in their abil- ity to produce human life, found in both the Saway and Sitoy versions. Every human being is in-dwelt by seven spirits or makatu, how these spirits in death merge into one and proceed to Baya  or Balatakan for judgment. The spirits created by the evil god (Saway) are placed over the material things (soil, plants, water, forest and games, bees and honey, wealth) which  subserve  the  needs of  man. By judicious use of rituals and ceremonies a friendly and beneficent relationship is built up between the guardians of these natural re-
sources and man.
In the Bukidnon concept, sickness can be caused either by the absence of one or more of the seven spirits in man or by man’s com- mitting certain acts contrary to custom or his omitting certain acts prescribed by custom. Death itself is the permanent absence from the


429


PHzIrrmx sums

human body of the seven  spirits. This absence  includes  its  journey to Baye or Mt. Balatukan, the judgment the spirit undergoes and the final destination in Baya, under the headship of  the god  Gemogunal of all the just dead. We do not know whether those who are not admitted to Mt. Balatukan because they are unworthy and are con- signed to expiate their sins are eventually sent up to the summit of Balatukan and or to heaven or whether they  remain  outside  of heaven forever. From the epics, however, we know that in the end when the salimbal, the spirit boat, returns to fetch Agyu and his people, they will all be brought to heaven on earth or Nalandangan.





A
ABAK – (Mandaya, Bagobo) A malevolent or demonic spirit of the Mandayas (Mindanao); b) the proper name given by the Bagobos to one of their deities.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

ABAT – (Waray, Eastern Samar) A Waray aswang that sucks internal organs. Big red bulging eyes, fingers long and bony, and dishevelled hair. Detaches from lower body. The creature is said to resemble a beautiful maiden by day and marries an unsuspecting man in order to live close to human communities. She goes to bed early with her spouse, and one informant from Samar reported that the creature quietly gets out of bed at moonrise, opens an eastern window, and stares at the newly-risen moon until her lower body drops off. The abats of a town can visit neighboring towns. They fly over nipa houses in which live pregnant women.
(Source: The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology and The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

ABAT – (Tingguian) Abat are numerous spirits who cause sore feet and headache. Salono and bawi are built for them. The spirits of Ībal, who live in Daem, are responsible for most sickness among children, but they are easily appeased with blood and rice. The Ībal ceremony is held for them.
(source: The Tinguian: Social, Religious, and Economic Life of a Philippine Tribe, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1922)

ADA – (Tagalogs) The term used for a “fairy”. Thought to be derived from the word “engkantada.” It was more likely taken from the Spanish word “hada” (fairy).
(source: Ancient Beliefs and Customs of the Tagalogs, Jean-Paul G. Potet, Lulu Press, 2017)

AGALON HAYOPAN – (Bicol) Inactive aswangs, they prefer to live right by the river where crocodiles are plentiful. They desire to eat human flesh and employ crocodiles to kill people and discreetly bring their flesh to them.
(Source: Filipinas Volume 12, Page 53, Filipinas Pub., 2003)

AGHOY – (Waray) The East Visayans call them aghoy. They look like little men and women. Their skin is fair and smooth. They have deep-set eyes, blue, green, or brown. They have high noses and yellow hair. Their feet are bare and they dress like villagers. They live in trees near villages. They come into a village after dark. They speak to men in whistles. They make friends with kind people. They give their friends wonderful gifts. They give them magic pots always full of food. They give them magic purses always full of gold.

The term likely comes from the term “panaghoy” (lament/ mourn). “Whistling at night is prohibited lest an engkanto answers. Then something bad will happen to you. (Ayaw gayud panaghoy sa gabii kay tubagon ka ug engkantos. Unya may piligro nga modangat kanimo.)”
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990 | The Encyclopedia of Philippine Folk Beliefs & Customs Vol. 1, Demetrio, Xavier University Press, 1991)


AGHOY
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
AGTA – (Eastern Visayas) On September 18, 1963, Virginia Taglucop told folklorist Maximo Ramos that she and her sister were walking on a lonely footpath in Barrio Palanas, Masbate, in 1957 when they saw an agta sitting under a big santol tree (Sandoricum koetjape). The creature stood and walked toward them for a distance of twenty-five meters before they ran away. The creature was black and twice as tall as an ordinary man. The agta of the East Visayas are said to live in mangroves and swampy places. The agta was reported to have carried a rattan cane – the only Philippine creature shown by the data to be provided with this elegant appurtenance. The Agta reported most often in Leyte smoked a large cigar and it can usually be seen in a standing position. Benilda Moreno (from Barrio Gabas, Baybay, Leyte) said that an agta once ordered some night fishermen not to proceed, blocking their river route with large trees which it had knocked down to give force to its demand. Virginia Taglucop reported seeing an agta smoke, between eight in the evening and four the next morning, under a santol tree in which it resided. Although they share similar traits, the Agta should not be considered a ‘variety’ of kapre, but instead one of the many tall, black, tree dwellers that have been (mis)classified under that umbrella term.

The Agta has also been described as a supernatural man of dark complexion and extraordinary size inhabiting trees, cliffs, or empty houses. He is said to play practical jokes on people or kidnap them. He has a large cigar in his mouth. In Bacolod, people believe the Agta is human, giant and very black. He stays in a tall tree, wears a hat, and smokes a pipe. He is harmless as long as people do not harm him.

As a protection against the agta, a bottle filled with mercury (asugui) should always be carried, because they are afraid of mercury.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990 | The Encyclopedia of Philippine Folk Beliefs & Customs Vol. 1, Demetrio, Xavier University Press, 1991)

AKOP – (Tingguian) Akop is evil. He has a head, long slimy arms and legs, but no body. He always frequents the place of death, and seeks to embrace the spouse of the deceased. Should he succeed, death follows quickly. To defeat his plans, the widow is closely guarded by the wailers; she also sleeps under a fish net as an additional protection against his long fingers, and she wears seeds which are disliked by this being.
(source: The Tinguian: Social, Religious, and Economic Life of a Philippine Tribe, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1922)

ALALIA or ARARIA – (Ilokano) Likewise called in the Ilocano language as the spirit of the dead, which on the third or ninth day of its death visits its house and all of the places where it had stayed while alive. The howling of dogs announces the presence of this specter.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

ALAN – (Tingguian) The skin on the face of a wizened old alan is described in a Tingguian tale as having been tough like carabao hide. The alan’s long arms had fingers pointing back from the wrist, horrible to look at. Elsewhere, the alan are said to be as large as people but have wings and can fly. Their toes are at the back of their feet, and their fingers point backward from their
wrists with long nails. The alan is said to have lived in the depths of a dark forest where people seldom went. They hang upside down from a tree like a bat. In a tale “The Alan and the Hunters,” a man climbed to the top of a forest tree and saw smoke rising in the distance. He and his companion then walked toward the smoke and reached the house of a female alan. They killed her and found a jar of beads; and another jar of gold in her house.

The Lepanto tale (Benguet Province) “How a Young Man Escapes a Cannibal” tells that the alan lived in a house of pure gold in Kitlungan. They alan are rumoured to adopt children who have been lost in the jungle. This cannibalistic version of the alan in Northern Luzon should be quite a character to draw—rough skinned, long-armed, winged, but cravely afraid of crabs, his hands and feet set wrong end forward, when asleep hanging upside down from a branch like an enormous bat or bird, and yet courting and being accepted by village girls and able to trade off his green mangoes for human male babies.

They are said to procreate by collecting menstrual blood, aborted fetuses, and afterbirth from humans, which they form into Alan children.

There is a regional variant of the alan in northwestern Pangasinan and La Union. They describe these creatures as taller than most people, their complexion is a bit darker than the rest of the local community, but they have eyes that are light/fair (amber or light brown). They seem to live in tribal communities and travel during full moon or sometimes at dusk, beating drums and bells.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, 1990 Phoenix Publishing | A Study in Tinguian Folk-Lore, Fay-Cooper Cole

ALAN – (Kalinga) The aLan are cannibal or ghoul spirits that figure largely in myths and folktales as carrying away or devouring souls and as producing many kinds of transformations in men and in themselves.
(source: THE KALINGAS: Their Institutions and Customs Laws, Roy Franklin Barton, The University of Chicago Press, 1949)

ALLAWIG – (Ilokano) The allawig, also known as silew-silew (‘lighter’), is a ball of fire moving across open fields or through wooded areas at night. Unlike fire, it ignites nothing it
touches. It is commonly red but may be blue, green, orange, or yellow. Unlike a real flame, too, it is round rather than peaked. It may burn bright or just flicker. One under its spell follows it and is then led round and round until he falls down in exhaustion. The creature may also lead a man into a mudhole or swamp where he can drown. One under the spell of the allawig should take off his clothes and put them on inside out. The creature will then leave and he will find his way home, which may prove to be just around the corner after all.
(source: Philippine Demonological Legends and their Cultural Bearings, Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)

AMALANHIG – (Western Visayas, Hiligaynon) The amalanhig —or maranhig—of the Hiligaynon is said to be a dead woman who has lived on because no one inherited her vampiric state when she was dying. She lives in the woods, quietly enters villages at night, and sucks the blood of those asleep.

When about to die, a vampire asks a close relative to take over her vampirism. If no one agrees to do so, she lives on and remains a vampire.

One should climb up a crooked tree when pursued by the Hiligaynon vampire—the amalanhig—since her joints are stiff and she cannot negotiate the crook in the tree. If no crooked tree is around, one being pursued by her should follow a crooked path, for the vampire cannot follow such a path because she cannot bend her legs to turn. Or one should jump into a river or lake since an amalanhig fears bodies of water.

“An old man from a distant barrio in one of our towns is known throughout as a maranhig. This man is old and cannot die unless someone in his family inherits his power. Whenever he begs, his children to take his power, saliva comes out of his mouth and reaches down to the ground. The saliva is long like a rope and sticky. His sons married women from outside the province who did not know about their sickness. His daughters have become spinsters and cannot marry unless one of them inherits her father’s power.

Only one in the family will become a maranhig and will do as he does. The old man used to make those who talked about them sick.”
(source: Philippine Demonological Legends and their Cultural Bearings and The Aswang Complex in Philippine Folklore, Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)

AMDAG – (Ibaloy) Nature spirits that travel with the wind who carry nets to catch the souls of a person.
(source: Ethnography of the Major Ethnolinguistic Groups in the Philippines, Arsenio L. Sumeng-ang, New Day Publishers, 2003)

AMOMONGO – (Western Visayas) The term amomongo has been used to describe a gorilla in traditional Visayan folktales, such as “Amomongo and Iput-Iput (The Ape and the Firefly). In Brgy. Sag-ang, La Castellana, Negros Occidental, the same term was used to describe a man-sized creature that attacked two residents and disemboweled goats and chickens in the area. Elias Galvez and Salvador Aguilar reported to Mayor Alberto Nicor and the police that they were separately attacked by a “hairy creature with long nails,” on the nights of June 9 and 10, 2008. Brgy. Sag-ang residents described the creature to be about 5 feet and 4 inches tall, and looks like a monkey. Sag-ang Brgy. Capt. Rudy Torres has confirmed reports of the existence of such creature, called amomongo (gorilla) by residents. Brgy. Sag-ang in La Castellana is located at the foot of Mt. Kanlaon , which has many caves where the creature could live.
(source: Philippine Folk Literature: An Anthology, Eugenio, UP Press 2007 | sunstar.com.ph “Creature terrorizing residents of farms”)

AMPASIT – (Ibaloy) Nature spirits that dwell in caves and are believed to mislead people who are traveling at night or at dusk.
(source: Ethnography of the Major Ethnolinguistic Groups in the Philippines, Arsenio L. Sumeng-ang, New Day Publishers, 2003)

ANANANGGAL – (Bicol) Anananggal or manananggal is a kind of witch that with its supernatural powers is able to detach its upper torso from the rest of its body and flies with its trailing intestines in search of a victim, leaving its lower torso behind. This happens only at night. It has to come back before the rays of the sun strike any portion of the separated body.
One can kill an anananggal by putting garbage, ashes or salt on the detached lower torso so it can no longer reattach to its upper torso. The ananaggal has bat-like wings. It is a beautiful woman at day, but a monster at night. The anananggal avoids saringsing or kagingking as this will tear its wings. Its entrails may also get entangled with the thorns of the marurugi. Common belief.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

ANAYO – (Tayabas) According to the folklore of Tayabas, the anayo are types of nymphs who punish, with insanity and other afflictions, those who treat the unknown (invisible spirits) without respect, or those who bathe in a river that’s not frequented.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

ANDUDUNO – (Catanduanes) In Catanduanes, the anduduno (one who visits the sick) feeds on human corpses and her cannibalism is passed on through seven generations. It is reported that when the ghoul senses that the patient smells like ripe langka (jackfruit), it means he is about to die and she stays around.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, 1990 Phoenix Publishing)

ANGAKO D NGATO – (Kalinga) The Angako d Ngato are spiritis that afflict with sickness.
(source: THE KALINGAS: Their Institutions and Customs Laws, Roy Franklin Barton, The University of Chicago Press, 1949)

ANGGITAY – (Tagalogs/ Batangas) The anggitay was reported from Santo Tomas, Batangas, by the late Aproniano G. Castillo, a lawyer and the father of Maximo Ramos’ daughter-in-law, Exaltacion C. Ramos, a psychologist. It has a peculiar anatomy. Seen from in front, it is a beautiful maiden from head to foot, and it is a haggard mare seen from behind. It sits in a tree in a wood and quietly watches wayfarers go by.
(source: Philippine Demonological Legends and their Cultural Bearings , Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)

ANGONGOLOOD – (Bicol) Through more in-depth translations of the Ibalong Epic of Bicol, this is the being that is thought to be described in stanza 31 when translated to Bicolano.

Los pongos y orangutangs
La miraban con horror,
Porque las aguas del Bicol
Con su sangre coloro.

The pongos and orangutans
Watching the fight filled with horror stung,
With color due to crocodiles blood
He tinged the Bicol River red.

Bicolano folklore says the angongolood looks like a gorilla and inhabits swamps and riverbanks. It can turn people into trees by pouncing on them as they pass. It is reported that some people passing in boats will strikes the sides to create enough noise to frighten off the angongolood.
(source: Bikols of the Philippines, Maria Lilia F. Realubit, A.M.S. Press, 1983 | Bikol Voices Anthology, Merito B. Espinas, Caesar C. Altarejos, Carlos S. Gegantoca, Bikol University, 1983)

ANGTAN – (Kalinga) The Angtan are goddesses or demons that depress men, bring worry and bad luck.
(source: THE KALINGAS: Their Institutions and Customs Laws, Roy Franklin Barton, The University of Chicago Press, 1949)

ANI-ANI – (Zambales) The ani-ani is said to stand eighteen feet tall. A man may think he is standing between two trees and then realize that he is between the lower legs of the ani-ani. The creature lumbers along because of its great size. It is dark-complexioned, hairy, and bearded. Its nose is flat and its mouth wide, and it has a rough skin. It generally appears when there is a new moon and may be seen at night smoking on the branch of a large tree beside a country road such as the bulala (Iloko) or talisay (Tagalogs). The ani-ani blocks the path of a wayfarer at night. It changes its shape from that of a tall, dark man to that of a carabao without horns, a horse, or a hog and back into a tall, dark man again.
(source: Philippine Demonological Legends and their Cultural Bearings and The Creatures of Midnight, Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)

ANIT or ANITAN – (Manobo, parts of Agúsan Valley) Anit or Anítan, is the spirit of the thunderbolt, and one of the mightier class of spirits that dwell in the upper sky world.
(source: THE MANÓBOS OF MINDANÁO, JOHN M. GARVAN, 1931)

ANNANI – (Ibanag) The annani among the Ibanag generally ate human food. When offended, they were propitiated with a fat hog, the uncooked head of a carabao, rice cakes, coconut milk, sugar, bibingka, basi, cigars, and a fee of a dozen betels.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, 1990 Phoenix Publishing)

ANSISIT – (Ilokano)The Ilokanos call him ansisit. He is an old man who is as short as a boy of three. His joints, belly, head, eyes, nose, and mouth are large. He lives underground and owns all the land. He lives in caves and anthills, too. Anthills are mounds of earth made by termites. He naps on the anthill at noon. He does not want farmers to plow the ground with tractors. He fears that plowing with heavy tractors will ruin his home. He visits people’s yards after the sun has set. He walks under our homes at noon and after dark. He doesn’t want us to sweep our yard or floor then. If we do, the dust may get into his eyes. He pinches us, and our skin becomes blue. He pulls our toes and makes them twice as long. He gives us scabies, fever, and chills.
(source: Philippine Demonological Legends and their Cultural Bearings and The Creatures of Midnight, Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)

APILA – (Manobo) Apíla is an innocuous giant whose one great pleasure is to leave his far-off forest home and, crashing down the timber in his giant strides, go in quest of a wrestling bout with Mandayáñgan. The noise of their fierce engagement can be heard, it is said, for many and many a league, and there are not wanting those who have witnessed their mighty struggle for supremacy.
(source: THE MANÓBOS OF MINDANÁO, JOHN M. GARVAN, 1931)

ARIMAONGA – (Maranao) Arimaonga is the term used for lion. It appears in traditional Maranao folktales such as “Pilandok and Arimaonga” (The Mouse-Deer and the Lion). It is also described in a Maranao myth as one of the moon-eaters.

“Up in the sky lives a huge lion named Arimaonga. The animal sometimes gets playful and it swallows the moon thus producing an eclipse of the moon. The Arimaonga is forced by the people to disgorge the moon only by making noises during an eclipse of the moon, by beating gongs and plucking their fingernails. The eclipse of the sun happens when one of the wheels of the chariot which carries it gets destroyed thus forcing it to deviate from its regular path.”
(source: Philippine Folk Literature: The Myths and Philippine Folk Literature: The Folktales, Damiana Eugenio, UP Press, 2001)

ASUÁNG – (Bagobo, Mayo Disctrict) This name is applied to a class of malevolent spirits who inhabit certain trees, cliffs and streams. They delight to trouble or injure the living, and sickness is usually caused by them. For this reason, when a person falls ill, a ballyan offers a live chicken to these spirits bidding them “to take and kill this chicken in place of this man, so that he need not die.” If the patient recovers it is understood that the asuang have agreed to the exchange and the bird is released in the jungle.

There are many spirits who are known as asuang but the five most powerful are here given according to their rank, (a) Tagbanua, (b) Tagamaling, (c) Sigbinan, (d) Lumaman, (e) Bigwa. The first two are of equal importance and are only a little less powerful than Diwata. They sometimes inhabit caves but generally reside in the bud-bud (baliti) trees. The ground beneath these trees is generally free from undergrowth and thus it is known that “a spirit who keeps his yard clean resides there.” In clearing ground for a new field it sometimes becomes necessary to cut down one of these trees, but before it is disturbed an offering of betel-nut, food, and a white chicken is carried to the plot. The throat of the fowl is cut and its blood is allowed to fall in the roots of the tree. Meanwhile one of the older men calls the attention of the spirits to the offerings and begs that they be accepted in payment for the dwelling which they are about to destroy. This food is never eaten, as is customary with offerings made to other spirits. After a lapse of two or three days it is thought that the occupant of the tree has had time to move and the plot is cleared.
(source: The Wild Tribes of the Davao District, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1913)

ASWANG – The aswang concept is most usefully understood as a congeries of beliefs about five types of mythical beings identifiable with certain creatures of the European tradition: (1) the blood-sucking vampire, (2) the self-segmenting viscera sucker, (3) the man-eating weredog, (4) the vindictive or evil-eye witch, and (5) the carrion-eating ghoul. Thus when Philippine folk speak of the aswang, they generally refer to the physical traits, habitat, or activities of these five types of mythical beings, and sometimes also of other mythical entities like the demon, dwarf, and elf. What follows is a brief description of each aspect of the aswang, a term chiefly used by the Tagalogs, Bikol, and Visayan groups in the country.

(Blood sucker Aspect: Bicol, Cebu, Visayas, Ilokano) By Philippine folk traditions, the vampire is a bloodsucking creature disguised as a beautiful maiden. It marries an unsuspecting youth and thus can sip a little of his blood each night till he dies of anemia, whereupon the monster gets itself another husband. To suck blood the vampire uses the tip of its tongue, pointed like the proboscis of a mosquito, to pierce the jugular vein.

(Viscera Sucker Aspect: Bicol, Luzon) The viscera sucker is a mythical being said to suck out the internal organs (naguneg in Iloko, laman luob in Tagalog, kasudlan in West Visayan) or to feed on the voided phlegm of the sick. This creature rarely occurs in European folklore but is widespread in Malaysia. It is reported to look like an attractive woman by day, buxom, long-haired, and light complexioned. Its tongue is extended, narrow, and tubular like a drinking straw — but not pointed like the vampire’s— and it is capable of being distended to a great length. At night the monster discards its lower body from the waist down and flies or floats or glides out.

(Were-Beast Aspects: Bicol, Cebu, Western Visayas, Luzon) The weredog is a mythical being said to be a man or woman— chiefly the former—by day, but at night to turn into a ferocious beast, principally a dog, known as aso in many Philippine languages. A werewolf is identified with the fiercest animal in a region, so that Europe has werewolves, China werefoxes, and India weretigers. Since there are no wolves in the Philippines, the term weredog is more appropriate; although the term werebeast may, in some cases, be even more applicable.
A weredog is said to reside in a village and turn into a ferocious dog, boar, or large cat at about midnight.

(Witch Aspects: Bicol, Cebu, Eastern Visayas) Another member of the cluster of mythical concepts encompassed by the term aswang is the witch, believed by the folk to be a man or woman—mostly the latter— who is extremely vindictive or who causes sickness without meaning to do so. By magically intruding various objects—shells, bone, unhusked rice, fish, and insects of various species—through the victim’s bodily orifices or by herself entering the victim’s body, the Philippine witch punishes those by whom she has been put out. Or by an innocent look or remark, she also makes an equally innocent victim ill. Unlike the European witches, however, the Philippine witch has no appetite for human flesh. She is shy and lives in abandoned houses at the outskirts of towns and villages. She will not look people straight in the eye because the image in the pupils of her eyes is said to be upside down and the pupils are thin and elongated like a cat’s or lizard’s in bright sunshine.

(Ghoul Aspect: Many areas in the Philippines) The Philippine ghoul is said to steal human corpses and devour them. For this purpose, its nails are horned, curved, and sharp and its teeth pointed. Its smell and breath are fetid, and though generally invisible, the creature is said to look like a human being when it shows itself. Some ghouls live in human communities. At night they congregate in large trees near a cemetery and then descend atid exhume the newly buried corpses. They devour their plunder, making audible noises as they do so. A ghoul is said to be able to hear, over great distances, the groans of the dying. Its greed is aroused when it catches the scent of death, and then it snatches the mourners as well as the dead.
(source: The Aswang Complex in Philippine Folklore, Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)


ASWANG by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
ASUWANG NA LAKAW – (Bicol) A classification of asuwang detailed by Francis Lynch, S.J. in his paper “An Mga Asuwang: A Bicol Belief”. This kind of asuwang, the walking species, is by far the most common. Asuwang na lakaw decides, about 6 p.m., where he or she operates that night by putting his ear to the rice mortar and listening to sounds of mourners, or listens for such sounds while standing on his head, resting in a shallow hole in the ground, or, say others, removing the cover of a specially made listening well and listening. At 8 o’clock he leaves for his operations. Some claim this asuwang uses a special concoction rubbed over its body (a premixed ointment consisting of chicken dung and coconut oil).
(source: An Mga Asuwang: A Bicol Belief, Francis X. Lynch, S.J., 1949 | The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, 1990 Phoenix Publishing)

ASUWANG NA LAYOG – (Bicol) A classification of asuwang detailed by Francis Lynch, S.J. in his paper “An Mga Asuwang: A Bicol Belief”. There are two kinds of flying asuwang: the simple asuwang na layog, and the anananggal. They differ in that the latter type leaves its trunk and limbs in some secluded spot while the head and entrails take to the air. The former flies with its entire body intact.

Lynch, from his compilation of Bikol asuwang studies, revealed that the anananggal goes into the hidden portion of the house or a secluded area, then, “…..dipping his right hand into the foul smelling ointment which he has prepared, applies it on the line beginning from the tip of of the little finger of the left hand, progressing the length of the arm to the armpit, thence down his left side and the outer side of his left leg, ending at the tip of the little toe. Then the left hand is dipped into the chicken dung mixture and the process is duplicated on the right side of the body. During the operations, he repeats to himself, but alone, the following formula or its equivalent: Siri siri daing Diyos kung banggi, labaw sa kahoyan, lagbas sa kasirongan! Literally translated, the formula reads, “siri, siri, there is no God at night, over trees, under houses.”

Supposedly after the application of the chicken dung mixture, an oily membrane appears on both sides of the body, more like flying skin folds. For the ordinary layog, he needs only to jump and hop for momentum before he ascends to the night sky. The anananggal reacts differently. Propping himself against a wall, if there be one, through magic he is then presumed to detach himself from his lower limbs. The cry kakak or kikik is heard in the process of flight.

The anananggal creature perches on the roof where he droolingly awaits his next meal, and it is his long thread-like tongue that passes through the roof shingles.
(source: An Mga Asuwang: A Bicol Belief, Francis X. Lynch, S.J., 1949)

ASWANG – (Kapampangan) Was a mean, dark creature who rubbed a special ointment on his armpits to fly in search of the dying instead of the already dead.
(source: Kapampangan beliefs circa 1900 can be found in accounts compiled by ethnographer H. Otley Beyer, in an unpublished volume at the HAU Center for Kapampangan Studies courtesy of Beyer’s family | compiled by Robby Tantingco)

ASWANG NA LUPAD – (Bicol) Another name used in Bicol for the flying aswang.
(source: The Aswang Complex in Philippine Folklore, Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)

AWAN-ULO-NA – (Iloko) This creature is a headless being often vaguely referred to in the Iloko region as the awan-ulo-na, ‘headless one’. It is said to be sometimes seen under large trees and to have the demon’s characteristic habit of changing its size and shape. It may be related to a being that appears in the Ifugao myth entitled “Tulud Numputul: The Self-beheaded,” a headless demon appears to the human hero, “his neck stump bubbling and frothing as he dances along his way.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, 1990 Phoenix Publishing)

AWOK – (Waray) Similarly, the abat and awok of the Eastern Visayas have been described as extremely dangerous beings that fly with only the upper part of their body and have big, red, bulging and hungry eyes, disheveled hair, and long bony and clawed fingers. They are reported to fly with only their heads and hands. Maximo Ramos points out that the awok may simply be a different name for the abat used in other Visayan areas.
(source: The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology and The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BACK TO TOP



B
BACOBACO – (Zambales) In 1915, Henry Otley Beyer recorded a myth of the Ayta living in Zambales that sounds very much like a volcanic eruption of Pinatubo. The battle is between Algao, which may be northern name for the Sun (related to Aldo), and Bacobaco, a great sea turtle. In this account Algao and Bacobaco have a great battle in which the latter eventually bores into the top of Pinatubo creating a great crater and emitting great flames, huge rocks, mud, ashes, smoke and deafening noise in the process. According to the legend, Bacobaco continued to dwell in the mountain and when he comes out “woe be to us.”

BAGAT – (Central Panay) The bagat, according to the Central Panay people, are seen on a full moon, or when it is extremely dark after a slight drizzle earlier in the evening. They assume the form of domestic animals and are normally harmless. However, they are dangerous when harmed. Some of them are pets of supernatural beings. The aswang also sometimes take the form of the bagat.
(Source: The Encyclopedia of Philippine Folk Beliefs and Customs Vol. 1 , F.R. Demetrio S.J., Xavier University, 1990)

BAG-ONG YANGGAW – (Hiligaynon) The term yanggaw is an Ilonggo term that refers to infection, more specifically, of an affliction that turns normal human beings into aswangs. It was popularized with Richard Somes’ 2008 film “Yanggaw”. Bag-ong Yanggaw refers to a newly empowered or ‘infected’ aswang. A newly empowered aswáng is aggressive and dangerous, and is likely to kill people they encounter alone near rivers at night. There are no historical sources for Bag-ong Yanggaw.

BAKUNAWA – (Western Visayas) Sometimes a deity that was represented as a serpentine dragon, according to Filipino mythology. He has two sets of wings, whiskers, a red tongue, and a mouth ‘the size of a lake.’ The Filipinos once thought that the Bakunawa lived in the sea at a time when the world had seven moons that the serpents, being fascinated by their light, would rise out of the sea into the sky and consume the moons. Thus, the serpents were the cause of lunar eclipses. To prevent the world from becoming dark the people would run out of their homes, taking their pots and pans, to make the most noise they could in order to scare the Bakunawa so they would stop eating the moons, and give them the moonlight back. But in some versions, these serpents also devour the sun in which case also cause the solar eclipse. (Learn more about Bakunawa)

BAKUNAWA – (Bicol) The ancient Bikols were also nature worshippers. They stood in awe and prostrated themselves in worship before the ineffable god of nature. The halia was a feast dedicated to the full moon to prevent the bakunawa, a horrible sky serpent from devouring the moon and leaving them in perpetual darkness. The feast was performed with the wild beating of the gimbals and balalongs.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)


BAKUNAWA
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
BALBAL – (Tagbunuwa) Dean C. Worcester wrote a vivid description of the balbal which the Tagbanuwa believe in: While a corpse is awaiting burial, the Tagbanua are in dread of a mythical creature called balbal, which they say comes from the Moro country. It sails through the air like a flying squirrel. In form it is manlike, with curved nails which it uses to tear up the thatch houses, and a long tongue with which it reaches down to “lick up” the bodies.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, 1990 Phoenix Publishing)


BALBAL by Ian Balba via Deviant Art
BALBAL – (Maranao) Another specie of witch is the so-called balbal, which is said to evolve when the bird laasan (possibly a kingfisher) enters a person’s body and with its gradual growth within, enhances the bewitched person’s metamorphosis. Traditionally making a nocturnal appearance, especially during a full moon, the balbal is noted for devouring corpses as well as foetuses, making it the scourge of women in the family way. Its compulsive habit of yawning whenever faced with corpses during wakes seems to be a common means of detecting a balbal.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

BALBALAN – (Tausog) The Tausogs have a counterpart of the Visayan aswang in the so-called balbalan as, like the former, this character has the power to transform into a cat, dog or bird. As such, it is naturally terribly feared.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

BALENDIK – (Dumagat Aeta) Name that the Negritos Dumagats (from the northeastern coast of Luzón) give to a demon with skinny legs, of whitish color and that has the head of a horse.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

BALINONOK and BALINSOGO – (Bagobo) Balinonok and his wife Balinsogo. This couple love blood and for this reason cause men and women to fight or to run amuck.
(source: The Wild Tribes of Davao District, Mindanao, Fay-Cooper Cole, The R. F. Cummings Philippine Expedition, 1913)

BALINSUGU – (Bagobo) Balinsugu is another dangerous spirit that stirs up enmity at ceremonies, in the hope that good men may be induced to fight and kill one another in the house where many are assembled, and thus give him blood to drink. Benedict witnessed a devotional meeting when one of the anito urged the Bagobo to be on their guard against Tagareso and Balinsugu.
(source: A study of Bagobo ceremonial, magic and myth, Laura Watson Benedict, New York Academy of Sciences, 1916)

BANGUNGOT – (Tagalogs) The close link between demons and nightmares is indicated by the fact that the dream demons are quite common.The bangungot, a nightmare said to beset persons who go to sleep immediately after a heavy meal, has been blamed for some mysterious deaths in years past. It is said that when a person is attacked by the bangungot, a heavy creature suffocates him by sitting on his chest or by stuffing his mouth with its penis and his nostrils with its testicles. Deaths traced to bangungot have puzzled medical doctors in the country for some time and its tie-up with demon lore may be worth looking into. (learn more)
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BANIG – (Ifugao) Whenever there is a death the soul of the deceased roams about for a while as a temporary or transient ghost. Ghosts of those dead from natural causes are not much feared, but those dead from violence or childbirth are. Besides transient (disembodied) ghosts the Ifugao sees in almost everything and every place permanent ( unembodied) ones. These permanent ghosts (not individually named), aside from scaring people well nigh to death, cause sickness. If the agba, the divination stick, points to ghosts as the source of an affliction, it is necessary to sacrifice a chicken in the fields at midnight. In such a rite the priest knows, when he feels his body swell up, that the ghosts have come to partake of the offering.
(source: The Religion of the Ifugaos, R.F. Barton, American Anthropological Association Vol. 48, October 1946)

BANIG and PENTEN – (Ibaloy) The banig are spirits of an almost dying person while the penten are spirits of people who died a violent death. They live in rivers and cause the river to swell or rise when one crosses, especially during rainy season.
(source: Ethnography of the Major Ethnolinguistic Groups in the Philippines, Arsenio L. Sumeng-ang, New Day Publishers, 2003)

BANNOG – (Ilokano, Tingguian) Most Philippine giants appear to have human shape, although one, the bannog of Northern Luzon, was in the form of a huge bird. The bannog which features in the Tingguian tale “Sogsogot” was large enough to swoop down on a hunter, clutch him in its talons, and carry him to its nest on top of a large tree. The bannog in an Isneg tale, “The Negrito and the Birds,” flew off with both the hunter and the hunter’s catch, a wild boar. The young of the bannog were so large that a hunter rode out of the nest on one of them as it fluttered down in its first flight.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BANTAY – (Pangansinan) An old man living in a large tree. He turns into a white rooster that grows bigger and smaller. It stops people from going near a tree, or blocks their path so they can’t pass.
(Source:The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BANWAANON – (Cebu) – “Banwaanon,” in the Cebuano tongue, means “of the jungle.” In this respect the banwaanon are therefore similar to Scandinavia’s tomtegubbar (diminutive old men) who are supposed to inhabit forest lands. A minority of the banwaanon are thought of as witches who cast their vile spell not on fellow banwaanon but on some earthlings who are so unlucky as to wander unwittingly into their habitat. Having to do with demonology and angelology is the belief common to all nationalities that supernatural beings, as delineated in folklore, are either beneficent or malevolent towards man. Even the denizens of fairyland, who are understood to be mostly helpful, are thus classified. So are the banwaanon of the Cebu-Visayan Filipinos.
(source: Philippine Folk Literature: The Legends, Damiana Eugenio,UP Press, 2002)

BARANGAN – (Samar, Leyte) The witch who pricks dolls with eyeless needles to inflict pain on a person whom their client hates and wishes ill fortune is called barangan. Another of its ritual is writing an intended victim’s name on a piece of paper and together with a cross, wraps it in a small piece of cloth. This is then buried a tiny hole in the cemetery, after which the barangan lies flat on his breast reciting Latin-sounding incantation and concluding the ritual by kissing the ground three times. At no other time is this done than at 12:00 high noon, 6.00 p.m. during angelus and 12:00 midnight. The identifying mark on a barangan is a circular black spot on her palate. This is believed to have be6n there since her birth.
(source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978 & The Aswang Complex in Philippine Folklore, Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)

BARAS – (Pangansinan) Tall, dark and hideous. Lives in the deep woods. He steals women carries them off to his home. When they awaken, they are terrified and go insane.
(Source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BATIBAT – (Iloko) – It takes the form of an old, fat woman residing in trees, and is very vengeful. Most punishments they endure includes suffocation. They punish people who cut the tree to where they dwell. Whoever rests or sleeps on the wooden bench or bed which came from the wood of her tree, will die by sitting over that person. The only way to escape her is to press hardly the thumb toe of that human sleeping on it. (learn more)
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


Bangungot | Batibat by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
BAWA – (Antique) – The bawa are supernatural entities with wide dangling lips enough to cover their face. They can take the form of a chicken and make their presence known by a cackling sound. They can also transform themselves into a cow, a pig, a stone, or a dog. The bawa are believed to be harmless if left to themselves. Once they are harmed, however, they could be very cruel because they could wring the neck of a carabao or that of a man.
(Source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

BERBALANG – (Sulu) “At the center of the island is a small village, the inhabitants of which owe allegiance to neither of the two chiefs. These people are called ‘Berbalangs’, and the Cagayans live in great fear of them. These Berbalangs are a kind of ghouls, and feed on human flesh occasionally to survive. You can always identify them, because the pupils of their eyes are not round, but just narrow slits like those of a cat. They dig open the graves and eat the entrails of the corpses; but in Cagayan the supply is limited. So when they feel the craving for a feed of human flesh they go away into the grasslands, and, having carefully hidden themselves, hold their breaths and fall into a trance. Their astral bodies are then liberated…. They fly away, and entering a house make their way into the body of one of the occupants and feed on their entrails….. The arrival of the Berbalangs may be heard from afar, as they make a moaning noise which is loud from a distance but dies away into a feeble moan as they approach. When they are near you the sound of their wings may be heard and the flashing lights of their eyes can be seen like dancing fire-flies in the dark. Should you be the happy possessor of a cocoa-nut pearl you are safe, but otherwise the only way to beat them off is to jab at them with a kris, the blade of which has been rubbed with the juice of a lime. If you see the lights and hear the moaning in front of you, wheel fast and make a cut in the opposite direction. Berbalangs always go by contraries and are never where they appear to be.”
(source:Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Vol. LXV Part 1. Mr. Ethelbert Forbes Skertchley, 1896)

BENTOHANGIN– (Sulod, Antique, Panay) The bentohangin resemble that of a flying horse, but half of their body is that of a man. They neigh like a horse and are known to roam the village past midnight.
(Source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

BERBEROKA – (Apayao) The size of Berberoka, the Apayao ogre, is indicated by the fact that the river dried up when he reclined across it, and when he suddenly got up, the people who had gone to pick up the stranded fish drowned. Berberoka “could change himself at will,” and reclined across a stream and suddenly got up each time a crab pinched him. He grew correspondingly larger in size as the water which he dammed up with his body rose, but he was killed when he swallowed a woman who had a hatchet concealed in her hair.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BIANGONAN – (Batak, Palawan) The Biangonan is described as a small human with black skin, kinky dark hair, and feet pointing backwards. They can sometimes be found climbing through the tallest trees. It can transform into a human or a pig, where it will use this guise to sneak into a village and steal a pig or a human for its consumption. When villagers detect a rotting smell, they know a Biangonan is near. They will light a large fire which is believed to ward it off. The Biangonan devours every part of the human they steal from the village, but will leave the jaw bone of the victim hanging in a tree. An alternate description appears in “The Encyclopedia of Philippine Folk Beliefs and Customs Volume 1” : The Batak believe that biangonan are small people possessed of talons who hide in rocks and trees. When they attack their victims, they utter long piercing shrieks that paralyze their victims. Then they tear and claw at the throat of the helpless man.
(Source: The Encyclopedia of Philippine Folk Beliefs and Customs Vol. 1 , F.R. Demetrio S.J., Xavier University, 1990)

BINANGENAN – (Zambales, Ayta) Damian Amazona, writing about the Aeta along the eastern periphery of Luzon, defined the binangenan [sic] as “the spirits who bring down danger, sickness, and death as punishment. Their home is the balete tree.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BINANGUNAN – (Dumagat, Aeta on Luzon) The binangunan have an unmistakable physical resemblance to the tikbalang of the Tagalogs. Accounts say the binangunan “looked somewhat like a horse, but there was a fire on its back from head to tail.” The binangunan resided in the takang demonio (Sterculia foetida), a tree characterized by the foul smell of its flowers, and in the pitcher plant, respectively.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BINANGUNAN – (Kapampangan) Vampirish beings that could suck the blood of children even from a distance. Thin, anemic children were thought to be victimized by a binangunan.
(source: Kapampangan beliefs circa 1900 can be found in accounts compiled by ethnographer H. Otley Beyer, in an unpublished volume at the HAU Center for Kapampangan Studies courtesy of Beyer’s family | compiled by Robby Tantingco)

BINGIL – (Kalinga, Gaddang) If a sangasang (shrine)was not erected at a new site settled by these shifting cultivators, it was said that a bingi would appear- a person covered with old wounds and pus, and smelling like rotten flesh, with his tongue hanging out, like a severed head. Illness or death would plague the settlement until a shrine was erected. The bingil could only be propitiated by a headhunt or a large animal sacrifice and a chase (dagdag) in which all the village residents took part.

For this rite, an effigy of the bingil is tied to a pole where the shrine will be erected, with a banana trunk as its body, rags hung on it for clothes, and an old raincoat. A broken pot on top represents the head. Bamboo tubes ate struck with other objects to make noise and to drive the bingil out of the village. The participants chase it out toward the effigy, then strike the banana trunk with spears of the same kind used in headhunts and run away to the village. A medium who joins them in the chase becomes possessed by the bingil and pursues them back to their houses. Her tongue hangs out like the bingil, and her touch is said to kill any person she catches. When the participants have arrived back at the house once haunted by the bingil, the bingil-medium says he will no longer molest them and leaves, to stay at the village shrine with the other guardians.
(source: Headhunting and the Social Imagination in Southeast Asia by Jules de Raedt, Janet Hoskins, 1996)

BINOBAAN – (Ifugao) The Ifugaos gave him the name of Binobaan. He has a voice as loud as thunder. He lives in a house in the farthest woods. His house is roofed with forest leaves. He stores up bundles of rice under the roof. He cooks rice in a great big pot. He invites lost hunters to enter his house.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BIRADDALI – (Tausug, Sulu) ‘Biraddali’ is usually translated from Tausug or other Samal languages as ‘angel’ or ‘skymaiden’ They are female winged beings with the glowing beauty of the rainbow. In some legends each biraddali has a pair or silver wings that they can remove. In other myths, these maidens can change shape. They use the rainbow as a bridge to visit earth. Whenever a rainbow is seen the biraddali are usually enjoying a pleasant bath in the mountains. There are some Samal myths wherein a mortal man steals a biraddali’s wings to make her his wife. The biraddali eventually finds her silver wings and escapes the clutches of the man, with some versions ending with the man learning his lesson and becoming worthy of the biraddali through a series of tasks.
(source: Voices from Sulu. A Collection of Tausug Oral Traditions, Gerard Rixhon, Ateneo De Manila Univ Press, 2010)

BONḠAN – (Bicol) Demonic dwarves and malignant spirits of the early Bicolanos.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

BONGGO – (Bicol) Bonggo is a human-like monster whose eyes spew out fire. It burns everything it sees. It is afraid to cross rivers as when he touches water, its fire is extinguished. And when this happens, it dies. Its victims are mostly women. This is because it is in constant search for its wife, the aswang, who deserted it.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

BORINGKANTADA – (Bicol) A boringkantada is a beautiful woman that closely guards a heap of untold riches and treasures. Possessed with such physical beauty, and an unbelievably beautiful voice, it whiles away its time by singing to itself. When someone, lured by the ethereal beauty of its plaintive song, draws near, the boringkantada would think that its treasure will be stolen. It then becomes vicious, and its jealousy is so that it would immediately suck the blood out of anyone who dares come near it or its treasure.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

BOROKA – (Zambales) In Dean Fansler’s 1921 Filipino Popular Tales he theorized that “Boroka, (is) apparently a corruption of the Spanish bruja (“witch”).” Maximo Ramo’s entry in his 1965 dissertation The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology states: “But in the years when the present writer was a boy in Zambales, people went into hysterics every time the boroka, a viscera sucker, was thought to have made its presence felt. There a boroka in a tale “Pedro and the Witch” is reported to have “had wings like a bird . . . but a head like that of a woman,” although the present investigator’s Zambales informants described the boroka as the true viscera sucker in both appearance and habits: physical beauty, ability to detach the lower portion of her body about midnight before she went out on a raid, in the form of a bird returning with the hearts and livers of her victims before dawn, her inability to join the upper portion of her body to the lower if ashes and a mixture of salt and vinegar were sprinkled on the latter, and her being frightened off by calling out these substances when signs of her proximity were evident.”
(source: The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology and The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


BOROKA
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
BUGSOK – (Bicol) Bugsok is a black fairy that walks with its feet up and its hands down. It buries objects like stones, sticks, and fish bones into people’s bodies causing victims to be seriously ill. The herbulario can cure such ailment, and can pick out a stone or fishbone or whatever from a body where the bugsok “buried” them. The Bugsok is the cruel son of the maligno. It lives in the thick forests where there are big ants and spiders. If it happens to be harmed by playing children, it causes them to swell from the knees down. This will give them so much pain, and the condition will make the children raise their legs and use their hands to walk. Eventually the victims also become bugsok, or turned upside down.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

BULAIYAO – (Kalinga) The bulaiyao live in big rocks, hot springs, and volcanoes. They have a fiery appearance which they can turn on or turn off. They capture or devour souls. Gulilingob ud Tangob is the strongest of all the bulaiyao. This class is, of course, the same as the Ifugao tayaban.
(source: THE KALINGAS: Their Institutions and Customs Laws, Roy Franklin Barton, The University of Chicago Press, 1949)

BULALÁKAU – (Bukidnon of Mindanao) Another multiple spirit, often ranked as a lesser Magbabaya, is Bulalákau, the spirit or spirits of the water. They have their home in the center of the sea but they also frequent springs, streams and rivers. They are sometimes spoken of collectively as Talawahig, “dwellers in the water.” One of these spirits is responsible for drowning. He pulls a person down, takes out his spirit, and throws the body to the surface. “We know that this is true for when the body is recovered the spirit is gone.” Bulalákau properly belongs to the group of nature spirits known as Inkanto, and he is often addressed with others in that division.
(source: The Bukidnon of Mindanao. Fay-Cooper Cole. Harold C. Conklin,. Columbia University, 1957)

BULAW – (Buhid Mangyan) According to Buhid Mangyan beliefs, theBulaw are those who live in mountain peaks and are depicted as shooting stars because they fly from one peak to another and light their way with a torch made from human bone.
(source: The ties that bind: The Buhid Mangyan People of Mindoro, their Sacred Lands and Medicine Mountain, NewCAPP, 2014)

BUNGISNGIS – (Tagalogs) In a Batangas tale, the giant Bungisngis is described as “a large strong man who is always laughing.” He has but one eye. His name is said to be derived from the Tagalog word ngisi (‘to show the teeth’). He is also said to have “an upper lip so large that when it is thrown back, it completely covers [his] face.” His strength is indicated by his reportedly seizing a carabao by the horns and throwing it “knee-deep into the earth.”
(source: The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology and The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


BUNGISNGIS by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
BURIKAY – (Isneg) Burikay (Buriay), the Isneg ogre, devoured men, too, perhaps by first opening them up, as can be deduced from three Isneg folk songs.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BURULAKAW – (Antique) The burulakaw appear like balls of fire with tails when viewed at a distance. Actually they are small women with long hair appearing like strands of fire covering their bodies. They resemble shooting stars except that they travel horizontally in the air in a sloping manner starting from a point of origin which is usually a stream or shallow well. Once they reach a destination, they disappear. They travel day and night, but they could only be seen in the evening when there is no more glare from the sun. Because they travel fast, they are believed to be the messengers of supernaturals in the higher order.
(Source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

BÚSAU – (Manobo, parts of Agúsan Valley) The búsau, black, hideous spirits that dwell in dark, desolate places, and who are for the most part implacable enemies of man. To counteract the machinations of these spirits, the beneficent dieties[sic] are called upon by Manóbo priests and feasted with song and dance and sacrifice. Pleased with these tokens of friendship, the good spirits pursue the evil ones, and even engage in battle with them.
(source: THE MANÓBOS OF MINDANÁO, JOHN M. GARVAN, 1931)

BUSAU/ BUSAW – (Mandaya) Among the Mandaya at the north end of Davao Gulf this spirit is also known as Tuglinsau, Tagbusau, or Mandangum. He looks after the welfare of the bagani, or warriors, and is in many respects similar to Mandarangan of the Bagobo. He is described as a gigantic man who always shows his teeth and is otherwise of ferocious aspect. A warrior seeing him is at once filled with a desire to kill. By making occasional offerings of pigs and rice it is usually possible to keep him from doing injury to a settlement, but at times these gifts fail of their purpose and many people are slain by those who serve him. Among the Mandaya, the balyan (baylan) plays an important role in their rituals, religious or otherwise. Offerings and libations are common practices. Offerings may be a bagi where pigs, chickens and other animals are offered to the diwata to ward off the evil spirits or busaw.
(source: The Wild Tribes of the Davao District, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1913, The Encyclopedia of Philippine Folk Beliefs and Customs Vol. 2 , F.R. Demetrio S.J., Xavier University, 1990)




BUSAW
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
BUSO – (Bagobo) Mean, evil spirits who eat dead people and have some power to injure the living. A young Bagobo described his idea of a buso as follows: “He has a long body, long feet and neck, curly hair, and black face, flat nose, and one big red or yellow eye. He has big feet and fingers, but small arms, and his two big teeth are long and pointed. Like a dog he goes about eating anything, even dead persons.” As already noted, the people of Malilla are inclined to identify the gimokod of the left side with this evil class.
(source: The Wild Tribes of the Davao District, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1913)

BUTAT-TEW – (Ibaloy) Spirits who group themselves to misguide people in their paths or in their activities.
(source: Ethnography of the Major Ethnolinguistic Groups in the Philippines, Arsenio L. Sumeng-ang, New Day Publishers, 2003)

BUWAYA – (Many regions as a crocodile) It is called buwaya all over our country. The buwaya is a crocodile. But Tagalogs and Visayans thought it was a dragon. They thought it carried a big box on its back. It lived in a cave in deep water. It caught people in the water. Then it put them in the box on its back. It took them to its cave in the water. The people prayed to the buwaya. They called it nuno or “grandfather.” They gave it food when they saw it.The chiefs punished people who killed it.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BUYAGAN – (Cebu) A buyagan is a person known to cause certain ailments by merely commenting on anyone. It is a popular belief that one who is born coincidentally with the rising of the sun (pagsilaw sa adlaw) will grow up to be a dangerous buyagan. A first class buyagan possesses a very dark tongue.”

“A real buyagan uses only his saliva to cure an ailment that may result from the comments made. . . .”

“In cases where the real buyagan could not be found, anyone who has been treated by him is considered qualified to administer the treatment. In this case bun- ga* (a fruit), mayana* leaves an ash from the hearth are chewed together and this concoction is spat on the head, on the temples, at the nape, at the spinal column, and on the joints of the limbs. Other effects of buyag are itches or scabies and pain in that part of the body commented upon.”
(source: Cebuano Sorcery: Malign Magic in the Philippines. By Richard W. Lieban. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1967)

BACK TO TOP



C
CALAG – (Hiligaynon)…they did not usually wait three days before burying the corpse, for it was said that if three days passed, the calag, together with several tic-tic, would touch the coffin, whereupon the belly of the deceased would burst, and a very strong and fever-bearing stench would be emitted.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

CALANGET – (Gaddang) A small earth spirit in the ground, in a mound, or woods and fields. Makes whizzing sound when responding to shaman’s call. Regarded as “the true owner of the land”. Inflicts harm on those who disturb its home.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


CALANGET by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
CAMANA – (Zambales) An evil spirit that lives in gloomy places. It can assume the form of any small animal, or can make itself invisible. If a person who comes across the camana does not propitiate it with food or something entertaining, he will become sick; and he can be cured only by an old woman who is a manganito.
(source: Types of Prose Narratives, Harriott Ely Fansler, Row, Peterson & Company, 1911)

CARANGO – (Ibanag) A small earth spirit in the ground, in a mound, or woods and fields. Makes whizzing sound when responding to shaman’s call. Regarded as “the true owner of the land”. Inflicts harm on those who disturb its home.
(source: The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BACK TO TOP



D
DÁBUA DÁBUA – (Manobo) Among the Manobo giants, there are others, lesser but more human, the principal of whom is Dábau. Dábau lived on a small mountain in view of the present site of Veruéla. It is said that, before beginning his trip up the Agúsan, he sent word to the inhabitants of the Umaíam River that on a certain day he would pass through the lake region and that all rice should be carefully protected against the commotion of the waters.
(source: THE MANÓBOS OF MINDANÁO, JOHN M. GARVAN, 1931)

DÁGUA – (Manobo, parts of Agúsan Valley) A mischievous, fickle spirit that delights in stealing the rice from the granary. If aroused to anger she may cause a failure of the rice crop. She is called also Ma-ka-bún-ta-sái, i.e., “can cause hunger.”
(source: THE MANÓBOS OF MINDANÁO, JOHN M. GARVAN, 1931)

DAKES – (Ilokano ) Malignant spirits of the Ilocano mythology.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

DALAKETNON – (Waray) They are called dalakitnon by the East Visayans. Their name means ‘those who live in the balete tree’. They appear like good-looking tall men and women. Their skin is smooth and white. Their hair is wavy and brown. Their clothes have gold and silver threads. They mix with people and attend public dances. They go to college and travel in foreign lands. They drive new cars and win beauty contests. But they live deep in the wild woods. What we think are balete trees are their mansions. We hear the clink of dishes in their kitchens. We smell their cooking and hear their babies cry. An attractive city girl once came to the village. She wanted to spend a quiet summer near a forest. A good-looking youth met her at the village dance. They danced and danced, and she fell in love. She agreed to visit his folks. In his car he drove her to a beautiful city. The streets were wide and the houses were splendid. Next morning she was found weeping in the woods alone.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

DALIGMATA – (Visayan) A wizard , sorcerer or a nocturnal animal which , according to the Bisayans , is full of bright , shining eyes.* The Visayans believe that there exists a herb (daligmata), that is used to see a sorcerer that has rendered themselves invisible by the power other herbs.**
(source: *DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021 and **Historia de Las Islas E Indios de Bisayas, 1668, Francisco Ignacio Alcina)

DANAG – (Isneg) The Isneg tale “The Danag Spirits” suggests how vampirism started in the world. The danag are said to have planted taro “in former days,” clearing the fields with their human neighbors. One day the forefinger of a woman was hurt. A danag sucked the wound and, enjoying the taste of blood, then went on to suck out all her blood, saying: “The blood of a human is sweet.”143 The tale concludes: “That is the end of the danag’s planting.” (Learn more about the Danag)
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


DANAG
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
DARAGÓ – (Bagobo ) A demon of the Bagobos. The name daragó means spiller of blood. Sometimes this creature is called Da-dagó, du-dagó, or mudugó. The Bagobos also call the Mandarangan, Daragó as well, if we are not misinterpreting the information found on page 120 of volume VIII from, Las Cartas; of the PP. Filipino Jesuits. It is assumed that Daragó is a titlethat the Bagobos give, not only to the Mandarangan, but also to other demons and malignant spirits.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

DARUANAK – (Bicol) Daruanak counted among the fantastic creatures of Bikol’s epic age.
(source: What Youv́e Always Wanted to Know about Mayon Volcano, Merito B. Espinas,1978)

DAYAMDAM – (Agusan) They are known as dayamdam in Agusan. They are the tiniest folk you have ever seen. Their noses are high-bridged and thin. Their hair is straight and thin, too.They hop about on fallen trees in the woods. They cover themselves with leaves. They stick out their tongue at you and hop off. They own every tree in the deep woods. We must ask their permission to gather fruit. We must get their permission to fell forest trees.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


DAYAMDAM
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
DIDIT – (Bicol) Didit is an earth cricket, whose nocturnal chirp signifies the death of a relative.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

DIAKAY DALIN – (Pangasinan) Dikay dalin are the earth or mound deities, the counterpart or version of the Ilocano ca-i-ba-an. Stepping on their habitat brings about incurable malady.
(source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978 & The Aswang Complex in Philippine Folklore, Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)

DIWATA – (Many regions) Sometimes written as: Devata, dewata, divata or duiata; is the name (Sanskrit origin) that the various races of the southern archipelago give to their deities; The following are known; 1. Amongst the early Visayans they had Diwata, the same meaning as the anitos of the Tagalogs. 2. The Tinitianos or Batak of the island of Paragua (Palawan) give the name Diwata to minor spirits, good or evil. 3. The Tagbanuas, another indigenous race of the island of Paragua, called the spirits and invisible beings diwatas. 4. The Mandayas (Mindanao) called the idols that represented their ancestors Diwata or Manaug. 5. The Bagobos (Mindanao) know, more or less, a Diwata. However it is assumed that they do not give this name just to a singular spirit. 6. Also the Manobos (Mindanao) have spirit called Diwata. 7. The Subanos (Mindanao) relate, according to P. Sanchez, only in a vague meaning of the Diwata, and dark idea of god, of whom they are very afraid of. It is assumed that the Subanos know not only one, but many diwatas. 8. The Tirurayes call a superstitious fish that has eight heads and lives in Ombligo or in the middle of the sea, a Diwata. It is assumed that this is not the only monster that the Tirurayes call Diwata. Other spirits and mythical beings are also called this name. 9. The Manguindinao Moros call the idols and gods of the infidels, their neighbors, Diwata. It is noted that the name Diwata was not used and is not used in the island of Luzón.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

DAGATNON or LAWODNON – (Antique) Dagatnon or lawodnon are mischievious spirit beings who inhabit the sea. This is a belief in some areas of Panay , especially in Antique.
(source: Fishers of the Visayas, Iwao Ushijima, ‎Cynthia Neri Zayas, 1994)

DUWENDE – (Tagalogs) The duwende “is a pygmy with only one eye in the middle of the forehead and huge nose with only one nostril.” The duwende are said to give sums of money to their human friends. A bad thing about the duwendes is, however, that when one wins their friendship, it must be retained, or one meets with an untimely death. An elevated mound of earth, a seemingly innocent-looking big ant hill, is said to be one of the dwelling places of unseen evil spirits and tiny duwende.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

DWENDE – (Various Regions) A dwende is a short, long-bearded old man who dwells in a ponso, or a mound resembling an ant hill. Those who inhabit rivers are called water dwarves. Dwarves are classified as black or white. The white dwarves are happy and do not harm humans. They live in ceilings and attics and sometimes the owner of the house hears their laughter. The black dwarves are malevolent and could cause illness and death. When black dwarves inhabit a house, the members of the house meet all kinds of misfortune. The dwende is full of mischief—it steals money or food, or a thing that may take its fancy. Some dwendes live in a mound on the ground. If a man happens to urinate on its abode, it can cause bongao or inflammation of the man’s genitals. They are helpful and like to live with humans. Sometimes they are offended and cause illness or even death of the persons with whom they live. Clothes must be taken from the clothesline before dark lest they be stolen and worn by dwendes.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)



BACK TO TOP


E
EBWA – (Tinggian) The Tingguian fear Ebwa, an “evil spirit.” After the relatives have buried their dead, “all that night and the succeeding nine days and nights a fire is kept burning near the grave to keep away the evil spirit Ebwa.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

ENGKANTADA – (Tagalogs) A lovely female Enchanted Being who inhabits forests and trees. She sometimes falls in love with humans. According to one theory, though these engkantadas appear like human females, there is one distinguishing characteristic: they have “no pubic hair.” Unfortunately, it is rather difficult to verify this, to say the least.

Jeannie Javelosa recalled, “Saw one really beautiful female creature at the ‘llalim’, crater of Mt. Banahaw when I went down there. She was floating, dressed in a pearlized luminescent silver-white gown with a long veil extended. Dark hair – not menacing, very beautiful. I was enthralled. Just kept saying ‘Magandang gabi’ to her but I think she just wanted me to see her.”
(source: Dwarves and Other Nature Spirits, , Jaime T. Licauco, Rex Books, 2005)

ENGKANTO – (Tagalogs) This elemental creature is seen to be as big as humans and may even look like one. Seldom seen by man. Can fall in love with humans, specially lovely maidens and sometimes sexually molest or rape them. In forests, they can be heard as talking like birds chirping. The English equivalent of this Tagalog term is “Enchanted Being.” According to Filipino traditional beliefs Engkantos do not have indentation on their upper lip (philtrum) unlike normal humans.According to some beliefs, there are two types of engkanto, namely the Engkanto de Dias and Engkanto de Diablo.

Engkanto de Dios – Baptized elemental creatures. Work with God and do only the good. Help man in many ways like preserving the balance of nature.

Engkanto de Diablo – Believed to be unbaptized creatures, devilish and work with the dark forces or evil. Can do harm to humans and even waylay them. They are also known to possess human beings and make them do criminal or immoral things. These evil creatures also exhibit extraordinary paranormal powers and can make people sick.
(source: Dwarves and Other Nature Spirits, , Jaime T. Licauco, Rex Books, 2005)

ENGKANTOS – (Bicol) An engkanto is any enchanted creature—and much like human beings, they vary in form, attitude, and powers we can never understand nor fathom. They inhabit our world, and can see us, but, more often than not, we are unable to see and mingle with them unless they allow us to do so. An engkanto is an enchanted creature that can assume an assortment of images. It may be a dog, a cat, a beggar or a beautiful woman. It does this when it wants to enchant human beings. Before bathing in the river, one needs the permission of the engkantos. An engkanto is usually invisible; if “seen by the human eye” it is said to be very white or very bright. If it gets angry or falls in love with a human, the latter falls ill or dies. Engkantos are like human beings in appearance and habits. However, they envy humans because the latter occupy and enjoy the visible world. When children are alone, engkantos take pity on them and bring them to its kingdom.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

BACK TO TOP


F
FLAU – (Blaan) Flau is the spirit of an unborn child whose mother died in pregnancy. Its cry is often heard at night, and at times it attacks and injures people.
(source: The Wild Tribes of Davao District, Mindanao, Fay-Cooper Cole, The R. F. Cummings Philippine Expedition, 1913)This list has been researched and compiled by THE ASWANG PROJECT www.aswangproject.com


G
GAB-AN – (Visayas) Refers to what the Visayans describe as a malignant spirit possessing itself of a shaman.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

GABUNAN – (Western Visayas) The gabunan is an aswang which flies in the form of a huge bat.
(source: CCP Encyclopedia of Philippine Art – Volume 5 ,Nicanor G. Tiongson, ‎Cultural Center of the Philippines, 1994 )

GAKI – (Igorot) The water overseer of Lumawig was Gaki, the giant crab. The people were nomads in the area. They hunted animals for food. Often the hunters got lost, separated from each other and their families because of the absence of landmarks. To communicate with one another, the hunters resorted to shouting which disturbed Lumawig in his slumber. Lumawig, disgusted with his noisy subjects, decided to create a new generation deserving of a more beautiful world. He ordered Gaki to plug the hole which drained water. The whole earth was flooded.
(source: Philippine Folk Literature: The Myths, Damiana Eugenio,UP Press, 2002)

GARUDA – (Maranao) The Garuda that played villain in the Maranao tale “The Bird That Stole the Sultan’s Beard” lived in an underwater realm. Three brothers pursued a small bird that had been snatching off their father’s golden beard, and it descended by a pit in the sea. The youngest went down after it by using many lengths of rope joined end to end, and he reached the region under the sea. There the garuda had imprisoned three princesses in separate mansions of increasing size and magnificence. In the form of a tiny bird, one of the princesses had been making sorties into the realm of men to attract the attention of someone who might liberate them. One princess explained, “Have you not heard about the winged monster Garuda? When he flies, his wings sound like ten thunderstorms. The sweep of his wings pulls down houses and uproots trees. He can carry six men in his talons, and I tremble to think what will happen if he finds you here.”

The garuda in Maranao story “The Tale of Diwata” lived in a cave on the summit of a mountain made inaccessible by a pathless jungle. The summit was bare, but the hero “found bones scattered about.” Entering the cave, he came to “a magnificent house.” He walked in and saw . . . in the hall a beautiful table of solid gold. A golden chair stood on one side of the table and a silver chair on the other. He sat down on one of the chairs, and to his surprise two betel-nut boxes—one of gold and the other of silver—floated into the hall and placed themselves on the table. —an occurrence which the hero understood to be a conventional sign of welcome. The garuda was subject to flattery and it revealed its life index to its captive because of her smooth words. As it lay dying from stab wounds inflicted by the hero, the garuda “looked up at [the hero] and congratulated him on his success.
(Source: The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology and The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

GAWĪGAWEN – (Tingguian) A Tingguian mythical giant with six heads. It wields a spear and a head-axe the size of half the sky.
(Source: Traditions of the Tinguian: A Study in Philippine Folk-Lore, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1915)


GAWIGAWEN by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
GĪAMBŌLAN – (Tingguian) A Tinguian mythical giant with ten heads.
(Source: Traditions of the Tinguian: A Study in Philippine Folk-Lore, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1915)

GISURAB – (Isneg) Gisurab, the vindictive Isneg giant, killed all the men in a village. His Apayao counterpart, Gisorab, was “a huge man-eating giant.” A hunter tried to spear Gisurab when the giant refused to give up the man’s prize. Gisurab snatched the spear and threw it back at him, killing him. Gisurab then carried both him and the contested deer to his cave and ate them.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BACK TO TOP


H
HIGANTE – (Tagalogs) A general term used for “giant” or a ‘huge man’ in mythical settings.

HUANANGAN or JUANANGUAN – (Tinguianes) Is a spirit or demon that, according to Tinguianes beliefs, travels swiftly in the night on horseback, killing
abandoned children that crossed his path.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

HUBOT – (Antique)The hubot and the bentohangin are engkantus which inhabit the air above the ground. Encounters with them are rare. The hubot resemble a huge umbrella in the air approaching from a distance but they are actually huge birds with wide wings.
(Source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

HUKLUBAN – (Tagalogs) Juan de Placensia documented the Huklobon as such; the fifth was called HOCLOBAN, which is another kind of witch, of greater efficacy than the mangagauay. Without the use of medicine, and by simply saluting or raising the hand, they killed whom they chose. But if they desired to heal those whom they had made ill by their charms, they did so by using other charms. Moreover, if they wished to destroy the house of some Indian hostile to them, they were able to do so without instruments. This was in Catanduanes, an island off the upper part of Luzon.

Jocano notes; we think that Hukluban may have been considered the last agent of Sitan and could change herself into any form she desired. She could kill someone by simply raising her hand and could heal without any difficulty as she wished. Her name literally means “crone” or “hag.”

Today, the Hukloban is also considered a “witch” who could kill anyone simply by pointing a finger at him and without using any potion. It could destroy a house by merely saying so. The Hukloban appear as a very old, crooked woman.
(source: Customs of the Tagalogs (two relations), Juan de Plasencia, O.S.F.; Manila, October 21, 1589 and Outline of Philippine Mythology, F. Landa Jocano, Centro Escolar University, 1969)

BACK TO TOP


I
IANGGAM – (Maranao) A supernatural being, the so-called langgam, something white and huge and with bulging eyes. Or so attests those who claims to have seen it. Another of its characteristics is that of frothing mouth and unique groans (dugo). Bamboos and other thick foliage, seems to be its favorite haunts. It sits cross-legged at road junctions during moonlit nights, waiting for preys to manhandle — indicative of the fact that it is possibly the counterpart of the Tagalog kapre, but for a few deviations or omissions from the latter’s complete description.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

IBABASṒ – (Bukidnon of Mindanao) Listed with the “nature spirits” are the Ibabasṓ, the spirits who live in the fields and care for the crops. A yearly ceremony is made for them and they are also closely identified with the Kaliga-ṓn. They appear to be more powerful than any of the other Inkanto, and are held in great reverence. They probably stand apart from that grouping.
(source: The Bukidnon of Mindanao. Fay-Cooper Cole. Harold C. Conklin,. Columbia University, 1957)

IBINGAN – (Bicol) A huge and venomous, many-horned red serpent with a prominent crest on its head and dorsal fin on its back. In Bicolano folklore, it is said to guard a cave occupied by water spirits and sea maids. It stations itself at the mouth of the said cave and crushes intruders with its powerful tail.
(source: Ibálong: the Bikol folk epic-fragment : English and Bikol, Merito B. Espinas, 1996)

īBWA – (Tingguian) Ībwa is an evil spirit, who once mingled with the people in human form. Due to the thoughtless act of a mourner at a funeral, he became so addicted to the taste of human flesh, that it has since then been necessary to protect the corpse from him. He fears iron, and hence a piece of that metal is always laid on the grave. Holes are burned in each garment placed on the body to keep him from stealing them.
(source: The Tinguian: Social, Religious, and Economic Life of a Philippine Tribe, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1922)

IKUGAN – (Manobo) It seems that long, long ago a ferocious horde of tailed men overran the Agúsan Valley as far south as Veruéla. They were tailed men from all accounts, the tail of the men being like a dagger, and that of the women like an adze of the kind used by Manóbos.
(source: THE MANÓBOS OF MINDANÁO, JOHN M. GARVAN, 1931)


IKUGAN
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
IMPAKTO – (Tagalogs) A generic term that can refer to any malevolent creature or nature spirit. Someone once told Maximo Ramos that the impakto chased people and put their vitals in glass jars that bubbled with blood.
(source: Dwarves and Other Nature Spirits, , Jaime T. Licauco, Rex Books, 2005 & The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

INÁWEN – (Tingguian) Ináwen is a pregnant female spirit, who lives in the sea, and who demands the blood of a chicken mixed with rice to satisfy her capricious appetite. She is called in the Sangásang ceremony.
(source: The Tinguian: Social, Religious, and Economic Life of a Philippine Tribe, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1922)

INKANTO – (Bukidnon of Mindanao) A more specific name for nature spirits is Inkanto but the term busau is also used. It is said that the Inkanto have only half a face; the body is complete but many of them walk on their hands with their heads hanging down and their feet up. Some have fur on their bodies but the hairs are sharp like needles.
(source: The Bukidnon of Mindanao. Fay-Cooper Cole. Harold C. Conklin,. Columbia University, 1957)

INLABLABBUUT – (Ifugao) Inlablabbuut, the Ifugao ogre, passed himself off as a handsome youth and won the love of Bugan, a woman who had sent her husband away “because her head was hot.” Inlablabbuut then asked her to go home with him. He disappeared into the woods several times on the way and each time he returned to her, part of his body had swollen to a monstrous size. When he attained his full ogre size and shape, he told her: “Now I will eat you.” Inlablabbuut had a smithy, and in the bellows pipe he imprisoned four children who had come to ask for fire.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

IQUI – (Tagalogs) The “iqui” is a man who has the virtue of flying at night, leaving half his body, from the waist to his feet, in his home. It is said that the “iqui” lives only on the liver of men, and when he sallies out at night, he stations himself on the roofs of houses, whence he kills sick persons by means of a tongue of such fineness that it can hardly be distinguished, appearing like a thread of cotton, which penetrates his bowels, causing death. What is not explained is the method they employ to remove the livers.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BACK TO TOP

K
KABABALAN – (Magindanao) One of four creatures from the Magindanao tale of INDARAPATRA AND SULAYMAN. One of these monsters haunted the hillsides of Kabalalan, eating men and other animals it could reach. It was called Kurita. It lived partly on land and partly on sea.
(Source: Tales from our Malay Past, Mela Ma. Roque, Filipinas Foundation, Inc. 1979)

KABALAN – (Catanduanes, Bicol) Stories of the Kabalan hail from the province Catanduanes in the Bicol region. They are described as horse-like (with 4 legs like a centaur). Hairy from head to toe, with an human face/human likeness to the face. They are said to live in trees and are angered when their homes are disturbed. There are some legends where humans accidentally kill kabalans by burning down their tree-homes through kaingin farming methods. The creatures are merciless though and will curse the offenders with sickness and bad luck until the end of their days.
(source: Story told by Grace Collantes, collected by Philippine Spirits, Karl Gaverza 2016)

KADONGÁYAN – (Tingguian) Kadongáyan indulges in the malicious sport of slitting the mouth of the corpse back to the ears. In order to frighten him away, a live chicken, with its mouth split to its throat, is placed by the door, during the time the body is in the house. When he sees the sufferings of the bird, he fears to enter the dwelling lest the people treat him in the same manner.
(source: The Tinguian: Social, Religious, and Economic Life of a Philippine Tribe, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1922)

KADU-KADU – (Bicol) Kadu-kadu is a small creature with pointed ears. The upper part of his body is larger than the lower part.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

KAGKAG – (Romblon) The kagkag live in the woods far from villages. They hunt for corpses by night. They put their heads in the mouths of mortars. Then they listen to the other ghouls. They listen at moonrise and moonset. This is the time the ghouls all go to their feast. They tell one another where they will have a feast. They make themselves look like animals. They smell like animals, too. They are afraid of seaweeds and spices.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

KAHOYNON – (Waray) The spirits of the earth which may have caused the illness are the kahoynon ( spirits living in trees ). If someone is ill, an egg is broken open. If the yolk shows any sign in a form of a tree , a kahoynon ( enkanto who lives in trees ) is responsible for the infliction.
(source:The Tambalans of Northern Leyte, Rebecca C. Tiston, 1983)

KAIB-AN – (Tingguian/ Itneg) The spirit who protects the growing crops in the rice field. Offerings are made to him during the construction of a field, during rice planting, and harvesting time for him to continue gaurding the crops. He lives in the saloko, a small hut built in the rice fields.
(source: Ethnography of the Major Ethnolinguistic Groups in the Philippines, Arsenio L. Sumeng-ang, New Day Publishers, 2003)

KALANGET – (Ifugao) The Ifugaos call him kalanget. The Gaddangs call him karanget, the Ibanags karango. He is called taong-lupa or “man of the earth,” too. Sometimes he is called kutong-lupa or “louse of the earth He is a short old man with a large head. He lives under ant mounds in the woods and fields. He is said to be the real owner of all the land. Farmers can only rent the land from him. They pay him a rent to plant crops on the land. The rent is in the form of good food. He will take food that has no salt or spices. He hates ginger, pepper, and vinegar.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

KALAPAW – (Isneg) The Isnegs knew Kalapaw as a giant. The people of Apayao called him Sappaw. He was a very strong giant. He could pull out a coconut tree by its trunk. He could break the coconut tree on his knee. He could walk past Apayao land at one stride. He was too big to marry a human girl. So he married his own sister. His son wrecked the people’s fences. The people set bamboo traps to catch his son. But he wrecked the traps with his little finger.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

KALARIOT – (Pampangan) He is called kalariot in Pampanga. He lives in the deep woods. He is tall, dark, and hideous. He comes into the village late at night. He opens a window and gets in. He carries off the pretty maiden who is asleep. He carries her off to his house in the woods. She wakes up in his house and sees him. Then she is frightened and becomes insane.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

KAMA-KAMA – (Antique) The kama-kama are known to be both helpful and naughty. They are very small, from one to two feet in height. When kind, they can bring luck to a family by giving or showing them treasures or magical objects that will bring them luck. When naughty, they could pinch and this is known only by the appearance of some bluish-blackish spots on the skin. They are known also to put foreign objects like small stones, broken glasses, or hair on a person’s body especially when one takes a bath near a shallow well.
(Source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

KAMANAN – DAPLAK – (Zambales) The kamanan-daplak are elves among the Zambals. They are tiny and cute mythical people. They smell sweet like ilang-ilang blossoms. They have long hair the color of com tassels. They live in trees over mountain brooks. They live the same way people live. They call people by name at sundown. People hear their names called and they wonder. For they see no one there at all. They are kind to infants who are left alone. They put sweet wild flowers beside them.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

KANTANOD – (Tagalogs) A kantanod is literally someone or something “who keeps watch.” The root word is tanod. In folklore, a kantanod is a creature similar to the aswang. The pregnant woman should not venture out alone at night if she does not want to expose herself to the aswang and the kantanod. Unlike the aswang , however , the kantanod keeps watch over a pregnant woman from a distance.
(source: Southeast Asian Birth Customs: Three Studies in Human, Donn Vorhis Hart, ‎Anuman Rajadhon (Phrayā), ‎Richard J. Coughlin · 1965 )

KAPAPU-AN – (Kinaray-a) The villagers also pay their respects and show love to another group of unseen spirit beings, their kapapu-an. Unlike some engkantu, their papu are not malevolent because of their kin affiliation with them. More familiar to many villagers and remembered in their lores are deceased ma-aram ancestors who died long ago and were noted for their supernatural feats.
(source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

KAPEROSA – (Tagalogs) Female ghosts often seen wearing flowing white robes or gowns. Their long black hair cover their faces, which was likely borrowed during the Japanese Horror movie craze of the 90’s/ 2000’s. Some may be seen without heads or with rotting flesh. The most popular are the White Lady of Balete Drive and of Loacan Road in Baguio. common stories about the Kaperosa involve a female who commits suicide because of hatred, or being betrayed by her husband or fiance, murdered. Other ‘ghost stories’ say they are the souls who doesn’t rest because they have unfinished thing to do on Earth.
(source: Tagalog ghost stories, Urban Legends)

KAPRE – (Tagalog, Bicolano, Zambales) Kapre is often used as an umbrella term. It is believed to have replaced many local names for similar beings. The term kapre refers to a creature described by Zambales informants as …another black creature with the power of changing its size from that of a manikin to that of a giant of the proportions of a church tower… its glassy eyes large as plates. A boy in a tale entitled “The Big Man in the Tree” thought that he was looking at the trunk of a tree when it was a kapre’s leg instead. The kapre lives in that favorite home of lower mythical beings in the Philippines—the balete — as well as in other large trees. In some tales the kapre was said to “chirp like a bird.” The Zambales kapre was “most often seen sitting on a large branch and smoking a cigar as large as a man’s thigh.” (Learn more about the Kapre)
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


CAFIR by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
KAPRI – (Kapampangan) “10 to 15 feet tall, very black and wearing a long black coat, had long arms, long beard, a long cane which he used to knock the heads of people, and always had a long cigar in his mouth.” He appeared at night during a slight drizzle, staying under a large tree or squatting on its branches or sometimes dangling his legs.”
(source: Kapampangan beliefs circa 1900 can be found in accounts compiled by ethnographer H. Otley Beyer, in an unpublished volume at the HAU Center for Kapampangan Studies courtesy of Beyer’s family | compiled by Robby Tantingco)

KAPRI – (Antique) The kapri are big supernatural beings inhabiting huge trees. They usually visit abandoned buildings. During the night they appear as big people smoking huge pipes and standing near big trees. They are seldom violent and are aggressive only when challenged. When angry, they are known to pick up people and throw them up like playthings.
(Source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

KATAMBAY – (Bicol) A term used to by the early people of Bicol to refer to guardian anito.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

KATAW – (Cebuano, Hiligaynon) The Visayans call her kataw. Her name means that she looks like a person. She is a pretty woman from head to waist. She is a fish with shiny scales below the waist. Her skin is light, her hair wavy and long. She lives in a beautiful house under the sea or beside a river, a lake, or a waterfall. She sits on a rock drying her long hair. She sings a sweet, sad song as she sits there. She makes the fisherman row his boat to her. Then she sinks his boat and gets him.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


KATAW
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
KATATAOAN (Ilocos Sur and La Union) These are elves/dwarves, according to the beliefs of the peasants of Ilocos Sur and of La Union; they usually take the human form or other forms of gigantic proportions and travel at night in an aerostatic ship, taking those found in an unpopulated place, also eating the bodies of their dead.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

KIBAAN – (Ilokano) Fair-skinned was the kibaan in two Iloko folktales collected by Maximo Ramos: “The Wee Folk” and “The Fairy’s Gifts.” Its mouth gleamed with its gold teeth. Its heels pointed before and its toes behind, thus grossly misleading people who tried to pursue it by its footprints. The kibaan’s long hair reached down to its feet and it was as “small as a child of two years.” The kibaan are said to keep house, to enjoy cooking in their kitchens after sunset, and to be generally near human habitations, especially at night. Zambales folk used to say that small trees and bushes on which fireflies habitually swarmed at night were the home of kibaan. A peculiar strong, spicy odor resembling that of crushed kakawate leaves emanating from the trees along country roads after sundown is said to come from kibaan kitchens.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

KīDENG – (Tingguian) Kīdeng is a tall, fat spirit with nine heads. He is the servant of Ináwen, and carries the gifts of mortals to his mistress.
(source: The Tinguian: Social, Religious, and Economic Life of a Philippine Tribe, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1922)

KIKIK – (Bicol) The kikik is a bird so called because of the sound it creates – “kikik”. It is known to be an emissary or servant of the aswang. Wherever there is a kikik sound, an aswang is around. It is also said that when the kikik hovers above, the aswang is below. When the aswang is above, the kikik is below. Some believe the kikik to be a huge owl; some believe it to be a bat with a gift of exceptional sight. Whichever, it has a definite affinity to the aswang, and knows the aswang to be its master. When a kikik is heard in a house where there is a newborn baby, someone should say loudly, “Adi an asin” (Here is the salt).
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

KIMAT – (Tingguian) From the skies, Makaboteng saw the tragic death of Abag. He appealed to Kadaklan, mighty ruler of the sky, to punish the cruel villagers. Kadaklan sent Kimat, his lightning dog, to burn the village.
(source: Outline of Philippine Mythology, F. Landa Jocano, Centro Escolar University, 1969)

KIRBAS – (Ilokano) He is called kirbas among the Ilokanos. He lives in the deep woods. He is tall, dark, and hideous. He comes into the village late at night. He opens a window and gets in. He carries off the pretty maiden who is asleep. He carries her off to his house in the woods. She wakes up in his house and sees him. Then she is frightened and becomes insane.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

KIWIG – (Aklan) It is called kiwig in Aklan. It looks like a stooped dog, cat, or pig. Its tail arches down and then points straight back. It has fiery eyes and tangled coarse hair. It attacks human beings by biting their neck. It kills people and eats them raw. It fears people with loose long hair.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


KIWIG
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
KOMAU – (Tingguian) Komau is a giant spirit, who, according to tradition, was killed by the hero Sayen. Among the Ilocano and some of the Tingguian, the Komau is known as a great invisible bird, which steals people and their possessions. He does not visit the people through the bodies of the mediums.
(source: The Tinguian: Social, Religious, and Economic Life of a Philippine Tribe, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1922)

KOROKOTO – (Cebu) When the korokoto walks, his feet do not touch the ground. He seeks shelter in trees and bushes. He can take the form of a dog or a cat. He wrestles with his victims, drags them home, cooks them, and eats them. He can be identified by the sound he emits—”Koro-koto.”
(source: The Aswang Complex in Philippine Folklore, Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)

KUDO-KUDO – (Bicol) Kudo-kudo, so named because of the sound it creates while walking, is an unseen creature accompanied by mosquitoes. It eats salt and always frequents the kitchen. It is dark and lives under the house, or the silong. It is always dirty and likes to stay in dark, damp and unused spaces below the floorboards of the house. From the research on Kinawitan, Daraga, Albay, by Gerome Alarcio, BCA, Journalism IV. The kudo-kudo is a tiny, round or egg-shaped creature with very small eyes. Its limbs are as small as a needle. Its body is brown and jar-like, and it loves to stay inside wet jars. It is found in grasslands and deep in the forest. The kudo-kudo can harm people when it is hurt. It causes one to shiver with high fever. The shivering is often mistaken for malaria.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

KUKU – (Mandaya) The Mandayas (Mindanao) also know an anito or dwarf spirit called kuku.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

KULARIUT – (Kapampangan) A dark, elusive creature with a long white beard who lived in bamboo groves and forests, perched on branches or rooftops quietly watching people while they slept in their rooms.
(source: Kapampangan beliefs circa 1900 can be found in accounts compiled by ethnographer H. Otley Beyer, in an unpublished volume at the HAU Center for Kapampangan Studies courtesy of Beyer’s family | compiled by Robby Tantingco)

KUMAKATOK – (Luzon, Visayas) Three-hooded spirits that knocks on your door which signals that someone will die the other day after. One of them resembles that of a female, and the other two looks like old people. There’s one point in time when residents of Luzon and Visayas painted white cross or write a cross using a white chalk on their doors to scare or to ward off these trio.
(source: Tagalog ghost stories, Urban Legends)

KUMAO – (Ilokano) The early Ilocanos feared the mythical bird Kumao, which is said to take abandoned children.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

KURAKPAO – (Bicol) Kurakpao is a very untidy and dirty creature that has thick, disheveled hair and with big, piercing eyes. An irate creature, it carries a piece of wood shaped like a huge thick bat and is ready to batter the head of anyone it meets.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

KURITA – (Maguindanao) The kurita, “a pernicious monster,… had many limbs.” The kurita lived long ago in Magindanao and “haunted Mount Kabalalan.” The kurita “extirpated all animal life in its vicinity,” and when met by Sulayman, the hero, it “fixed its claws in his flesh.” Monster from the epic INDARAPATRA AND SULAYMAN – “One of these monsters haunted the hillsides of Kabalalan, eating men and other animals it could reach. It was called Kurita. It lived partly on land and partly on sea.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BACK TO TOP

L
LABANG – (Buhid Mangyan) Evil spirits which manifests in animal forms. The Buhid Mangyan believes that their bites are fatal. The bite becomes a channel where bad spirits can enter and bring sickness to a person or even death when the spirit is not driven away. In one tale a man is wounded by a group of labang. An edu-labang, which is a labang resembling a dog, kills him by licking his wound. A group of labang gather and eat his body.
(source: The ties that bind: The Buhid Mangyan People of Mindoro, their Sacred Lands and Medicine Mountain, NewCAPP, 2014)

LAGTAW – (Sulu) To the people of Sulu, it is called lagtaw. It is tall, black, and big like other demons. Its large eyes are like fire. Its nose and ears are large. It lives in great big trees. Its legs are like ship masts. It lives inside a tree hole. It leaves its hole at night. Then it goes out to frighten boys and girls.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

LAHO – (Tagalogs/ Luzon) The Tagalog probably said: “Linamon ng laho ang buwan” (The moon has been swallowed by the laho [dragon). The good prelate’s transcription, like that of many an amateur linguist in the early days of the Spanish occupation, leaves much to be desired. Cf. Juan R. Francisco’s gloss on laho: “The cosmic phenomenon, ‘the eclipse of either the sun or moon’ but more specifically the latter, is called in Tagalog laho (Pampanga. lawo, ‘obscurity of the eclipsed moon’) which may be derived from Sanskrit, rahu, ‘monster,’ son of Diti: The deity with a serpent’s tail which in eclipses devours the sun or moon’, doubtless via the Malaysian rahu, the Hindu dragon that swallows the moon and causes eclipses.’
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

LALAWAG – (Bukidnon of Mindanao) Lalawag are spirits who live in groves and who own deer and bees.
(source: The Bukidnon of Mindanao. Fay-Cooper Cole. Harold C. Conklin,. Columbia University, 1957)

LAMAN LUPA – (Luzon) Tagalog spirit; literally, ‘content of the earth’. “An invisible little being, the lamang-lupa lives in the earth (burrows), in fields or hills. It is territorial and only lets people use its territory under certain conditions. The lamang-lupa lives in communities and follows human trails out of hills. As territorial owners of the land, men used to give them offerings before and after planting and harvest. It then partakes in the proficiency gifts. It accepts the offering of red rooster’s blood sprinkled on rice plants. It will destroy crops if not asked permission bt farmers to use “their” land. It abhors salt and spices.
(source: Ancient Beliefs and Customs of the Tagalogs, Jean-Paul G. Potet, Lulu Press, 2017)

LAMBANA – (Tagalogs) This is what the early Tagalog people called their idol shrines. Lambana also had the same meaning as larawan. This word was widely used in the poems of the early Tagalogs*. Modern interpretations depict the lambana as a small fairy-like creature living in the forest – sometimes gruesome, and sometimes benevolent.
(*source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

LAMPONG – (Ilongot) The Ilongots and Ilokanos call him lampong. He is a short old man of the woods and fields. He has bright eyes and a long, sparse beard. He is a shepherd of wild deer. He turns himself into a deer and stands still. Hunters shoot at him but cannot hit him. The deer run away while the hunters try to shoot him. Then he turns into an old man again. He walks away from the hunters.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


LAMPONG by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
LAQUI – (Bicolano) A frightening creature believed in by the ancient Bicolanos. It has the hair and feet of a goat but the face of an ugly man. It is generally harmless, appearing at night and surprising people with its voice. A monster that lives in the mountain, its, body, feet, and hair is that of a goat and having a human face.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010 and Bikol Maharlika, Jose Calleja Reyes, Goodwill Trading Inc., 1992)

LAYUG/ LAYAP – (Bicolano) Layug or Layap. This is a creature that can assume the form of a dog or any creature that can fly (layug) or disappear (layap) at will.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

LEWENRI – (Romblon) They are tall and handsome and fair of skin. They wear clothes of violet, black, and white. They mix unseen with people in the village. They show themselves to the lonely traveler. They appear to boys and girls by moonlight. They appear to them at dawn, noon, and sunset, too. They make frightful and shrill sounds. They play sad or joyful music. They laugh and cry and sing. They help the humble and punish the proud.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

LIMÓKON – (Manobo) No arguments can shake the Manóbo’s faith in the trusty omen bird. For him it can not err, it is infallible. For every case you cite him of its errors, he quotes you numberless cases where its prophecies have come true, and ends by attributing the instance you cite to a false interpretation or to divine intervention that saved you from the evil prognosticated by the bird. Mandáyas, Mañgguáñgans, Debabáons, and Banuáons of the Agúsan Valley have practically the same beliefs as the Manóbos in regard to this omen bird. The omen bird is never killed, for to kill it would draw down unmitigated misfortune. On the contrary, it is often captured and is carefully fed and petted, especially when an inmate of the house is about to undertake a journey. The prospective traveler takes a little camote or banana and, placing it in the cage, addresses the captive bird and asks it to sing to its companions of the woods that they too in turn may sing to him the song of success and safe return.
(source: THE MANÓBOS OF MINDANÁO, JOHN M. GARVAN, 1931)

LITAO – (Ilokano) Described in Isabelo de los Reyes’ book, El Folk-lore Filipino, the litao is a male anito of the waters. In Vigan, it is a small man that lives in the branches of bamboo trees along river banks and is the husband of the sirena. The spirit sometimes goes on land disguised as a normal man and tends to the bamboo trees in his area. He curses with illness those that cuts the trees. In his human form his true nature is revealed through a strong fishy smell that emanates from his body.
(Source: El Folk-lore Filipino, Isabelo delos Reyes, UP Press, 1994)

LOLID or LULID – (Panay) The lolid live under the ground. They look like newborn puppies or piglets. White in color, they have very short legs, sometimes even reported as having no legs at all. They move about by rolling. Once unearthed under the ground, where a house is to be constructed, they may cause illness to a member of the household. They are pets of the engkantu.
(Source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

LULID – (Negros Oriental)That the lulid, whose peculiarity, is a child-like cry, prowls the underbrush, ready to pounce on anybody that comes its way. Its bite causes the growth of a big boil on the lymph nodes of a person’s groin or in the hallow of the joints between the thigh and the calf, thereby causing permanent lameness.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

LUPAD – (Visayan) In Bisaya means; flying birds, spirits, brujos; metaphorically it means the cause of death. (Compare: Lumabat and Lupa)
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

LUTAO – (Mindanao) Lutao are the partially decayed bodies of evil persons whose souls are on the way to narka ( hell ) . They are said to be frightful to see as they walk around re-animated.
(source: Philippine Sociological Review – Volumes 14-16 – Page 26,1966)

LUTAO – (Samal, Mindanao) The Samals are not above believing in ghosts, which they call lutao. They seem to have a definite concept of ghosts beyond merely shadowy
apparitions. Anything frightening or smelling obnoxiously is attributed to ghosts. What becomes ghosts are the souls of notorious characters thieves, robbers, rapists, murderers, swindlers and the like. That they live in the mountains and cannot swim somehow reinforces their thinking that the lutao cannot be anything but Tausug.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

BACK TO TOP

M
MAGINDARA – (Bicol)Manguindaras were underwater beings, our local concept of mythical siren. They were regarded as guardian spirits of the ancient Bikol fishermen. It was their belief that the maguindara kept them safe from disasters by forewarning them with shouts and signs on the sea of an approaching storm and aided them by leading the way to a school of fish when they were fishing. Maguindara or serena is a pretty woman from head to waist. She has a fish tail instead of legs. She lives in caves under the sea or behind water falls.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

MAGKUKUTUD – (Kapampangan) The magkukutud are beings endowed with supernatural powers to separate their heads from their bodies . They can simply will their heads to disappear . When headless , they are very powerful and can inflict diseases on people.
(source: Handbook of Philippine Language Groups, Teodoro A. Llamzon , University of California, 1978)

MAGLALAGE – (Kapampangan) Was the generic term for ghosts, or spirits of the dead stranded on earth because of an unfinished business.
(source: Kapampangan beliefs circa 1900 can be found in accounts compiled by ethnographer H. Otley Beyer, in an unpublished volume at the HAU Center for Kapampangan Studies courtesy of Beyer’s family | compiled by Robby Tantingco)

MAGOMÁNAY – (Bukidnon of Mindanao) Magománay, “spirits which live in the baliti trees,” and perhaps all other large trees. These are their homes and if they are cut down the spirits must move. Such spirits are important in the ceremonies and in the everyday life of the people, as well.
(source: The Bukidnon of Mindanao. Fay-Cooper Cole. Harold C. Conklin,. Columbia University, 1957)

MAHOMANAY – (Bagabo) The tahamaling of the Bagobo is a female spirit with a red complexion, and the mahomanay, her male counterpart, has a fair skin. E. Arsenio Manuel, writing about the Bagobo, noted: E. Arsenio Manuel, writing about the Bagobo, noted: ‘The balete tree is the favorite residence of the Bagobo “spirit” tahamaling, ‘the keeper of animals,’ and… mahomanay, ‘the guardian of animals’.” He also observed that the mahomanay “lives in mountains. She lives in a particular tree.” The mahomanay, is said to be “wholly a beneficent spirit.” “She is usually offered food or betel nut chew, even leglets, the hunters placing any of these articles at the foot of the trees to gain her goodwill before hunting.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

MAGTITI-LAOK NGA BILAKAK – (Licuan-Baay,Abra) A serpent whose scream sounds like a very loud and haunting rooster’s morning call. It does this to scare and prevent hunters and loggers from entering the mountain.
(source: Relayed to Jordan Clark by an informant)

MAGTITIMA – (Bukidnon of Mindanao) The magtitima of the Bukidnon lived in the balete tree. About this tree and the magtitima a Jesuit worker in the Bukidnon area toward the close of the Spanish regime made this observation, and he admitted that he was afraid of the tree: I noted in passing before a leafy tree called balete the mountaineer who accompanied me lowered his voice and was very much frightened. I asked him the reason for it, and after many urgings he considered it advisable to give me the explanation of his friend in these words: The magtitima, or an invisible being of the wood,… if he does not receive a sacrifice of white fowls, grows angry at mortals and does not allow them to cut wood, and sends them sickness. Although I do not believe in these things, I have a certain fear of passing near the trees.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

MALAKAT – (Waray) Richard Arens, who was for a time on the Silliman University faculty, did field work in the Eastern Visayas on the side and reported that the malakat (the walker) of Leyte could be either male or female—something unusual since the creature is said to be always male in other reports. Arens described an attacking malakat in these words: “In attacking a person, she assumes a horrible and frightful shape. Her long hair spreads all over her face. Her eyes turn fiery and her saliva flows from out of her mouth like long strings. Her nails grow long and sharp. As the fight begins, her hair crawls into the person’s nose, ears, mouth, and eyes, depriving him of his breath, voice, and sight. She grips the victim firmly on the arms and legs. With her sharp claws, she digs into the victim’s skin until it bleeds; if [she] has a weapon with her, she avoids the struggle and the victim might be killed; thereafter [she] feasts on the victim’s flesh.”
(source: The Philippine Journal of Science – Volume 85, Issue 4, Richard Arens, 1957)


MALAKAT
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
MAMAMARAYA – (Marinduque) The mamamaraya’s forteis the swelling of a victim’s lips or abdomen causing a feeling of having devoured something heavy. Thiseffect can be achieved only with the placing of the worn and unwashed clothes of the intended victim, plus a piece of paper with magic phrases scribblings on it, inside a tightly sealed pot. The pot is then brought to the beach where it is buried in the sand. The victim’s stomach swells and ebbs with the tide. Note the similarity of this case with the paktol, a kind of witchcraft malady attributed to the Visayans.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

MAMARANG – (Visayan) A sorceress who fights with travelers in lonely places and tries to kill them that she may eat them.
(source: Types of Prose Narratives, Harriott Ely Fansler, Row, Peterson & Company, 1911)

MAMBABARANG – (Bicol) The barang is a most feared form of witchcraft. So feared, in fact, that the people around which the witch circulates have no choice but to extend him due respect, if they do not want to be recipients of his dark art. In Bicol barrios Haguimit, Tambangan and Polongparang, Sta. Cruz, Marinduque, he is called mambabarang. Marinduque – though a little distant from Cebu – is one of the islands that constitute the Visayas group. A severe stomach ache, a big lump in the abdomen, an abnormal growth in the throat and windpipe and/or severe pains in the region of the heart – these are believed to be the harm caused by the mambabarang or barangan.

But the more common practice is through the use of insects. The controversial Povedano Manuscript of 1578, as written by Diego Lope Povedano, describes this more fully, to wit: The insect is called barang, and the man who can command the insect is called mambabarang. These animals (creatures) enter the body through any open places. This entry is invisible. The animals bite inside…. They may bite the liver, stomach, intestines, lungs…. The barang is kept in a bamboo tube… (Before sending an insect to attack someone) the sorcerer ties a thread to one of its rear legs. Signs of barang are discharge of blood; also, the stomach may swell and be painful.
(source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)


MAMBABARANG
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
MAMBUBUNO – (Zambales) The Zambals call her mambubuno. She looks like a fish with a double tail. She has large, black, slimy scales. Sometimes her scales are of many bright colors. She lives in a brook with a cave under its banks. A fisherman can see her when the moon is bright. He cannot help but follow her when he sees her. He follows her into her cave and does not get wet. Her cave shines with gold and precious stones. She marries him and does not let him go. He can leave only when she lets him. He will drown if he tries to escape. His folks will find him planted stiff in the water. Or they will find him squatting stiff at the bottom. But sometimes she lets him visit his village. His folks do not believe the story he tells them. They think he has become a fool. Or he returns to find all his folks dead and gone.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

MAMELEU – (Negros Island) The mameleu of Negros Island was believed to be a “a very large serpent” living in the sea. Its body was as big as that of a carabao and was thirty fathoms long. Its eyes were like two torches, and in their orbits “gleaned two jets of fire.” Its head was as large as that of a carabao, too, and it had two white horns. It had span- long tusks “and teeth about two cuartas long.” Its scales, the size of dinner plates, were hard and “resistant.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


MAMELEU by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
MAMLINDAO – (Kalinga) The mamlindao are hunting spirits.
(source: THE KALINGAS: Their Institutions and Customs Laws, Roy Franklin Barton, The University of Chicago Press, 1949)

MAMUMUYAG – (Western Visayas) The West Visayans call her mamumuyag. She is cross and has a hostile glance. She does not join groups washing clothes at the river. She does not join groups chatting at the village store. Folks do not pass by her house if they can help it. They speak softly for fear of annoying her. She gives various ailments to those she hates. She gives them a twisted mouth. She gives them painful tumors.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


MAMUMUYAG
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
MANAGBATU – (Cagayan) A spirit in the form of a man, which lives in trees and at midnight throws stones and clods at the houses near his dwelling. He can cause sickness to those that try to injure him.
(source: Types of Prose Narratives, Harriott Ely Fansler, Row, Peterson & Company, 1911)

MANAGILUNOD – (Ilokano) The managilunod is not the dangerous type of witch. Possessed of no supernatural power, his specialty is to wish ill, evil or misfortune upon a person who happens to be the object of his envy. Some of his or her wishes, as the case may be, is sometimes accomplished but through no direct effort of his or hers. It’s all a matter of chance or coincidence. The most common practice of the managilunod is to offer candles in church and there request that misfortune befalls the object of his/her envy.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

MANAGTANEM – (Ilokano) The managtanem exercises his art through a doll replica medium of the person who must be inflicted with pain by sticking pins into various parts of the body corresponding to where the pin is stuck on the doll. Sadism is probably the managtanem’s reason for being since it would seem that he usually doesn’t go to the extent of murder.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

MANANANEM – (Pangasinan) Black magic is the manananem’s forte, as had been proved and attested by a fish vendor’s sad experience. There was a woman who offered to buy one of her dalag (mud-fish). Because the offer was low and would mean losses on her part to accept it, she decided to reject it. After the passage of a day, she felt something irritating in her stomach. Days later, the feeling became more definite: it was now something live and moving. When it reached the point that she could bear it no longer, she consulted her ailment to a doctor. They operated on her stomach and extracted a live mudfish, a case that bewildered the doctors who performed the operation no end.
(source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

MANANANGGAL – (Tagalogs, Bikol) A creature often confused with being a type of vampire is the manananggal, a creature rare in European folklore but fairly common in Southeast Asian traditions. Instead of sucking the victim’s blood, the manananggal is thought to suck his phlegm and viscera or otherwise extract the latter. The vampire may or may not be said to use a long tubular, pointed tongue for sucking blood, whereas the viscera sucker is solely interested in sucking the phlegm of her victims or extracting their internal organs, particularly the liver and the heart. In Hiligaynon and Waray, this being is most commonly referred to as the wak-wak. One report states that the manananggal “feed only on the liver and heart” of human victims and hover after nightfall about a house where a birth is expected. The croaking of a flock of crows is said to signal its presence.

When the male manananggal of the Bikol area is ready to take off, he goes in a hidden part of the house or a secluded field and then,… dipping his right hand into the foul-smelling ointment which he has prepared, [he] applies it in a line beginning from the tip of the little finger of his left hand, progressing [along] the length of the arm to the armpit, thence down his left side and the outer side of his left leg, ending at the tip of the little toe. Then the left hand is dipped into the chicken dung mixture and the process is duplicated on the right side of body. During the operation, [he] repeats to himself, but alone, the following formula or its equivalent: Siri, siri, daing Diyos kung banggi, labaw sa kahoyan, lagbas sa kasirongan! Literally translated, the formula reads: “Siri, siri, there is no God at night; over trees, under houses.”

A Manila editor introduced some sketches of mythological creatures made by Carlos V. Francisco with this observation: against the manananggal and the aswang, he arms himself with a whip of the stingray tail or spine of sawfish, and scent of garlic, and a pinch of salt. The manananggal and the aswang are cruel and voracious. There are nights when, with a red moon shining through the trees, the peasant fancies he hears the kapre laugh, its eyes fiery and its huge cigar lit, enjoying the talking of the bats.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


MANANANGGAL
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
MANANGILAW – (Bikolano)The manangilaw was a cave – dwelling black giant that wore a vine for a hagkús ( belt ) . When hungry , this creature would lower its vine belt into the sea , a river or a well ; he would catch shrimp and other small game.
(source: Ibálong: the Bikol folk epic-fragment : English and Bikol, Merito B. Espinas, 1996)

MANAUL – (Negros) The manaul is a mythical king who became a bird. He was believed to have caused the seas and the skies to fight against each other. The clash between the seas and skies resulted to the formation of the Philippine islands.
(source: Philippine Folk Literature: The Myths, Damiana Eugenio,UP Press, 2002)

MANDAYÁÑGAN – (Manobo) Mandayáñgan, on the contrary, is a good-natured, humanlike giant, who loves to attend the combats of Manóboland. He is said to have been one of the great warriors of the days of yore. His dwelling is in the great mountain forests, where live the gods of war.
(source: THE MANÓBOS OF MINDANÁO, JOHN M. GARVAN, 1931)

MANDURUGO – (Tagalogs) A precise term designating the vampire is the Tagalog word mandurugo, blood (sucker). A pretty girl in the tale “The Girl of Many Loves” proved to be a mandurugo, ‘blood sucker’. Is said to fly from Capiz between midnight and the first cockrow. Becomes powerless at dawn and can be killed with a knife.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


MANDURUGO
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
MANG-AAMULIT – (Mindoro) Releasing several of his pet bugs from their luka (bamboo container) and letting them mix in the soiled clothes of the intended victim in order to acquaint them of his smell is the idea on how the mang-aamulit carry on his evil design. Once the bugs are fully acquainted with the intended victim’s smell, they are then released in the dark in the dead of night and are expected to proceed to the sleeping intended victim to inflict itchy sores which is the first thing he feels on waking the following morning. Toughies who commit the mistake of bullying a kin are often the unsuspecting victims of the mang-aamulit’s wares, which is in the form of long-healing, if incurable, sores on the part where it counts most: the knuckles.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

MANGALAYO aka ALLAWIG – (Sulod, Panay) Sulod natives in Panay Island tell of a flying ball of fire that appears at night and chases lone travelers. Known as Allawig in other parts of the country it is said to lead travelers astray into dangerous paths like cliffs or holes in the ground.
(source:The Remnants of the Great Ilonggo Nation, Sebastian Sta. Cruz Serag, Rex Book Store, 1997)

MANGALOK – (Palawan, Western Visayas) The Cuyonon believe that …a bedridden patient suddenly dies because a mangalok came in the night and pulled out its entrails. The people bury a banana stalk which the [mangalok] had transformed into a corpse. Should the coffin bearers complain of the weight, the mangalok is there perched on top of the casket, invisibly laughing, nibbling the liver of his victim and planning his next all-you-can-eat-for-nothing. She is called mangalok in Palawan and the Visayas. Some folks say she sleeps in forest trees by day. She hooks herself to a top branch with her wings. She drapes her long hair over her pretty face. Then she sleeps soundly till nightfall. She flies out to the villages in the dark. Her favorite food is human liver and unborn babies. Women with child fear her very much. She sucks out the intestines of little children, too. She steals the liver of a corpse on the way to the grave.
(source: The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology and The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

MANGGAGAMOD – (Ilokano) In Ilocandia, the conjurer is known as the manggagamod. He has the makings of a witch, real evil. Those of their kind who are sham and cannot practice genuine black art resort to foul means in the attainment of their objectives. Some collect snake venom and put it into the food of whoever they take fancy on. They do it without apparent motivation, except probably hatred for humanity. The manggagamod is a witch who specializes in poison. Gamod, after all, is the Ilocano term for poison. It is apparent that this kind of witch possesses no supernatural power but functions within human limits.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

MANGINGILAW – (Antique/ Iloilo) The mangingilaw are bigger than ordinary persons and have hairy bodies, big teeth and long hair. A mangingilaw can devour a man alive. They do not wear any clothing, though some informants say that they wear a tampi, a small piece of clothing to cover their lower private parts.
(Source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

MANGKUKULAM – (Tagalogs, Ilokano, Pampangos etc.) The Pampangos and Tagalogs call them mangkukulam. They look plain and are mostly women. They live in tiny huts at the outskirts of villages. People are afraid to speak to them. People avoid them if they can. They cause intense headaches, tumors, and pain. They cause these by a wish or by pricking their doll. They cannot go up a ladder with a pestle across it. They fear the things viscera suckers and weredogs fear. The mangkukulam avoid people, too. They do not look people in the eye. The image is said to be upside down in their eyes. They pass on their witchcraft to their children.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


MANGKUKULAM by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
MANGKUKUSINU – (Kapampangan) The Kapampangan version of the mangkukulam, only much more evil. He could inflict pain on a person even from a great distance, magically able to put poison, a metal object or even a live chicken inside his victim’s body, causing extreme suffering.
(source: Kapampangan beliefs circa 1900 can be found in accounts compiled by ethnographer H. Otley Beyer, in an unpublished volume at the HAU Center for Kapampangan Studies courtesy of Beyer’s family | compiled by Robby Tantingco)

MANGKUKUTUD – (Kapampangan) The Kapampangan version of the manananggal, whose torso detached from the rest of the body to fly in the night in search of cadavers to eat. This is the reason we never leave our dead unattended, or the mangkukutud would steal the corpse, slice the flesh and cook it. This creature laid eggs like hens do, and people who took these eggs by mistake and cracked them open would be shocked to find a nose, fingers, eyeballs and other body parts inside. The magkukutud got its name from the ancient Kapampangan word kutud, “to cut.”
(source: Kapampangan beliefs circa 1900 can be found in accounts compiled by ethnographer H. Otley Beyer, in an unpublished volume at the HAU Center for Kapampangan Studies courtesy of Beyer’s family | compiled by Robby Tantingco)

MANGLILILI – (Kapampangan) An invisible entity who caused disorientation in solitary travelers, making them lose their way in deep forests and mountains. Poor travelers would spend hours, even days, trying to find their way back. People living at the foot of Mount Arayat have experienced being led astray by a beautiful lady for what seemed to be only hours but turn out to be actually months and years.
(source: Kapampangan beliefs circa 1900 can be found in accounts compiled by ethnographer H. Otley Beyer, in an unpublished volume at the HAU Center for Kapampangan Studies courtesy of Beyer’s family | compiled by Robby Tantingco)

MANGMANGKIK – (Ilokano) This is the name that the rural llocanos people give to spirits, according to their superstitions, live inside trees, particularly in the tigbeg tree.D. Isabelo de los Reyes writes about the mangmangkik of the Ilocana legend, his work is titled “Vida de Juan el Peresozo”.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

MANGUANG ANAK – (Kapampangan) Fast-running agents of an unseen evil person or spirit who kidnapped children off the streets and took them to a faraway place where they were bled to death and their blood sold and used in minting coins (old folks thought dipping coins in blood was part of the minting process and coins did taste like blood). When I was a kid we called them Ilonggot, and I remember seeing one apprehended by the police and tortured before a big crowd in front of the municipio.
(source: Kapampangan beliefs circa 1900 can be found in accounts compiled by ethnographer H. Otley Beyer, in an unpublished volume at the HAU Center for Kapampangan Studies courtesy of Beyer’s family | compiled by Robby Tantingco)

MANINIBLOT – (Zambales) The Zambals call her maniniblot. She goes out to harm her enemies when the moon is full. She gives chills and fever to people she hates. She keeps a tiny doll under her fireplace. She pricks the doll with a pin where she wants her victims to suffer.She picks up their footprints and roasts the earth. She roasts the earth in a clay pot. Then her victims will have a high fever.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

MANGMANGKIT – (Iloko) The mangmangkit have been called “spirits of the forest,” but the data contain no physical description of them. The Iloko mangmangkit lived in trees: “Even to this day, [a person] murmurs his invocation to the spirits of the forest, the mangmangkit, before he lays his axe to the tree he means to fell:

Bari-bari
Dika agunget, pari,
Ta pumukan kami
Iti pabakirda kada kami.

(Bari-bari
Be not angry, friend,
For we must cut down some
Of what we have been told to.)
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

MANIOKAN – (Kulaman, Manobo) The maniokan, generally evil spirits, resemble snakes, and like them live in the ground. People are frequently made lame by simply stepping over their homes.
(source: The Wild Tribes of Davao District, Mindanao, Fay-Cooper Cole, The R. F. Cummings Philippine Expedition, 1913)

MANLALAYOG – (Cagayan de Oro) A manlalayog is usually a woman with long, scattered hair, who wrestles with a man until he dies. The woman’s hair would pass through all the openings of the man’s body, which prevents him from breathing. Wrestling usually occurs when the night is dark.
(source: The Encyclopedia of Philippine Folk Beliefs and Customs Vol. 1 , F.R. Demetrio S.J., Xavier University, 1990)

MANONOPSOP – (Bicol) Manonopsop is a witch with a strong sucking tongue that can extend meters long so it can suck blood from the stomach (usually that of a pregnant woman) of a sleeping victim. It will only stop sucking when the victim is already drained of blood. Usually the mononopsop positions itself from the roof of a house, and lets its thread-like tongue extend to the stomach of its unsuspecting victim.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

MANSALAUAN – (Negros Island) The mansalauan of Negros Island was identified in the last century as …a fabulous bird of the Negritos… the size of an exceedingly large bat. Its eyes resembled carbuncles, and its head that of a lizard, while its tail had hair like that of a woman, and it had very large wings. It had a sharp tongue [pincho] in its mouth. This tongue it contracted, and by means of it introduced itself into the stomach of the woman and drew thence the spirit of the Negrito. Its feet were as large as those of a man, and its hands like those of a monkey.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

MANSUSOPSOP – (Pampanga) Similar to the ghoul aspect of the aswang, the Mansusopsop is a being in Philippine Folklore that preys on pregnant women. This creature hovers over the rooftop and finds any opening for its long, thread-like tongue to pass until it reaches the stomach of its victim, sucking the blood, fetus and life energy until the victim dies.
(source: undocumented Kapampangan stories)

MANTAHUNGAL– (Tagbanuwa) They are described as cowlike in body and voice but having no horns. They have shaggy coats of hair which hang to the ground and monstrous mouths with huge tusk-like incisors, two above and two below, capable of ripping a person to bits.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


Mantahungal by Ian Balba via Deviant Art
MANTIANAK – (Tagakaulu Kalagan) Spirits of unborn children—mantianak (sometimes referred to as Busau) — wander through the forest crying “ina-a-a” (mother), and often attack human beings. The only way persons thus assailed can hope to escape is by running to a stream and throwing water on the abdomens of their pursuers.
(source: The Wild Tribes of Davao District, Mindanao, Fay-Cooper Cole, The R. F. Cummings Philippine Expedition, 1913)

MANTIANAK – (Bagobo) The Mantianak, as everywhere, is associated with childbirth, but there are local variations. Bagobo tradition says that if a woman dies during her trial her spirit is angry at the husband, since he is held responsible for the conditions that caused his wife’s death. The ghost of the woman becomes a mantianak that hovers in the air near her former home and utters peculiar cries, resembling the mewing of a cat. When the man hears that sound at night, he knows that it is the voice of the mantianak of his dead wife. This form of buso is characterized by a hole in the breast and by the long claws, and it is called “a bad thing. ” They say that the mantianak is constantly trying to kill men and boys, but that it is afraid of women and girls.
(source: A study of Bagobo ceremonial, magic and myth, Laura Watson Benedict, New York Academy of Sciences, 1916)

MANTIW – (Western Visayas) Giant spirits in Iloilo over thirty feet tall. They are usually seen roaming the fields or leaning against a coconut or Buri tree alone while whistling melodiously. People who have allegedly seen a Mantiw describe it as having a fair complexion, wide shoulders, and a tall aquiline nose. Also, a male Mantiw has an incredibly long penis and large, dangling scrotum. Although peaceful, a Mantiw is easily offended when a human whistles along with it. It will grab the nuisance human, carry him to the tallest coconut tree, and leave him on top with no means of climbing down.
(source: Philippine Folk Literature: The Legends, Damiana Eugenio,UP Press, 2002)

MARISPIS – (Hiligaynon) Beings in Western Visayas that make cricket-like sounds where their deep, sharp eerie chirps presage the coming of a ghost, sickness, or death.
(source:The Remnants of the Great Ilonggo Nation, Sebastian Sta. Cruz Serag, Rex Book Store, 1997)

MARKUPO – (Hiligaynon) It had the body of a very large snake. A red crest stood on its head. Its tongue was long and had thornlike hairs. It had two white tusks in its mouth. Its long tail was split at the tip. It lived on top of a mountain in the West Visayas. There it sang a loud song on quiet nights. People feared it, for its breath was poison. Men and beasts died if the markupo breathed on them. Trees became poisonous if it breathed on them. Birds died if they sat on the poisoned trees. (learn more)
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


MARKUPO
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
MARUKPUK – (Iloilo) The marukpuk is heard in bamboo groves . It is like the sound of splitting bamboo trees as though someone is cutting them ; the rustling of twigs and leaves is heard as though a strong wind is blowing and bamboo stems are being beaten. It is also said The marukpuk are spirits of the dead which haunt the bamboo groves from which the poles used for carrying the coffin to the grave.
(source: The Hiligaynon : an ethnography of family and community life in Western Bisayas region, F. Landa Jocano,University of the Philippine , 1983)

MATANDA SA PUNSO – (Tagalogs) The early Tagalogs believed that in the dirt that formed termite mounds, lived ancestor spirits and nunos. Their beliefs are reminiscent of the old beliefs of the past that the Tagalogs have conserved until now, they say that in those mountains named in the Tagolog language, punso, lives an ancient of such advanced age that can be found squatting in the punso. They offer it food without salt. This mythical ancient they call mantanda sa punso, common phrase, that means, old man of punso.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)


MATANDA SA PUNSO
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
MINOKAWA – (Bagobo) An eclipse of the moon is a sign that the mammoth bird Minokowa has swallowed her, and that the sun and all the people on the earth will be swallowed by the same bird, unless the Minokawa can be induced to open its mouth and disgorge the moon – a result which is regularly brought about by the shouting and screaming of men, and the beating of agongs.
(source: A study of Bagobo ceremonial, magic and myth, Laura Watson Benedict, New York Academy of Sciences, 1916) (learn more)


MIKOKAWA by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
MOLIN-OLIN – (Bukidnon of Mindanao) Molin-olin, the spirit of the afterbirth. When a child is born a spirit “brother” is likewise born. When its body is buried and becomes earth the spirit goes to the sky, where it lives and watches over its living brother. It never dies. “We do not know how it lives, but its home is straight above and it swings, maybe in a cradle—for the prayer taught us by our ancestors and used by the datos when they act as judges starts with ‘Now my Molin-olin who is swinging high up in the sky.’
(source: The Bukidnon of Mindanao. Fay-Cooper Cole. Harold C. Conklin,. Columbia University, 1957)

MULTO – (Tagalogs) Ghost. Refers to spirit of the dead man appearing to the living. Many times, the activities of elementals are attributed to ghosts, which are not true.
(source: Dwarves and Other Nature Spirits, , Jaime T. Licauco, Rex Books, 2005)

MUMU – (Various) In its simplest form, the Mumu is a malevolent spirit that lurks in darkened, shadowy corners waiting to snatch children away from their families. In the National Capital Region (Metro Manila), the most common belief is that the Mumu is a ghost or spirit that has unfinished business in our world, has not been given last rites, or have not yet accepted their death. As we move northward on Luzon the belief changes into a spirit that feeds on children or takes their soul. When we move south through the Philippines towards Bicol and the Eastern Visayas, the term Mumu is used to describe a variety of mythical beings and ‘engkanto’. The same can be said for Negros and Mindanao. In Iloilo, however, the Mumu is likened to the Tamawo.
(source: The term mumu is mostly used to reference ghosts or the ‘boogey man’ to children)

MUNTIANAK – (Mandaya) Among the Mandaya at the north end of Davao Gulf this spirit is also known as Tuglinsau, Tagbusau, or Mandangum. He looks after the welfare of the bagani, or warriors, and is in many respects similar to Mandarangan of the Bagobo. He is described as a gigantic man who always shows his teeth and is otherwise of ferocious aspect. A warrior seeing him is at once filled with a desire to kill. By making occasional offerings of pigs and rice it is usually possible to keep him from doing injury to a settlement, but at times these gifts fail of their purpose and many people are slain by those who serve him. Among the Mandaya, the balyan (baylan) plays an important role in their rituals, religious or otherwise. Offerings and libations are common practices. Offerings may be a bagi where pigs, chickens and other animals are offered to the diwata to ward off the evil spirits or busaw.
(source: The Wild Tribes of the Davao District, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1913)

MUROKPOK – (Antique) The Murokpok are noted to be harmful. They are relatively small, dark- complexioned and curly-haired. They look somewhat cross-eyed. When they roam around in the farm or hills, they wear a red bandana on their head. They usually bring with them a bow and arrow which they use to inflict harm on any person they meet. If a cane is aimed at a person, this person falls unconscious and gets ill. If the person is hit by a murokpok, he would die.
(Source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

MUTYA – (Various) In Pangasinan, the banana flower is pointed toward the sky when it emerges from the tree but bends earthward when its stem becomes sufficiently long. If you see a banana flower about to bend to the ground, wait under it at midnight when the moon is full. As it bends, it will simultaneously open and release a mutya, or magic jewel. Catch the mutya in your mouth as it falls and keep it there. The petioles of the banana tree will turn into human arms and its leaves into human hands and choke you into regurgitating the jewel. If you can keep it in your mouth till daylight, you will have great strength all your life.

The being that guarded the “stone,” also known as mutya among the Iloko and the Tagalog, of the banana blossom opening at midnight and facing east was said to be a particularly fierce character.

A report on beliefs about the mutya of the banana flower in Palawan which closely resemble beliefs in Zambales and Pangasinan.

It is a common practice in Bohol barrios to determine God’s will for the sick. Sickness to the Boholanos may be caused by God’s will or by people living in a gakit (balite tree), or in rivers — the kataw (mermaid) etc. Mutya (a pearl-like stone) is placed on a plate to determine the will of God. If the pearl sticks to the plate when turned upside down, then the relatives spontaneously cry because the patient generally dies.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, 1990 Phoenix Publishing, The Encyclopedia of Philippine Folk Beliefs and Customs Vol. 2 , F.R. Demetrio S.J., Xavier University, 1990)

MUWA – (Antique) The muwa are also supernatural beings that appear as old men and women. They stay in old abandoned houses and are known to hoard food provisions like palay. If a farmer fails to invite them at the pangkuyang, a pre-harvest rite, they are known to harvest the palay ahead of the farmers and store the crop for their own use.
(Source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

BACK TO TOP


N
NAGBUAGAN – (Tingguian) This is what Tinguianes of Abra called certain demons or malignant spirits who want to destroy everything. To the Igorots and Ifugaos, it is a name of their anito.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

NAGUINED – (Visayan) Name of certain demons of the early Visayans. Presumably the Bicolanos also knew the Naguinao.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

NANGANGATOK – – (Tagalogs) The Nangangatok are usually invisible spirits that are harbingers of terrible things to come. People are advised to peek through the window first when someone knocks before opening their doors or they might let the Nangangatok inside their house.
(source: Tagalog ghost stories, Urban Legends)

NONO or NUNO – (Tagalogs) Meaning grandfather, was one of the names given by the old Tagalogs to the spirits of their ancestors and ultimately, to all anito spirits. The same name was given to alligators. It is believed that when an alligator devours a human, the soul remains inside the animal. It is also believed that the anitos or nonos reside particularly in baliti trees (Ficus indica, L.) thus it was given the name Nonok. The Tirurayes also named the baliti tree Nunuk.

The Tagalog peasants still believe in nunó. In Bulacan, nunó is a very old man who resides in forests particularly in the anthills or any mounds. Also called Matandá sa punsó.

Lastly, the Visayans also call the baliti tree Nonok and believe that the spirits who dwell in it may cause harm if they are not feared or respected.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

NUNO SA PUNSO – (Tagalogs) Nuno sa punso (literally, grandfather of the mound) are also simply called nuno. It lives inside a mound of earth, sometimes mistaken to be termites’ home, usually seen to be slightly smaller than the average dwende.
(source: Dwarves and Other Nature Spirits, , Jaime T. Licauco, Rex Books, 2005)


NUNO by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
BACK TO TOP


O
OGRO – (Bicol) Ogro is an ugly dreaded monster that feeds on humans. The gigantic creature usually eats people who are selfish and cruel. The ogro is a black, horrible creature who watches children in their sleep, ready to hit their heads with its big wooden hammer if their heads reach up to the pillows of their parents. It is believed that children become disrespectful when they sleep with their heads on the same level as their parents.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

OKO – (Negros Oriental) That the oko is believed to be a monkey whose eyes are in vertically-situated and do not usually roam around during the day.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

OKOT – (Bicol) A duende of the early Bicolanos. It is a good-natured spirit that speaks by whistling.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

OMAYAN – (Bagabo) The Bagobo omayan, or kalalaoa nang omay (“spirit of omay”), was said to live “in the rice fields, and there offerings are made to him before the time of planting and reaping.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, 1990 Phoenix Publishing)

ONGLO – (Bicol) Onglo is a creature that is about one foot tall; it is very hairy and causes any person who touches its hair to itch all over. The onglo is a human-like creature that has long straight black hair around its body from head to toe. It has clawed feet and long sharp fingernails, and long-pointy ears. Humans can detect an onglo because of the fetid smell. It feeds on the food that is left out to dry in the sun—like dried fish. The onglo is a creature whose upper body is that of a man, and the lower body is that of a horse. Its odor is so sharp that one can smell it from quite a distance. Onglo is a very black and ugly monster whose touch or mere presence causes one’s skin to itch.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

ORIOL – (Bicol) Oriol is the fabulous snake daughter of Aswang, who appears and disappears at will. Her mission is to seduce men. Her beauty and influence were irresistible. A thousand fables were said about this snake- enchantress. Oriol or Irago is the serpent daughter of aswang who could transform herself into a seductive woman or appearand disappear as she pleases. In human form, she looks like a sweet, beautiful maiden with an equally sweet and beautiful voice. She has long, black, wavy, hair; and white, smooth skin. In her other form, she is a huge multi-colored serpent whose scales glisten in the sun. Oriol or Irago is the serpent daughter of aswang, who could transform herself into a seductive woman, or appear and disappear as she wants. Oriol is also a character from the Ibalong epic of Bicol.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

BACK TO TOP


P
PAH – (Magindanao) One of four creatures from the Magindanao tale of INDARAPATRA AND SULAYMAN. The second monster was called Pah. It was a winged creature, with razor-edge claws. Its feet were covered with steel-hard scales. Whenever this monster flew, its wings covered the sun and produced darkness akin to midnight. It haunted the regions east of Mindanao. It had its abode on top of Mount Bita.
(source: Tales from our Malay Past, Mela Ma. Roque, Filipinas Foundation, Inc. 1979)

PALASEKAN – (Ilongot) The palasekan that features quite prominently in Ilongot folklore is invisible, but its whistling at night can be heard plainly and understood rather well. The palasekan in an Ilongot tale entitled “The Elves and the Phonograph” played a music box owned by an agricultural school teacher. The palasekan were offended when their house was cut down. They demanded a propitiatory feast of wine in cups laid out on benches. The aesthetic sense of the palasekan and their uncanny knowledge of human affairs. The palasekan are capable of prognostication. Each Ilongot, moreover, has a personal palasekan, and one woman’s private palasekan keeps a rice pot constantly filled with cooked rice against the time when unexpected visitors arrive.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, 1990 Phoenix Publishing)

PAMAHANDI – (Bukidnon of Mindanao) The ten protectors of horses and carabao, and senders of good fortune, although each has specific duties. They are much respected and each year a family will observe a ceremony to obtain their good will. Occasionally they cause trouble and send sickness.

Their names are Pamahándi púti, Pamahándi lansion, Pamahándi biohon, Pamahándi sīgolón, Pamahándi hagsálan, Pamahándi boñau, Pamahándi opos, Pamahándi logdangon, Pamahándi komagasgas, and Pamahándi somágda. Not all these names are recognized in the Central Valley, but there is agreement as to their number and their duties.

The Pamahándi are often generalized into a single deity.
(source: The Bukidnon of Mindanao. Fay-Cooper Cole. Harold C. Conklin,. Columbia University, 1957)

PANIGOTLO – (Aklan) The favored beast of the Aklanon god, Gamhanan. If it bleats before midnight during a full moon it means the next day will be fruitful and abundant. If the bleating is heard after midnight it is an omen that something bad will happen. “In Mount Daeogdog there were times when the people used to hear the bleating of a white panigotlo during full moon. The panigotlo was a deer with full antlers. And this deer was often seen dashing across the river stream like a shaft of light. But the people never molested this pet of the gods; neither did they permit anyone to catch it.”
(source: Philippine Folk Literature: The Legends, Damiana Eugenio,UP Press, 2002)

PANTIYANAK – (Bicol) The patiyanak is an aborted baby’s spirit in limbo as it cannot enter heaven. It cries for prayers. The patiyanak is the offspring of an aswang and the devil. It looks like an innocent happy baby but when a human being gets near it, it reverts to its original form and devours the human so fast, and so viciously. The patiyanak is an ugly creature in its true form. It has reddish brown skin with sharp and glowing eyes. Its face is that of a very old man, and its teeth are long and sharp, protruding out of its mouth. The voice of patiyanak causes miscarriage. The patiyanak is an aborted fetus that comes to life to take revenge on its mother. The cry of the patiyanak, which resembles the cry of an infant, foretells that someone in the community is going to die. Patiyanak or tiyanak is also a nocturnal bird which no one can clearly describe, but it is believed to be the soul of an aborted or an unbaptized child since the sound it creates is like that of a crying baby. It can hurt you, or even eat you up. Where a patiyanak’s voice is heard above the house, an aswang lurks under. If the patiyanak’s voice is heard under the house, an aswang hovers above.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

PARADUNO – (Camarines) They are known as paraduno in Camarines. They look like human beings. But they smell like rotten flesh. They roam at midnight looking for corpses. They lie on their belly on the roof over the dead. Their tongue sticks out as they listen. They hasten the death of a sick.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

PASATSAT – (Pangasinan) A ghost of a dead person who died in a tragic way, especially those who died in Japanese Era (World War II). This kind of ghost usually shows to passersby in a solitary paths in the forest or even in cities. In order for the ghost to stop haunting, someone should stab the coffin or the reed mat where the body of this ghost was buried. It will show no sign of the body but a putrid flesh can be smelled.
(source: Pangasinan ghost stories)

PATIANAK – (Tagalog) Writing about the traditional beliefs of the Tagalog toward the end of the sixteenth century, Plasencia reported in 1589 that he believed the patianak to be a “woman and child who died in childbirth”. A Batangas census official later wrote that “the patianac was the soul of a child dying before baptism” (Census [1903]), a concept with which Cole’s later findings in Mindanao are in substantial agreement. More logical is Juan R. Francisco’s comment: “In the myths of the Filipinos, the (pa)tiyanak is a small being who brings mischief to anyone who crosses his path. He cries like a baby to attract the attention of passersby. When the unfortunate man gets lost in the woods, he can not find his way home unless he makes the (pa)tiyanak laughs by wearing his clothes inside out.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, 1990 Phoenix Publishing)

PATIANAK – (Kapampangan) Small dark creatures that lived underground, in remote spots marked by termite mounds. Passers-by had to say “Makilabas ku pu!” or “Itábi po, puera nunu!” (“May I pass?” or “Please go away, I hope there is no old dwarf here!”) The word patianak did not come from the Tagalog tiyanak, but from the Bahasa pontianak, the ghost of a stillborn baby. Thus, Kapampangans thought them to be the souls of unbaptized children, who tormented women during childbirth and harassed immoral people (like unchaste priests and unfaithful husbands).
(source: Kapampangan beliefs circa 1900 can be found in accounts compiled by ethnographer H. Otley Beyer, in an unpublished volume at the HAU Center for Kapampangan Studies courtesy of Beyer’s family | compiled by Robby Tantingco)

PINAD-ENG – (Ibaloy) Spirits who live in the forest who own the wild pigs and chickens; hunters offer sacrifices to these spirits for a successful hunting trip.
(source: Ethnography of the Major Ethnolinguistic Groups in the Philippines, Arsenio L. Sumeng-ang, New Day Publishers, 2003)

PINADING (or BIBIO) – (Ifugao) These deities are believed to inhabit large rocks, springs, trees, banks and other natural features of every locality. Their names differ in each region, of course, but there is not much difference in conception. Their principal activities are “theft” of the souls of rice and of men, causing death, and “theft” of rice from the granary; they are also believed to be the owners of all game living in their vicinity.
(source: The Religion of the Ifugaos, R.F. Barton, American Anthropological Association Vol. 48, October 1946)

PINTEN – (Northern Kankana-eys) There exists a special kind of spirit called pinten, the spirits of men who died a terrible death (e.g., killed in warfare or accident). They are usually called upon to help for success in headhunting activities or revenge.
(source: Ethnography of the Major Ethnolinguistic Groups in the Philippines, Arsenio L. Sumeng-ang, New Day Publishers, 2003)

PISPIS – (Negros Oriental) That the unrest of the soul of the deceased is believed to be augured by the sound of the pispis, a certain nocturnal insect, when heard on the ninth night of prayer.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

PONGO – (Bicol) An ape type being from the Ibalong Epic. “In the fight with giant crocodiles, which colored the Bikol river red, he emerged unhurt while the apes of the pongo and orangutan variety who had watched with horror were finally driven to the mountain Isarog.”

POO – (Waray) Like the wakwak he has the appearance of an ordinary person, and he does not have wings or fangs. The poo comes out only when there is a full moon. He shouts “poo” when he is still far from your house and when he comes nearer your house. When he shouts “poo” the fourth time, he is already in your house. If you are not awakened by his shouts, he will get your small child, but if you are awakened, he cannot get the child because he is afraid he might be killed by the one taking care of the child. If the poo finds out that you are alone, he will kill you.
(source: The Aswang Complex in Philippine Folklore, Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)

POPO – (Bicol) The superstitious belief in the existence of the Popo was one of the most terrifying that the wild imagination of the Bicolano could dream. When it happened, then, that some child grew rachitic,without believing as he should, he explained it by saying that that was because the Popo, imaginary and vengeful ghost, put his hand consuming his already weakened forces. For this reason they sought to appease the anger of the angry Popo with incessant prayers and offerings. In order to make the offering, thecalled the Baliana, who, after a few prayers, squeezed juice from the leaves ofthe lemon into the eyes of the child, to whose contact the Popo fled, leaving the child free of his tyrannical influence.
(source: SHORT GLIMPSE ON THE ORIGIN, RELIGION, BELIEFS AND SUPERSTITIONS OF THE ANCIENT NATIVES OF BICOL by Fray Jose Castaño, February 1895)

PUGOT – (Iloko, Pampanga) The term pugot denotes either “the black one,” “the decapitated one,” or “one with hands cut off,” and the creature is widely known by that name in Northern and Central Luzon, though less as a headless being than as “a black being that can assume varying sizes—from a man tiny as a new-born babe to a giant the size of a large acacia tree,” a gigantic Negro “terrifying but not particularly harmful.”

The pugot seems to somewhat differ from the kapre in its ability to assume a variety of shapes—human or animal, such as dogs and hogs, though to be sure, this capacity is shown by other demons and the dwarf as well. As a child in San Antonio, Zambales, Socorro P. Buenaventura heard it said that a mysterious hog would rush between the legs of a wayfarer in a deserted street bordered by large acacia trees in her town and then would suddenly assume a gigantic shape and carry the traveler off.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, 1990 Phoenix Publishing)


PUGOT
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
PUMUPUD (or KOLKOLIBAG) – (Ifugao) In these deities, who cause difficult birth by obstructing the vagina, we see an association of birth with water also noted with the Ifugao Gods of Reproduction. Pumupud living in the Upstream, dam the birth canal; Pumupud in the Downstream, is antidotal and tears the dam down. The class takes its name from Pumupud, a deity that is or becomes an upud, the large central disk of marble or mother-of-pearl that the Ifugao wears on his scabbard belt. This deity blocks the passage of the foetus.
(source: The Religion of the Ifugaos, R.F. Barton, American Anthropological Association Vol. 48, October 1946)



BACK TO TOP


R
RABOT – (Bicol) Rabot is half-man and half-beast creature that transforms its enemies into stone. A huge monster that resembles a man, and a huge lizard at the same time, it can fly and cast its power on anyone within its vision at will. This half-man and half beast has eyebrows that are so thick and so black that they protrude from its face. Its huge chin is tucked in, like that of a lizard’s, but it has really huge pointed ears that droop down. Its voice is so loud and raspy that it sounds like thunder. He was killed by Bantog using a bolo in the Ibalong Epic.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

RAGIT-RAGIT – (Romblon) They are known as ragit-ragit in Romblon. They are tiny, slender, and cute. Their eyes are sharp and they cannot wink. Their complexion is fair and smooth. They live forever and never grow old. Only infants of less than a year can see them. They steal an infant left outdoors after sunset. They make the infant ill. The infant fidgets and cries. It is cured by being made to wear a black cap.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BACK TO TOP


S
SAIRO – (Ilokano) This is the name used by the early Ilocano people to refer to malevolent entities or spirits; now the Ilocano people use it to refer to the demons of Christian tradition.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

SAITAN – (Tiruray)The Tiruray people in the island of Mindanao used this to refer to a kind of malevolent spirit that inflicted illnesses upon people. It is highly likely that the term has muslim origins. (compare: Sitan)
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

SANGKABAGI – (Ilokano) These are spirits feared by the locals of Ilocos Norte. These seem to be the same supernatural beings that are known as katatao-an in the countrysides of Ilocos-Sur. These are elves/dwarves, according to the beliefs of the peasants of Ilocos Sur and of La Union; they usually take the human form or other forms of gigantic proportions and travel at night in an aerostatic ship, taking those found in an unpopulated place, also eating the bodies of their dead.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

SANTELMO – (Samar) Leyte Gulf and past the island of Basey, Samar, to the part entering the Pacific Ocean are known for the santelmo, a natural phenomenon to some but regarded as a supernatural occurrence by others, especially by the fishermen and the natives of Samar. In English it is called Saint Elmo, and Santo Elmo in Spanish, but Samareno’s have come to call it santelmo unto this day.
(source: Philippine Folk Literature: The Legends, Damiana Eugenio,UP Press, 2002)

SANTILMO – (Various) Tagalogs, Visayans, and other Filipinos call it santilmo. It is a ball of fire in fields and swamps. It bounces along and rolls away. It changes into a beast with fire in its mouth. Travelers and fishermen follow it at night. They walk and walk till they are tired out. Then they cannot find their way home. They walk into deep mud and thorny bushes. They get dizzy and become insane. They must reverse their clothes to send it away. Then they can find their way home.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

SARANGAY – (Ibanags) Like other demons he is tall and dark. He has a large body, too. His hair is long, coarse, and black. He wears big wooden rings on his ears.He lows like a bull and runs after boys and girls He owns a magic jewel. His jewel glows like an ember in the dark.
(source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

SARIMAO – (Bicol) The Sarimao were avenging monsters in the Ibalong Epic that were brutally fierce, ugly, and ruinous. They went after evildoers, usually to those with hidden guilt, who could not be brought to justice. Handyong exiled the Sarimao to Mount Kulasi. Their human equivalents are believed to be those who take the law into their own hands, who have suffered injustice.
(Source: Ibalon Epic)

SARIMANOK – (Maranao) If there’s a symbol that the Maranao people in the Philippines are associated with, it’s the Sarimanok. Sarimanok is an important part of the Maranao people’s cultural heritage, it is invoked in many rituals and it showcases their unique artistic geniuses. The Sarimanok is depicted as a fowl with colorful wings and feathered tail, holding a fish on its beak or talons. With the head profusely decorated with scroll, leaf and spiral motifs (okir), it is said to be a symbol of good fortune.
(source: “Southwestern Philippine Art”. Anthropological Papers National Museum, Peralta, Jesus T., 1980)

SARINAGO – (Bagobo) Spirits who steal rice. It is best to appease them, otherwise the supply of rice will vanish rapidly.
(source: The Wild Tribes of Davao District, Mindanao, Fay-Cooper Cole, The R. F. Cummings Philippine Expedition, 1913)

SARUL or SARUT – (Ilonggo)The sarul or sarut were spirit beings that took the form of animals and insects and frequented places where there were humans.
(source:The Remnants of the Great Ilonggo Nation, Sebastian Sta. Cruz Serag, Rex Book Store, 1997)

SARUT – (Sulod) Similar to the bagat (pets of supernatural beings) are the sarut. These take the form of queer-looking animals and insects which situate themselves in places where humans are tempted to hurt them. They are harmless when left alone, but when hurt, they retaliate by inflicting sickness on the offender. The sarut may be described as a supernatural tempter.
(Source: The Encyclopedia of Philippine Folk Beliefs and Customs Vol. 1 , F.R. Demetrio S.J., Xavier University, 1990)

SASAGANGEN – (Tingguian) Sasagangen, sometimes called Ingalit, are spirits whose business it is to take heads and put them on the saga or in the saloko. Headache is caused by them.
(source: The Tinguian: Social, Religious, and Economic Life of a Philippine Tribe, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1922)

SEGBEN – (various Visayan groups) The goat like segben, otherwise not classifiable, appears to be an embodiment of the ghoul. It has the unpleasant smell characteristic of ghouls, hastens the death of sick persons, and lingers near the corpse: Segbens are goatlike animals, are hornless, and have big wide and prominent ears. They appear and are seen only in the evening. They are invisible during the day. In the evening they stay under the house of a dying person. The[y] come back for nine consecutive nights, until the accustomed novena for the dead is over. Their bodies produce a very pungent and nauseating odor and their big ears clap like two pairs of hands [sic] at the sides of their heads.

Asuncion Conde remembered hearing references made by the Agusan folk to the glowing eyes and perked-up ears of the segben. Benilda Moreno of Leyte reported that she twice saw segben come to eat the flowers of the squash vine in her father’s backyard at night and they “looked like white wild goats.” She added that she heard them bleat like ordinary goats and saw them vanish with incredible speed.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

SELDAY – (Tingguian/ Itneg) Selday is a malevolent spirit who lives in the forest and causes sore feet which is only relived when offerings are made to him. He is believed to cause great trouble or sickness to the community when he is not offered the blood of a small pig.
(source: Ethnography of the Major Ethnolinguistic Groups in the Philippines, Arsenio L. Sumeng-ang, New Day Publishers, 2003)

SIGBIN – (Negros Occidental) The sigbin is another nocturnal animal resembling a dog whose forelegs are constricted in the manner of the kangaroo.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

SIGBIN – (Visayan) A designation used by the Visayan people to refer to a certain type of spirit familiar that supposedly accompanied a person, to whom the spirit was bound by contract to serve constantly. (compare: Sigbinan.)
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

SIGBINAN – (Visayan) The early Visayan people believed the there was a certain type of sorcerer that was called a sigbinan who could transform into alligators,serpents, or dogs who would bite or slay many men.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

SILAGAN – (Catanduanes) An early Franciscan missionary indicated that he believed in viscera suckers, known as silagan in Catanduanes, when he wrote: [If the silagan] saw anyone clothed in white, [they] would tear out his liver and eat it thus causing his death. This… was in the island of Catanduanes. Let no one consider this a fable; because, in Calavan, they tore out in this way through the anus and all the intestines of a Spanish notary, who was buried in Calilaya by father Fray Juan de Merida.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

SILING – (Tagakaulu Kalagan)Siling causes much trouble by confusing travelers through the forest.
(source: The Wild Tribes of Davao District, Mindanao, Fay-Cooper Cole, The R. F. Cummings Philippine Expedition, 1913)

SIRENA – (Iloko, Ilongot, Tagalogs etc.) In an Iloko tale which Maximo Ramos recalled his mother used to tell, a boy playing at the river bank saw a beautiful woman bathing and she proved to be a sirena. He was attracted by her long hair and her charming smile and he walked to her. He then recalled a description of the sirena as a creature having a body covered with fish scales from the waist down, and he soon observed that “…like the body of a fish, her body was smaller at the end. Her tail fins flipped from side to side as they went through the water.” Later the mermaid described herself: “…half of my body is the body of a fish, and half is the body of a woman…” Informants from Zambales and elsewhere told Ramos that the sirena made the water rise quickly and engulfed her victim: “No sooner had his [the boy’s] feet touched the water than the river rose and the woman caught him in her arms.” Sirena is the Spanish equivalent of mermaid, and the term appears to have driven many of the vernacular terms out of use.(learn more)
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

S’IRING – (Bagobo) A rustic demon well known in folklore is S’iring, who, under the guise of some relative or friend, lures a young person into the densest part of the forest, causes him to lose memory and judgment, and finally brings him to his death in some indirect manner. What we call echo is the call of S’iring, who answers in a faint voice the shout of some wanderer whom he is trying to entice from the familiar trails. The S’iring is represented as having long sharp nails and curly hair.
(source: A study of Bagobo ceremonial, magic and myth, Laura Watson Benedict, New York Academy of Sciences, 1916)


SIRING
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
SIYAM-SIYAM – (Iloilo) In mid to late 19th century Iloilo, travelers on horseback or carriage told of encountering a restless spirit at night. The spirit at first appeared as a normal human and asked to hitch a ride. On the way it would talk casually and confess of its nine sins that it committed nine times. Then the hitchhiker will turn into a skeleton in tatters and ask for the nearest church and disappear while the travelers screamed their heads off. In one story, Siyam-Siyam finally found peace when he encountered a friar.
(source: Urban Legend from Iloilo)

SIYOKOY or SIUKOY – (Tagalogs) Some Tagalogs call the merman siukoy. A siukoy’s skin is sunburned and hairy and his head hair copper-colored and wavy but relatively short. The Tagalogs call him siukoy. He has a brown, hairy skin. His hair is short, golden, and wavy. He lives in rivers, lakes, and in the sea. He is often seen in flooded waters. He floats along on the brown water. He looks for children swimming in the water. He pulls them under by the legs. Then he takes them to his home in the water. Merfolk are said to drown those who tell them they eat meat and fish. They also drown those who say they eat greens with curly tips. This is because merfolk are half meat and half fish. It’s also because merfolk have curly hair.
(Source: The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology and The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

SUMARANG – (Iloko)In the Iloko folk narrative “The Life of Lam-ang” (Biag ni Lam-ang), Sumarang encountered the hero in a battle. He was described as “a man… whose eyes were as big as a plate and whose nose was the size of two feet put together.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BACK TO TOP


T
TA-AWI – (Maranao) The ta-awi of Maranao folklore was “monster” whose approach created “a noise as loud as thunder coming from the forest.” The ta-awi swore to come back and eat the princess after it had devoured her parents and kin, and it came on “faster than the wind.” Dying, the ta-awi told the hero to open up its stomach and take the undigested eyes of the people it had devoured. The hero did so and found the eyes of human beings. He collected them in a jar “the height of a man,” and he eventually restored their owners to life.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


TAAWI
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
TAGABATO – (Bukidnon of Mindanao) Tagabato (or tao sa bato) are the possessors of all large stones.
(source: The Bukidnon of Mindanao. Fay-Cooper Cole. Harold C. Conklin,. Columbia University, 1957)

TAGADALÁMA – (Bukidnon of Mindanao) Tagadaláma are spirits living in the cliffs. Some are poor, and when men fall and are killed they steal their clothing.
(source: The Bukidnon of Mindanao. Fay-Cooper Cole. Harold C. Conklin,. Columbia University, 1957)

TAGAMALING – (Bagabo) Another supernatural being associated with the mountains is Tagamaling, who is, traditionally, a god on the alternate months only, and at other times a demon. As the special protector, too, of deer and of pigs,. Tagamaling cannot be excluded from the spirits that are closely related to the interests of the Bagobo. Primarily, there are two· chief tagamaling, a male god and his wife, but, according to folklore, there must be very many spirits by that name.
(source: A study of Bagobo ceremonial, magic and myth, Laura Watson Benedict, New York Academy of Sciences, 1916)

TAGARESO – (Bagabo) Tagareso is an ugly fiend who stimulates ill-feeling and arouses a quarrelsome spirit on festival occasions. He tries to make married men dissatisfied with their wives, so that they will want to run off and leave them.
(source: A study of Bagobo ceremonial, magic and myth, Laura Watson Benedict, New York Academy of Sciences, 1916)

TAGASORO – (Bagabo)The demon who ” makes men dizzy” is Tagasoro, and his presence at a ceremonial is greatly feared.
(source: A study of Bagobo ceremonial, magic and myth, Laura Watson Benedict, New York Academy of Sciences, 1916)

TAGO-NGIRIT (Bicol) Tago-ngirit is a creature that is said to be half-hidden behind trees and leaves as it wears a big smile. Children are afraid of the tago-ngirit whom they might find as they play hide and seek.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

TAHAMALING – (Bagabo) The tahamaling of the Bagobo is a female spirit with a red complexion, and the mahomamy, her male counterpart, has a fair skin. E. Arsenio Manuel, writing about the Bagobo, noted: ‘The balete tree is the favorite residence of the Bagobo “spirit” tahamaling, ‘the keeper of animals.’ *note: Among the Manuvu, according to Manuel, Tahamaling is a goddess.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


TAHAMALING by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
TAIYABAN – (Ifugao)The name of the class may possibly be derived from an ancient form of the word taiyap, meaning wing. These are the most feared, perhaps, of all deities. The Flying Monsters prey on the souls of men, carrying them off, it would seem, as eagles do their prey. They also prey on soul-stuff: for example, they devour that of the arm-then the arm will wither-or of the ear, and the hearing will be lost.

These beings are believed to live in rocks, thickets, trees and other natural features of landscapes all over the Ifugao’s known earth. They are, therefore, largely local, but there are also general ones. This class would be the most numerous of all if there were included in it those taiyaban that are of local character. Although the taiyaban is conceived as being usually bird-like, it sometimes “turns on the fire” and appears as a flame or apparition of fire. It also frequently assumes human form. Dogs can perceive it when human eyes cannot, and if dogs bark without apparent reason, it is believed that they are barking at a flying monster that has come into the village.
(source: The Religion of the Ifugaos, R.F. Barton, American Anthropological Association Vol. 48, October 1946)

TALAHIANG – (Zamboanga) People in Zamboanga call him talahiang. He is twelve feet tall and has large muscles. He is dark and has coarse, kinky hair. He has thick lips and large teeth. He lives in big trees in the jungle. He makes travelers lose their way. But he is afraid of noise. He runs away when he hears a shout. He changes himself into a big lizard and flees.
(Source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

TAMÁ – (Kulaman, Manobo) Tamà owns the deer and wild pigs, and no one hunts or traps in the forest until he has made an offering of betel nut to this spirit. When game is secured its tail and ears are strung on rattan and are hung in a tree, in exchange for the live animal.
(source: The Wild Tribes of Davao District, Mindanao, Fay-Cooper Cole, The R. F. Cummings Philippine Expedition, 1913)

TAMAWO – (Antique) The tamawo are described as “beautiful or handsome and fair- complexioned.” When wanting to court a villager, a tamawo appears as an ordinary person but when scrutinized closely, he is said to have no narrow groove on the upper part of the lip. One’s image is also believed to appear slanted when seen through the pupil of the tamawo’s eye. A person courted by a tamawo exhibits strange (lunatic-like) behavior. The tamawo that reside in Mariit are known by the following names:

Bumalabag, also a male engkantu whose job is to drive away spirit beings who bring illness to people and animals.
Liktin-laktud, another male engkantu, who views and visits places. He walks fast and crosses hills.
Manupongtupong, a male engkantu who dresses just like an ordinary man. He is a big man, fond of roaming around but he usually stays close to the hills.
Manla-aw-la-aw, a male engkantu who also roams around and looks out from behind a hill.
Manilagnilag, a female engkantu who likes to be present in all social gatherings and festivities. She attends ritual gatherings.
Mambukay or Kalambukay, another female engkantu who dwells near the shallow wells. She is the object of ritual offerings by ma-aram every year.
(Source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)
TAMBALOSLOS (Bicol) Tambaloslos is a two-foot tall creature with a very distinctive characteristic: his upper lip and lower lip measure two inches and three inches respectively, and the whole mouth stretches from ear to ear. The tambaloslos is a black, lanky creature with wobbly legs. Its body is almost skin and bones. Its huge, fleshy and protruding lips extend from one ear to the other. To drive the tambaloslos away, one has to tickle it. This will force it to laugh and make its huge lips draw onto its face; and since. its lips are so huge, they cover its eyes when it laughs. These descriptions seem to be the ‘G’ rated versions of the being below.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

TAMBALUSLOS – (Bicolano, Mindanao, Visayas) From Cebu:Overly large head and a freakish grin. Has a scary, evil laugh. Makes people who walk through the forest lost. The more lost its victim is the harder it laughs. If you put your clothes inside out the tambaloslos finds it so funny it will laugh so hard it will cover its eyes with its enormous upper lip, giving the victim a chance to escape.

Tambaloslos is a slang word in the Cebuano language. It is used to mean a useless or an inept male. It is seldom used to refer to a woman. It is a vulgar word and is not used in polite or formal conversation. Occasionally people say it to elicit a humorous effect. The suffix “loslos “is a slang term for the male genitalia.

“Tambaloslos kang daku!” is a saying in Cebuano that is similar to “You’re such a dimwit!”.

From Bikol: It got its name from the long, wrinkled penis and dangling testicles which dangles to the ground (luslus).

An awkward, lanky, wrinkled black creature, it has long, thin, wobbly legs, hooves and big joints. It has long, thin arms and fingers and a mane like that of a horse that went all the way down from the head to the buttocks. It has wide protruding lips that covers its face when it laughs.

The Tambaluslus hides under trees on moonlit nights and loves to chase people who are lost in the woods.

‘luslus’ which means ‘loose and hanging’.

Also from Bikol: A tall humanoid creature. Generally black in complexion, it has long and thin legs with big joints, hooves, long thin arms and fingers, and a mane that runs from the back of the head down to its buttocks. It also has wide protruding lips like an ape. Another strange feature of this creature are its long wrinkled penis and loose testicles which dangle near the ground.

The Tambaluslos chases people who wander in the woods. The only way to escape it is to take off your clothes and wear them upside-down. The creature finds this act very hilarious and it will laugh so much that its wide lips would cover its face, therefore preventing it from seeing the victim who in turn will have ample time to escape.

Bicol, Bisaya, Mindanao: from ‘luslos’ or to have an erection

Takes women into secluded areas. To escape ones must turn their clothes inside out so that the tambaloslos can see their breast, this will make the tambaloslos erect so much that its genitals will cover its vision.
(source: Due to the graphic nature of this being, it rarely appears in written sources)

TAMBANOKANO – (Mandaya) One of the children of the Sun and Moon, was a giant crab names “Tambanokano”. He is so powerful that every time he open and closes his eyes lightening flashes. He lives in a large hole at the bottom of the ocean. When the tide goes out, it is because he has left the hole and the water rushes in to fill it. His moving about causes great waves which crash on the shore. The crab is quarrelsome, like his father; and sometimes becomes so angry with his mother (the Moon), that he tries to swallow her.
(source: Philippine Folk Tales, Cole, Mabel Cook, London: Curtis Brown, 1916)

TAMBANAKÁUA – (Manobo, parts of Agúsan Valley) The almost universal belief regarding an eclipse of the moon is that a gigantic tarantula has attacked the moon and is slowly encompassing it in its loathsome embrace. Upon perceiving the first evidences of darkness upon the face of the moon, the men rush out from the houses, shout, shoot arrows toward the moon, slash at trees with their bolos, play the drum and gong, beat tin cans and the buttresses of trees, blow bamboo resounders and dance around wildly, at the same time giving forth yells of defiance at the monster saying, “Let loose our moon,” “You will be hit by an arrow.” The women at the same time keep sticking needles or pointed sticks in the wall in the direction of the enemy that is trying to envelop the moon. Some say that a huge scorpion is the cause of eclipses. The explanation of these curious proceedings is simple. If the moon does not become freed from the clutches of this gigantic creature, it is believed that there will be no dawn and that, in the eternal darkness that will subsequently fall upon the world, the evil spirits will reign and all human apparel will be turned into snakes. During the eclipse the priests never cease to call upon their deities for aid against the mighty tarantula that is menacing the moon.
(source: THE MANÓBOS OF MINDANÁO, JOHN M. GARVAN, 1931)

TÁME – (Manobo, parts of Agúsan Valley) A gigantic spirit, that dwells in the untraveled jungle and beguiles the traveler to his doom.
(source: THE MANÓBOS OF MINDANÁO, JOHN M. GARVAN, 1931)

TAONG-LIPOD – (Bicolano) An unseen being
(source: Bikol Maharlika, Jose Calleja Reyes, Goodwill Trading Inc., 1992)

TANDAYAG NA OPON – (Bicol) Is a huge black boar who was killed by Baltog in the Ibalong Epic. “Then one night, a monstrous, wild boar known as Tandayag saw these field and destroyed the crops. Though the Tandayag had very long fangs, he (Baltog, the hero) was able to pin down the monstrous, wild boar and break apart its very big jawbones.”
(Source: Ibalon Epic)

TARABUSAW – (Magindanao) One of four creatures from the Magindanao tale of INDARAPATRA AND SULAYMAN. The third was a huge man-like monster called Tarabusaw. It inhabited the mountain of Matutum and plagued the neighboring territory.
(Source: Tales from our Malay Past, Mela Ma. Roque, Filipinas Foundation, Inc. 1979)

TAUO SA SALUP – (Bukidnon) These are spirits that dwell inside the forest. The Bukidnon (of Mindanao) summons them in times of war, or if a disease invades their territory, or if they want to have a safe trip.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

TAUO SATOLONAN – (Bulalacaunos, Palawan) The Bulalacaunos believe that when their business(es) go wrong, the guilt lies in the tauo satolonan, a spirit that eats children and does a thousand mischievous things with mortals.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

TAWONG LIPOD – (Bicol) Some folks believe in tawong lipod ( literally , people who are covered ) who are supposed to be supernatural beings normally unseen but sometimes allow themselves to be visible.
(source: Readings on Bikol Culture, Luis General (Jr.), University of Nueva Caceres, 1972)

TAWONG LUPA – (Mindanao) In Mindoro and Marinduque, the belief is still current that there are “little earth-spirits or tawong-lupa” whose permission must be sought before one passes through the deserted place in which they reside. It is reported, “before throwing anything filthy upon the ground, you should always warn the little earth-spirits, or tawong-lupa, to get out of the way.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

TÁYHÒ – (Negros Occidental) A fabulous creature, half man and half horse; centaur, hippocentaur. There is an old belief of the existence of the tayho , a grey horse with a long neck similar to that of a giraffe.
(source: Kaufmann Hiligaynon Dictionary & A History of Occidental Negros, Modesto P. Sa-onoy,Today Printers and Pub., 1992 )

THALON – (Zamboanga Del Sur) The Thalon is an obscure creature in Philippine Folklore. From its origins in Zamboanga Del Sur, its myth has not spread to the other parts of the Philippines. Unlike most monsters in Philippine folklore, the attitude of the Thalon is based on its gender, either being a simple trickster spirit if male, or a terrible man-eating beast if female. The Thamad Thalon and Mhenamad Thalon look completely identical. The female Thamad Thalon is more dangerous as it eats humans that encroach on her territory while the Mhenamad Thalon would rather scare humans away.
(source: Philippine Spirits, Karl Gaverza, http://phspirits.com/series/the-terror-of-the-thalon/)

TIBSUKAN – (Antique) The tibsukan look like small pigs with long snouts. Like the lolid they are also pets of the engkantu. Once commanded by their master, they can bore holes from underneath the house causing illness to a member of the household. A house should not be constructed in a place where there are tibsukan.
(source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

TIBURONES/ Triburon – (Bicol) The Tiburon were giant flying fish (or sharks) which had slimy, scaly, and hardy flesh and saw-like teeth that could crush rocks. Handiong and his men did not stop until they vanquished every Tiburon. In the Ibalon epic, they were tamed by the warrior-hero Handyong.
(source: Ibalon: Tatlong Bayani ng Epikong Bicol. Philippines: Children’s Communication Center: Aklat Adarna, Lacson, Tomas; Gamos, Albert 1992 )

TIGABULAK – (Tagalogs) A demon who in the form of an old man entices children with candy and cakes. After he has led them far from home, he puts them in a sack and carries them to his dwelling. Then he kills them and makes money out of their blood.
(source: Types of Prose Narratives, Harriott Ely Fansler, Row, Peterson & Company, 1911)

TIGBANUA – (Bagobo) The tigbanua are representative fiends of the most dangerous sort. To them, more than to any other buso, shrines are erected, magic formulae are recited, and propitiatory offerings are made ; while numerous spells are constantly worked to frustrate their evil designs. A tigbanua is reported to live in a state of perpetual cannibalism and to be most repulsive in aspect, having one eye in the middle of the forehead, a hooked chin two spans long and upturned to catch the drops of blood that may chance to drip from the mouth, and a body covered with coarse black hair. From Mount Apo and from the deep forest the tigbanua come flying or running to every fresh-dug grave, whether it be on mountain or beside the sea ; they drink the blood from the corpse, and gnaw the flesh from the bones, and then throw away the skeleton.
(source: A study of Bagobo ceremonial, magic and myth, Laura Watson Benedict, New York Academy of Sciences, 1916)

TIGMAMANUKAN – (Tagalogs) A bird, also called tigmamanok, whose songs serve as an omen to the Tagalogs. Its scientific name is Jrena cyanogastra (according
to Doctor A. B. Meyer). The early Tagalogs called their primary God Badhala or Bathala mey-kapal, and gave the same name to the bird Tigmamanukin.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

TIKBALANG – (Tagalogs and other regions) The abundance of literature about the tikbalang indicates its firm grip on the imagination of the folk. The name itself is Tagalog and there is no other early report about it from other regions in the country except, curiously, from the Negrito around Mount Pinatubo in the Zambales range and in the Baler area in Quezon Province. In the Pinatubo area, two mythical creatures known as the tulung (or tuwung) and the binangunan have an unmistakable physical resemblance to the tikbalang of the Tagalogs. Of the tulung, Fox wrote: “This spirit is usually described as being horselike, but having clawed feet, long hair, and very large testicles.”18 The binangunan, too, “looked somewhat like a horse, but there was a fire on its back from head to tail.” Damian Amazona, writing about the Negrito along the eastern periphery of Luzon, defined the binangenan [sic] as “the spirits who bring down danger, sickness, and death as punishment. Their home is the balete tree.” A tikbalang that is said to have kidnapped and murdered one of the belles at a grand ball in Manila hundreds of years ago—on the night of April 15, 1580, to be exact—was described as a “tall, hideous creature dressed in a dark tunic… its long straight hair flowing over its shoulders and with the wrinkled yellow feet of a bird.” It wore a dark cloak that hung down to its knees, and it had horse’s legs.

An Augustinian parish priest of Parañaque, Calumpit, and Tambobong registered the following complaint about his parishioners: The tigbalang [sic] is another of the things of which they are greatly afraid. It is a kind of ghost which they say appears to them in the form of an animal or of some unknown monster and forces them to do things contrary to the laws of our religion.

Elsewhere, the tikbalang as a group have been described thus: They have bodies like those of men, but their heads are similar to those of horses. Their limbs are said to be so long that when they sit their knees reach above their heads. When they laugh, all you can see is mouth. A tikbalang could assume the form of an old man, of a horse, or of “a monster.” An investigator who gathered his data from Filipino laborers in Alaskan salmon canneries reported: “The tikbalang is… always seen as a tall, thin and black man with a horse’s head and terrible teeth.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990) (Learn more about the Tikbalang)


TIKBALANG
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
TIKBALANG – (Bicol) Tikbalang is a tall, thin and dark creature that is half human and half horse. While it may have the entire stature of a man, its upper body and face are unmistakably akin to a horse. During full moon he goes out to take a bath and dips his long legs in the river. The tikbalang is a horse-like man. This tall creature has long bony limbs that are disproportioned. When squatting, its knees are taller than its head. It has clawed feet and long hair, with a large mouth, teeth, and huge testicles. The tikbalang is the culprit behind people who get lost in the woods or in the forest. When the tikbalang misleads people in the forest, they are, more often than not, not found again. A person who gets hold of one of the tikbalang’s spines can use it as an anting-anting and makes the tikbalang his slave.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

TIKTIK – (Eastern Visayas) The viscera sucker of the Eastern Visayas is said to supplement its staple food of human viscera with discarded human phlegm and the tender flesh of small children and to work with the cooperation of its avian scout, the tictic: They [early Filipinos] assert that the bird tictic is the pander of the sorcerer called usang. Flying ahead of that being, the bird shows it the houses where infants are bom. That being takes its position on the roof of the neighboring house and thence extends its tongue in the form of a thread which it inserts through the anus of the child and by that means sucks its entrails and kills it.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

TIKTIK OR WAKWAK – (Bicol) Tiktik or kikik and wak-wak are birds and are pets of aswang. Their voices announce the coming of their master. The tik-tik assumes its duties at night and looks for a victim for its master, the aswang. When one hears a tik-tik within the perimeters of his house, he must make sure that all the doors are locked, and all the holes in the house must be sealed, so the tik-tik may not see into the house. This is done extra carefully if there is a baby in the house, or if someone in the house is ill.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

TIMBALUNG – (Bagabo) Timbalung is a disease-bringer whose home is on the mountains, and who is said to be “a big bad animal that goes into the belly and makes the Bagobo very sick.” It is thought dangerous to speak the name of this buso, and children are so instructed ; but occasion. ally somebody will mention him in connection with the sickness he causes.
(source: A study of Bagobo ceremonial, magic and myth, Laura Watson Benedict, New York Academy of Sciences, 1916)

TINAKCHI – (Kalinga) The Tinakchi from the mountain range of Kalinga are a classic example of “unseen beings” that are often a pivotal element to staple horror stories. Called by the people from the mountain as “cha tagun ajipun maila” (people who can’t be seen), Tinakchi seems to be on par with the likes of Engkanto, Palasekan and Tahamaling who exist along side people, while hiding their presence. Often they blend mystery into the mundane life of normal people; the usual root cause of supernatural events that can’t been comprehended or explained.
(source: Indigenous Earth Wisdom: A documentation of the Cosmologies of the Indigenous People of the Cordillera, Fangloy, Dulawan, Macay, Regpala and Ruiz, 2015)

TINGOHAN – (Bicol) The terms tingohan and ting-wan come from the word tingo, which means big sharp teeth. A tingohan is a creature with plenty of big, sharp and pointed teeth. Since it is said that the tingohan stays in the dark, children are scared they might see one while playing hide and seek at night.
(source: Bikol Beliefs and Folkways, Eden K. Nasayao, PhD, Hablong Dawani Publishing House, 2010)

TINMONGAO – (Ibaloy) Malevolent spirits that live in caves, stones and trees that cause injury or sickness to a person who steps on their dwelling place.
(source: Ethnography of the Major Ethnolinguistic Groups in the Philippines, Arsenio L. Sumeng-ang, New Day Publishers, 2003)

TIRTIRIS – (Ilokano) The Ilokanos gave them the name tirtiris. They are little folk with teeth of gold. They have long noses and a light skin. They wear clothes of shimmering silk. Their clothes are embroidered with gold threads. They live in bagbagotot vines. They skip and dance in people’s yards at nightfall. They like to be watched while they skip and dance. They make friends with good people from the village. They add rice to their bins. People are afraid to hurt them. When throwing things out of the window, people say, “Go away, go away.” People who hurt them get sore eyes and skin rashes.
(Source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

TIYANAK – (Various) Perhaps the best described dwarf in Philippine folklore is the tianak, called patianak by the Tagalogs and by the Mandaya of Eastern Mindanao, where it has been defined as: “…the spirit of a child whose mother died while pregnant, and who for this reason was born in the ground… The belief in a similar spirit known as muntianak is widespread throughout the Southern Philippines.” When first encountered, the tianak looked like “a naked newborn baby,” “a very plump baby lying on the side leaf of a banana plant. Two boys who once found a tianak “lifted him up and kissed him many times.”When fondled, the infant-seeming creature suddenly turned into a little old man with an old man’s face, wrinkled skin, long beard, and mustache. It had a flat nose, its eyes were the size of a peseta coin, and its right leg was much shorter than the other, so that the creature had to move around by leaps. The tianak are said to “take a mischievous delight in misdirecting travelers.” One of them “laughed ha-ha- ha. I fooled you. I fooled you. And disappeared.” In the tale “The Devil-Child,” a tianak cried “Uha-ah! Uha- ah!” like a human infant to attract passersby and it had “the happy voice of a baby at play.” The tianak were capable of being outwitted. If a man lost his way and turned his clothes inside out.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)




TIANAK by Ian Balba via DeviantArt
TIYU-AN – (Location of belief is unclear) According to Nid Anima, the tiyu-an, is a type of aswang who stays on the ground and does not have the power to fly but can transform into a pig. They keep puppies which are usually passed on to them by their parents, and these puppies are eternal puppies because they never grow old, they never get to be dogs ever. These puppies are the principals, or masters, in the sense that it’s they who holds the power, and the tiyu-an is just their slave. When they perform the ritual of licking him, the message being sent across is for the tiyu-an to prey. This is a departure and contradiction in terms from the universal trait of witchcraft as practiced in almost all other parts of the world wherein animals are just familiars or slaves to do the bidding of the master, which is the witch.
(Source: Witchcraft, Filipino Style, Nid Anima, Omar Publishing, 1978)

TOMONGAW – (Southern Kankana-eys) Benevolent anito spirits who are believed to own the animals in the forest such as boars, deer, cats, and the wild fowls as well as the gold, silver and minerals underneath. The people are careful not to offend and offer thanksgiving to these spirits so that they shall continue to be charitable to them.
(source: Ethnography of the Major Ethnolinguistic Groups in the Philippines, Arsenio L. Sumeng-ang, New Day Publishers, 2003)

TULAYHANG – (Antique) The tulayhang like the lolid and tibsukan, are also pets of the engkantu that live underneath the ground at the mouth of the river where it bores a hole. Their form resembles that of an umang- umang, a small crab-like animal that inhabits empty seashells. Once unearthed under the ground where a house is to be constructed, it, too, can cause illness.
(Source: The Enduring Ma-Aram Tradition, Alicia P. Magos., New Day, 1992)

TULUNG/ TUWUNG – (Mt. Pinatubo Negrito) “This spirit is usually described as being horselike, but having clawed feet, long hair, and very large testicles.” The dread with which the Pinatubo Negrito regarded the tulung variety of the tikbalang is indicated by the following account by an anthropologist who lived two years with them after World War II: “Specific areas may become uninhabitable through the invasion of an evil spirit or spirits. One extensive region on the lower and eastern slopes of Mt. Liwitan, formerly good for clearing, hunting, and for gathering forest products, is now the sole property of the huge evil spirit, tulung (tuwung) in Botolan. A few years ago a group of Negritos from Villar had been gathering rattan in this area, when they noticed that many of the plants, even large trees, had been violently torn from the ground. Later, they heard loud, strange noises, and fled in terror. Today, no Negrito would wittingly enter the region.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)



BACK TO TOP


U
UGAW – (Pangansinan) They are known as ugaw in Pangasinan. They are as pretty as old-fashioned rag dolls. They live behind rice granaries and rice bins. They pound your rice in your kul-ong. Their pounding sounds faraway, like an echo. They move quickly and are hard to see. They follow you when you enter your granary. They steal some of the rice after you leave. They steal rice from your bin, too. They get exactly as much rice as you do. Quickly cover the bin after getting some rice. Be sure not to spill rice on the floor. The ugaw will know where you keep your rice if you do. Then they will steal from it.
(Source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

UGKOY – (Waray) Like the crocodile, the Samar ugkoy is said to have been in the habit of “dragging down victims by the feet into the bottom.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)


UGKOY
By Isaiah Cabanting
www.isaiahcabanting.com
UMANGOB – (Ifugao) There is an old custom among the Ifugao to hang their dead under the house and build fires around it. People keep vigil and keep all the fires alive, for they are afraid of the umangob. They also plant a crimson herb/ dongla, around the house, for it is believed that the umangob is afraid of it.It looks like a big black police dog that comes at night to steal the big toes and the thumbs of the corpse. It does not touch any other part of the corpse except the big toes and the thumbs. It is not afraid of any other thing except the dongla and live fire. But it can pass through these, for it moves like lightning.
(source: The Aswang Complex in Philippine Folklore, Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)

UNGLOC – (Pany, Leyte) The creatures’ master is the god Captan. He commanded them to obey his brother Maguayan. From the folk-tale “The Faithlessness of Sinogo.” In a short time the little island was crowded with these dreadful creatures. There were huge Buayas from Mindanao, fierce Tic-bolans from Luzon, savage Sigbins from Negros and Bohol, hundreds of Unglocs from Panay and Leyte, and great Uak Uaks and other frightful monsters from Samar and Cebu.
(source: PHILIPPINE FOLKLORE STORIES, John Maurice Miller, Boston, U.S.A., 1904)

UNGMANAN – (Bicol) The unseen dweller of nature is found near strange rock formations, water, and misshapen trees. If you disrespect nature, you disrespect the Ungmanan which will cause you sickness. The sickness will not be fatal, but you will need to visit an albularyo (healer) who will perform the ritual of “santigwar” to heal you.
(source: relayed to Jordan Clark by artist Alfran Marfil)

UNGO – (Waray) Typical of the kapre type, the bawo and ungo of the Eastern Visayas sat in large trees to “smoke the biggest pipes.” When a person offended the ungo and bawo, they punished him by giving him “one big latik (a quick and sudden touch with the forefinger) on the head or [stole] his firewood or basket of clothes.” Most of the demons here discussed went about in the dark terrifying people.
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

UNGO – (Zamboanga)She is called ungo in Zamboanga. She looks like a woman and sleeps all day. She becomes a bird or a beast by night. There is a secret hole in her roof.
She gets out of the hole about midnight. She goes out to steal a human corpse. She changes the corpse into a pig or fish. She takes it home and cooks it. Then she gives some of it to the neighbors. Or she asks them to come and eat it with her. They eat the human flesh and don’t know it. After that they become ungo, too.
(Source: The Creatures of Midnight , Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

BACK TO TOP


W
WAKWAK – (Surigao) The wakwak of Surigao were said to “steal the baby from the body of the mother” and to “drool at the sight of a pregnant woman.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

WAKWAK – (Mandaya) Another bird known as wak-wak “which looks like a crow but is larger and only calls at night” foretells ill-fortune.
(source: The Wild Tribes of the Davao District, Fay-Cooper Cole, 1913)

WAK-WAK – (Bagabo) An efficacious charm to drive away the mythical bird called wak-wak is the use of a suggestive formula. The wak-wak is a rapacious bird resembling a crow that flies headless, but having four legs, two of which are covered with claws, and it flies over the country at night, hunting for living men as its prey. The magic spell is as follows : When you hear the sound of the bird’s voice shrieking, ” Wak-wak ! wak-wak ! ” you must call to him : ” I am not fat ; I am skinny. I eat rotten wood. I eat baguiang.” Then the wakwak cannot hurt you ; but you must speak again, saying, “You go on to Bago ; there are many fat men there.” By means of this spell, such unpleasant suggestions are flung at the evil bird as to induce him to seek prey elsewhere. If the baguiang leaf is chewed, it is said to give itching lips and to leave a bad taste in the mouth.
(source: A study of Bagobo ceremonial, magic and myth, Laura Watson Benedict, New York Academy of Sciences, 1916)

WHITE LADY – (Manila) A modern kind of ghost, particularly those living in Balete Drive in Quezon City.
(source: urban legend from Manila)

WIRWIR – (Apayao)A ghoulish being among the Apayao, “went everywhere spending his time looking for the dead.” He lived on the dead bodies of people, exhuming these from the graves. Fearful that Wirwir would eat the corpses, the native priests placated him. According to an account, the house of Wirwir, an Apayao ghoulish creature, was found in a forest in Mount Anay and consisted of “a cave full of valuable properties taken from the graves of dead persons.”
(source: The The Creatures of Philippine Lower Mythology, Maximo Ramos, Phoenix Publishing, 1990)

WUWUG – (Calapi, Westrn Samar)Mang Juan had two sons, Jose and Pedro. One night Pedro and Mang Juan went fishing while Jose stayed home. Pedro was talking to his father, and when he turned to him he saw his head with the intestines dangling from it, shining like a thousand fireflies just a few feet above him. And he realized that his father was the wuwug rumored to be going around at midnight. He kept it a secret but Pedro’s two friends who came from serenading saw it, too. They put crabs into the wuwug’s body. When the wuvmg joined his body, he wiggled and wiggled until he died. But before he died, he gave his wuwug-ness to Pedro, much against Pedro’s wishes. And Pedro, because of great shame and not wanting to kill anybody, drowned himself in quicksand. Jose, his brother, sells balinghoy [cassava cakes] in the market. Nobody buys his merchandise during Lent because it is the belief that during this time wuwug appear.
(source: The Aswang Complex in Philippine Folklore, Maximo Ramos, 1990, Phoenix Publishing)


Y
YASAO – (Bicol) They also had the beings of evil, and to whom they looked with the utmost terror and respect, the Yasao, a kind of horrible spirit that was presented to them on moonlit nights in the shade of the trees. When their appearance occurred, if at the same time they heard shouts or presumed to hear them, it was a sign that some of them were going to die soon, because the Asuang would be on the prowl. The Yasao that we have been talking about sometimes also becomes Laqui , a monster with goat hair and feet and the face of an ugly man. In that state he roamed wandering through the forests, as if punished by the Asuang, in pain of his indolence in persecuting men, without being able to harm anyone.
(source: SHORT GLIMPSE ON THE ORIGIN, RELIGION, BELIEFS AND SUPERSTITIONS OF THE ANCIENT NATIVES OF BICOL by Fray Jose Castaño, February 1895)

YAUA or YAWA – (Visayas) A demon of the early Visayans.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

YAUÁAN – (Bisaya) Bisaya word for possessed person or animals that have the devil or a demon in their body.
(source: DICCIONARIO MITOLÓGICO DE FILIPINAS, Ferdinand Blumentritt [1895], translated and republished by The Aswang Project, 2021)

YÚMUD – (Manobo, parts of Agúsan Valley)The water wraith, an apparently innocuous spirit, abiding in deep and rocky places, usually in pools, beneath the surface of the water.
(source: THE MANÓBOS OF MINDANÁO, JOHN M. GARVAN, 1931)
