Preface


About Men




When Phyllis Chesler’s book About Men was first published more than ten years ago, I was excited. At last, I thought then, a feminist thinker will explain this mystery—men. Back then I had never shared with anyone the feelings I had about men. I had not been able to confess that not only did I not understand men, I feared them. Chesler, with her usual “take no prisoners” daring, I was certain, would not simply name this fear, explain it, she would do much more: she would make men real to me. Men would become people I could talk to, work with, love. Her book was disappointing. Filled with quotes from numerous sources, newspaper clippings of male violence, it offered bits and pieces of information; there was little or no explanation, no interpretation. From that time on I began to think that women were afraid to speak openly about men, afraid to explore deeply our connections to them—what we have witnessed as daughters, sisters, grandmothers, mothers, aunts, lovers, occasional sex objects—and afraid even to acknowledge our ignorance, how much we really do not know about men. All that we do not know intensifies our sense of fear and threat. And certainly to know men only in relation to male violence, to the violence inflicted upon women and children, is a partial, inadequate knowing.

Nowadays I am amazed that women who advocate feminist politics have had so little to say about men and masculinity. Within the early writings of radical feminism, anger, rage, and even hatred of men was voiced, yet there was no meaningful attempt to offer ways to resolve these feelings, to imagine a culture of reconciliation where women and men might meet and find common ground. Militant feminism gave women permission to unleash their rage and hatred at men but it did not allow us to talk about what it meant to love men in patriarchal culture, to know how we could express that love without fear of exploitation and oppression.

Before her death Barbara Deming was among those rare outspoken feminist thinkers who wanted to create a space for women to talk openly about our feelings about men. Articulating her concern that the wellspring of female fury at men was making it impossible for women to express any other feelings than their sense that “men are hopeless,” she stated: “It scares me that more and more women are coming to feel this way, to feel that men as an entire gender are hopeless.” Deming did not feel that men were incapable of change, of moving away from male domination, but she did feel that it was necessary for women to speak the truth about how we think about men: “I believe that the only way we can get where we have to go is by never refusing to face the truth of our feelings as they rise up in us—even when we wish it were not the truth. So we have to admit to the truth that we sometimes wish our own fathers, sons, brothers, lovers were not there. But, this truth exists alongside another truth: the truth that this wish causes us anguish.” While some women active in the feminist movement felt anguished about our collective inability to convert masses of men to feminist thinking, many women simply felt that feminism gave them permission to be indifferent to men, to turn away from male needs.

When contemporary feminism was at its most intense, many women insisted that they were weary of giving energy to men, that they wanted to place women at the center of all feminist discussions. Feminist thinkers, like myself, who wanted to include men in the discussion were usually labeled male-identified and dismissed. We were “sleeping with the enemy.” We were the feminists who could not be trusted because we cared about the fate of men. We were the feminists who did not believe in female superiority any more than we believed in male superiority. As the feminist movement progressed, the fact became evident that sexism and sexist exploitation and oppression would not change unless men were also deeply engaged in feminist resistance, yet most women were still expressing no genuine interest in highlighting discussions of maleness.

Acknowledging that there needed to be more feminist focus on men did not lead to the production of a body of writing by women about men. The lack of such writing intensifies my sense that women cannot fully talk about men because we have been so well socialized in patriarchal culture to be silent on the subject of men. But more than silenced, we have been socialized to be the keepers of grave and serious secrets—especially those that could reveal the everyday strategies of male domination, how male power is enacted and maintained in our private lives. Indeed, even the radical feminist labeling of all men as oppressors and all women as victims was a way to deflect attention away from the reality of men and our ignorance about them. To simply label them as oppressors and dismiss them meant we never had to give voice to the gaps in our understanding or to talk about maleness in complex ways. We did not have to talk about the ways our fear of men distorted our perspectives and blocked our understanding. Hating men was just another way to not take men and masculinity seriously. It was simply easier for feminist women to talk about challenging and changing patriarchy than it was for us to talk about men—what we knew and did not know, about the ways we wanted men to change. Better to just express our desire to have men disappear, to see them dead and gone.

Eloquently, Barbara Deming expresses this longing when she writes about her father’s death: “Years ago now. It was on a weekend in the country and he’d been working outside with a pick and a shovel, making a new garden plot. He’d had a heart attack and fallen there in the loose dirt. We’d called a rescue squad, and they were trying to bring him back to life, but couldn’t. I was half-lying on the ground next to him, with my arms around his body. I realized that this was the first time in my life that I had felt able to really touch my father’s body. I was holding hard to it—with my love—and with my grief. And my grief was partly that my father, whom I loved, was dying. But it was also that I knew already that his death would allow me to feel freer. I was mourning that this had to be so. It’s a grief that is hard for me to speak of. That the only time I would feel free to touch him without feeling threatened by his power over me was when he lay dead—it’s unbearable to me. And I think there can hardly be a woman who hasn’t felt a comparable grief. So it’s an oversimplification to speak the truth that we sometimes wish men dead—unless we also speak the truth which is perhaps even harder to face (as we try to find out own powers, to be our own women): the truth that this wish is unbearable to us. It rends us.” As a young woman in my twenties who had not yet found her own powers, I often wished the men in my life would die. My longing for my father’s death began in childhood. It was the way I responded to his rage, his violence. I used to dream him gone, dead and gone.

Death was the way out of the fear evoked by the proclamation “Wait until your father comes home.” The threat of punishment was so intense, his power over us so real. Lying in my girlhood bed waiting to hear the hard anger in his voice, the invasive sound of his commands, I used to think, “If only he would die, we could live.” Later as a grown woman waiting for the man in my life to come home, the man who was more often than not a caring partner but who sometimes erupted into violent fits of rage, I used to think, “Maybe he will have an accident and die, maybe he will not come home, and I will be free and able to live.” Women and children all over the world want men to die so that they can live. This is the most painful truth of male domination, that men wield patriarchal power in daily life in ways that are awesomely life-threatening, that women and children cower in fear and various states of powerlessness, believing that the only way out of their suffering, their only hope is for men to die, for the patriarchal father not to come home. Women and female and male children, dominated by men, have wanted them dead because they believe that these men are not willing to change. They believe that men who are not dominators will not protect them. They believe that men are hopeless.

When I left home and went away to college, if I called home and my father answered, I hung up. I had nothing to say to him. I had no words to communicate to the dad who did not listen, who did not seem to care, who did not speak words of tenderness or love. I had no need for the patriarchal dad. And feminism had taught me that I could forget about him, turn away from him. In turning away from my dad, I turned away from a part of myself. It is a fiction of false feminism that we women can find our power in a world without men, in a world where we deny our connections to men. We claim our power fully only when we can speak the truth that we need men in our lives, that men are in our lives whether we want them to be or not, that we need men to challenge patriarchy, that we need men to change.

While feminist thinking enabled me to reach beyond the boundaries set by patriarchy, it was the search for wholeness, for self-recovery, that led me back to my dad. My reconciliation with my father began with my recognition that I wanted and needed his love—and that if I could not have his love, then at least I needed to heal the wound in my heart his violence had created. I needed to talk with him, to tell him my truth, to hold him close and let him know he mattered. Nowadays when I call home, I revel in the sound of my father’s voice, his southern speech familiar and broken in all the right places. I want to hear his voice forever. I do not want him to die, this dad whom I can hold in my arms, who receives my love and loves me back. Understanding him, I understand myself better. To claim my power as a woman, I have to claim him. We belong together.

The Will to Change: Men, Masculinity, and Love is about our need to live in a world where women and men can belong together. Looking at the reasons patriarchy has maintained its power over men and their lives, I urge us to reclaim feminism for men, showing why feminist thinking and practice are the only way we can truly address the crisis of masculinity today. In these chapters I repeat many points so that each chapter alone will convey the most significant ideas of the whole. Men cannot change if there are no blueprints for change. Men cannot love if they are not taught the art of loving.

It is not true that men are unwilling to change. It is true that many men are afraid to change. It is true that masses of men have not even begun to look at the ways that patriarchy keeps them from knowing themselves, from being in touch with their feelings, from loving. To know love, men must be able to let go the will to dominate. They must be able to choose life over death. They must be willing to change.





1


Wanted: Men Who Love




Every female wants to be loved by a male. Every woman wants to love and be loved by the males in her life. Whether gay or straight, bisexual or celibate, she wants to feel the love of father, grandfather, uncle, brother, or male friend. If she is heterosexual she wants the love of a male partner. We live in a culture where emotionally starved, deprived females are desperately seeking male love. Our collective hunger is so intense it rends us. And yet we dare not speak it for fear we will be mocked, pitied, shamed. To speak our hunger for male love would demand that we name the intensity of our lack and our loss. The male bashing that was so intense when contemporary feminism first surfaced more than thirty years ago was in part the rageful cover-up of the shame women felt not because men refused to share their power but because we could not seduce, cajole, or entice men to share their emotions—to love us.

By claiming that they wanted the power men had, man-hating feminists (who were by no means the majority) covertly proclaimed that they too wanted to be rewarded for being out of touch with their feelings, for being unable to love. Men in patriarchal culture responded to feminist demand for greater equity in the work world and in the sexual world by making room, by sharing the spheres of power. The place where most men refused to change—believed themselves unable to change—was in their emotional lives. Not even for the love and respect of liberated women were men willing to come to the table of love as equal partners ready to share the feast.

No one hungers for male love more than the little girl or boy who rightfully needs and seeks love from Dad. He may be absent, dead, present in body yet emotionally not there, but the girl or boy hungers to be acknowledged, recognized, respected, cared for. All around our nation a billboard carries this message: “Each night millions of kids go to sleep starving—for attention from their dads.” Because patriarchal culture has already taught girls and boys that Dad’s love is more valuable than mother love, it is unlikely that maternal affection will heal the lack of fatherly love. No wonder then that these girls and boys grow up angry with men, angry that they have been denied the love they need to feel whole, worthy, accepted. Heterosexual girls and homosexual boys can and do become the women and men who make romantic bonds the place where they quest to find and know male love. But that quest is rarely satisfied. Usually rage, grief, and unrelenting disappointment lead women and men to close off the part of themselves that was hoping to be touched and healed by male love. They learn then to settle for whatever positive attention men are able to give. They learn to overvalue it. They learn to pretend that it is love. They learn how not to speak the truth about men and love. They learn to live the lie.

As a child I hungered for the love of my dad. I wanted him to notice me, to give me his attention and his affections. When I could not get him to notice me by being good and dutiful, I was willing to risk punishment to be bad enough to catch his gaze, to hold it, and to bear the weight of his heavy hand. I longed for those hands to hold, shelter, and protect me, to touch me with tenderness and care, but I accepted that this would never be. I knew at age five that those hands would acknowledge me only when they were bringing me pain, that if I could accept that pain and hold it close, I could be Daddy’s girl. I could make him proud. I am not alone. So many of us have felt that we could win male love by showing we were willing to bear the pain, that we were willing to live our lives affirming that the maleness deemed truly manly because it withholds, withdraws, refuses is the maleness we desire. We learn to love men more because they will not love us. If they dared to love us, in patriarchal culture they would cease to be real “men.”

In her moving memoir In the Country of Men Jan Waldron describes a similar longing. She confesses that “the kind of father I ached for I have never seen except in glimpses I have embellished with wishful imaginings.” Contrasting the loving fathers we long for with the fathers we have, she expresses the hunger:





Dad. It is a vow against all odds, in the face of countless examples to the contrary. Dad. It does not have the utilitarian effect of Mum or Ma. It’s still spoken as a ballad refrain. It’s a pledge that originates in the heart and fights for life amid the carnage of persistent, obvious history to the contrary and excruciatingly scant follow-through. Mother love is aplenty and apparent: we complain because we have too much of it. The love of a father is an uncommon gem, to be hunted, burnished, and hoarded. The value goes up because of its scarcity.





In our culture we say very little about the longing for father love.

Rather than bringing us great wisdom about the nature of men and love, reformist feminist focus on male power reinforced the notion that somehow males were powerful and had it all. Feminist writing did not tell us about the deep inner misery of men. It did not tell us the terrible terror that gnaws at the soul when one cannot love. Women who envied men their hardheartedness were not about to tell us the depth of male suffering. And so it has taken more than thirty years for the voices of visionary feminists to be heard telling the world the truth about men and love. Barbara Deming hinted at those truths:





I think the reason that men are so very violent is that they know, deep in themselves, that they’re acting out a lie, and so they’re furious at being caught up in the lie. But they don’t know how to break it…. They’re in a rage because they are acting out a lie—which means that in some deep part of themselves they want to be delivered from it, are homesick for the truth.





The truth we do not tell is that men are longing for love. This is the longing feminist thinkers must dare to examine, explore, and talk about. Those rare visionary feminist seers, who are now no longer all female, are no longer afraid to openly address issues of men, masculinity, and love. Women have been joined by men with open minds and big hearts, men who love, men who know how hard it is for males to practice the art of loving in patriarchal culture.

In part, I began to write books about love because of the constant fighting between my ex-boyfriend Anthony and myself. We were (and at the time of this writing still are) each other’s primary bond. We came together hoping to create love and found ourselves creating conflict. We decided to break up, but even that did not bring an end to the conflict. The issues we fought about most had to do with the practice of love. Like so many men who know that the women in their lives want to hear them declare love, Anthony made those declarations. When asked to link the “I love you” words with definition and practice, he found that he did not really have the words, that he was fundamentally uncomfortable being asked to talk about emotions.

Like many males, he had not been happy in most of the relationships he had chosen. The unhappiness of men in relationships, the grief men feel about the failure of love, often goes unnoticed in our society precisely because the patriarchal culture really does not care if men are unhappy. When females are in emotional pain, the sexist thinking that says that emotions should and can matter to women makes it possible for most of us to at least voice our heart, to speak it to someone, whether a close friend, a therapist, or the stranger sitting next to us on a plane or bus. Patriarchal mores teach a form of emotional stoicism to men that says they are more manly if they do not feel, but if by chance they should feel and the feelings hurt, the manly response is to stuff them down, to forget about them, to hope they go away. George Weinberg explains in Why Men Won’t Commit: “Most men are on quest for the ready-made perfect woman because they basically feel that problems in a relationship can’t be worked out. When the slightest thing goes wrong, it seems easier to bolt than talk.” The masculine pretense is that real men feel no pain.

The reality is that men are hurting and that the whole culture responds to them by saying, “Please do not tell us what you feel.” I have always been a fan of the Sylvia cartoon where two women sit, one looking into a crystal ball as the other woman says, “He never talks about his feelings.” And the woman who can see the future says, “At two P.M. all over the world men will begin to talk about their feelings—and women all over the world will be sorry.”

If we cannot heal what we cannot feel, by supporting patriarchal culture that socializes men to deny feelings, we doom them to live in states of emotional numbness. We construct a culture where male pain can have no voice, where male hurt cannot be named or healed. It is not just men who do not take their pain seriously. Most women do not want to deal with male pain if it interferes with the satisfaction of female desire. When feminist movement led to men’s liberation, including male exploration of “feelings,” some women mocked male emotional expression with the same disgust and contempt as sexist men. Despite all the expressed feminist longing for men of feeling, when men worked to get in touch with feelings, no one really wanted to reward them. In feminist circles men who wanted to change were often labeled narcissistic or needy. Individual men who expressed feelings were often seen as attention seekers, patriarchal manipulators trying to steal the stage with their drama.

When I was in my twenties, I would go to couples therapy, and my partner of more than ten years would explain how I asked him to talk about his feelings and when he did, I would freak out. He was right. It was hard for me to face that I did not want to hear about his feelings when they were painful or negative, that I did not want my image of the strong man truly challenged by learning of his weaknesses and vulnerabilities. Here I was, an enlightened feminist woman who did not want to hear my man speak his pain because it revealed his emotional vulnerability. It stands to reason, then, that the masses of women committed to the sexist principle that men who express their feelings are weak really do not want to hear men speak, especially if what they say is that they hurt, that they feel unloved. Many women cannot hear male pain about love because it sounds like an indictment of female failure. Since sexist norms have taught us that loving is our task whether in our role as mothers or lovers or friends, if men say they are not loved, then we are at fault; we are to blame.

There is only one emotion that patriarchy values when expressed by men; that emotion is anger. Real men get mad. And their mad-ness, no matter how violent or violating, is deemed natural—a positive expression of patriarchal masculinity. Anger is the best hiding place for anybody seeking to conceal pain or anguish of spirit. My father was an angry man. At times he still is, even though he is past eighty years old. Recently when I called home he said, speaking of me and my sister, “I love you both dearly.” Amazed to hear Dad speak of love, I wanted us to talk but I could not find words. Fear silenced me, the old fear of Dad the patriarch, the silent, angry man and the new fear of breaking this fragile bond of caring connection. So I could not ask, “What do you mean, Dad, when you tell me that you love me dearly?” In the chapter focusing on our search for loving men in Communion: The Female Search for Love I make this observation: “Lots of women fear men. And fear can lay the foundation for contempt and hatred. It can be a cover-up for repressed, killing rage.” Fear keeps us away from love. And yet women rarely talk to men about how much we fear them.

My siblings and I have never talked with Dad about the years he held us hostage—imprisoning us behind the walls of his patriarchal terrorism. And even in our adult years we are still afraid to ask him, “Why, Daddy? Why were you always so angry? Why didn’t you love us?”

In those powerful passages where she writes of her father’s death, Barbara Deming names that fear. As death is swiftly taking him beyond her reach, she sees clearly that fear had kept him away from her all along—his fear of her being too close, and her fear of seeking to be close to him. Fear keeps us from being close to the men in our lives; it keeps us from love.

Once upon a time I thought it was a female thing, this fear of men. Yet when I began to talk with men about love, time and time again I heard stories of male fear of other males. Indeed, men who feel, who love, often hide their emotional awareness from other men for fear of being attacked and shamed. This is the big secret we all keep together—the fear of patriarchal maleness that binds everyone in our culture. We cannot love what we fear. That is why so many religious traditions teach us that there is no fear in love.

We struggle then, in patriarchal culture, all of us, to love men. We may care about males deeply. We may cherish our connections with the men in our lives. And we may desperately feel that we cannot live without their presence, their company. We can feel all these passions in the face of maleness and yet stand removed, keeping the distance patriarchy has created, maintaining the boundaries we are told not to cross. In a class with students who are reading the trilogy of books I have written about love, with forty men talking about love, we talk of fathers. A black male in his late thirties, whose father was present in the home, a hard worker, talked about his recent experience of parenthood, his commitment to be a loving father, and his fear that he will fail. He fears failure because he has not had a loving role model. His father was almost always away from home, working, roaming. When he was home, his favorite way of relating was to tease and taunt his son mercilessly, in a biting voice full of sarcasm and contempt, a voice that could humiliate with just a word. Reflecting the experience of many of us, the individual telling his story talked about wanting the love of this hard man but then learning not to want it, learning to silence his heart, to make it not matter. I asked him and the other men present, “If you have closed off your heart, shut down your emotional awareness, then do you know how to love your sons? Where and when along the way did you learn the practice of love?”

He tells me and the other men who sit in our circle of love, “I just think of what my father would do and do the opposite.” Everyone laughs. I affirm this practice, adding only that it is not enough to stay in the space of reaction, that being simply reactive is always to risk allowing that shadowy past to overtake the present. How many sons fleeing the example of their fathers raise boys who emerge as clones of their grandfathers, boys who may never even have met their grandfathers but behave just like them? Beyond reaction, though, any male, no matter his past or present circumstance, no matter his age or experience, can learn how to love.

In the past four years the one clear truth I have learned from individual men I have met while traveling and lecturing is that men want to know love and they want to know how to love. There is simply not enough literature speaking directly, intimately, to this need. After writing a general book about love, then one specifically about black people and love, then another focusing on the female search for love, I wanted to go further and talk about men and love.

Women and men alike in our culture spend very little time encouraging males to learn to love. Even the women who are pissed off at men, women most of whom are not and maybe never will be feminist, use their anger to avoid being truly committed to helping to create a world where males of all ages can know love. And there remains a small strain of feminist thinkers who feel strongly that they have given all they want to give to men; they are concerned solely with improving the collective welfare of women. Yet life has shown me that any time a single male dares to transgress patriarchal boundaries in order to love, the lives of women, men, and children are fundamentally changed for the better.

Every day on our television screens and in our nation’s newspapers we are brought news of continued male violence at home and all around the world. When we hear that teenage boys are arming themselves and killing their parents, their peers, or strangers, a sense of alarm permeates our culture. Folks want to have answers. They want to know, Why is this happening? Why so much killing by boy children now, and in this historical moment? Yet no one talks about the role patriarchal notions of manhood play in teaching boys that it is their nature to kill, then teaching them that they can do nothing to change this nature—nothing, that is, that will leave their masculinity intact. As our culture prepares males to embrace war, they must be all the more indoctrinated into patriarchal thinking that tells them that it is their nature to kill and to enjoy killing. Bombarded by news about male violence, we hear no news about men and love.

Only a revolution of values in our nation will end male violence, and that revolution will necessarily be based on a love ethic. To create loving men, we must love males. Loving maleness is different from praising and rewarding males for living up to sexist-defined notions of male identity. Caring about men because of what they do for us is not the same as loving males for simply being. When we love maleness, we extend our love whether males are performing or not. Performance is different from simply being. In patriarchal culture males are not allowed simply to be who they are and to glory in their unique identity. Their value is always determined by what they do. In an antipatriarchal culture males do not have to prove their value and worth. They know from birth that simply being gives them value, the right to be cherished and loved.

I write about men and love as a declaration of profound gratitude to the males in my life with whom I do the work of love. Much of my thinking about maleness began in childhood when I witnessed the differences in the ways my brother and I were treated. The standards used to judge his behavior were much harsher. No male successfully measures up to patriarchal standards without engaging in an ongoing practice of self-betrayal. In his boyhood my brother, like so many boys, just longed to express himself. He did not want to conform to a rigid script of appropriate maleness. As a consequence he was scorned and ridiculed by our patriarchal dad. In his younger years our brother was a loving presence in our household, capable of expressing emotions of wonder and delight. As patriarchal thinking and action claimed him in adolescence, he learned to mask his loving feelings. He entered that space of alienation and antisocial behavior deemed “natural” for adolescent boys. His six sisters witnessed the change in him and mourned the loss of our connection. The damage done to his self-esteem in boyhood has lingered throughout his life, for he continues to grapple with the issue of whether he will define himself or allow himself to be defined by patriarchal standards.

At the same time that my brother surrendered his emotional awareness and his capacity to make emotional connection in order to be accepted as “one of the boys,” rejecting the company of his sisters for fear that enjoying us made him less male, my mother’s father, Daddy Gus, found it easier to be disloyal to patriarchy in old age. He was the man in my childhood who practiced the art of loving. He was emotionally aware and emotionally present, and yet he also was trapped by a patriarchal bond. Our grandmother, his wife of more than sixty years, was always deeply invested in the dominator model of relationships. To macho men Daddy Gus, Mama’s father, appeared to be less than masculine. He was seen as henpecked. I can remember our patriarchal father expressing contempt for Daddy Gus, calling him weak—and letting Mama know via domination that he would not be ruled by a woman. Dad took Mama’s admiration for her dad, for his capacity to love, and made it appear that what was precious to her was really worthless.

Back then Mama did not know how lucky she was to have a loving father. Like so many females, she had been seduced by myths of romantic love to dream of a strong, domineering, take-control, dashing, and daring man as a suitable mate. She married her ideal only to find herself trapped in a bond with a punishing, cruel, unloving patriarchal man. She spent more than forty years of marriage believing in the patriarchal gender roles that told her he should be the one in control and that she should be the one to submit and obey. When patriarchal men are not cruel, the women in their lives can cling to the seductive myth that they are lucky to have a real man, a benevolent patriarch who provides and protects. When that real man is repeatedly cruel, when he responds to care and kindness with contempt and brutal disregard, the woman in his life begins to see him differently. She may begin to interrogate her own allegiance to patriarchal thinking. She may wake up and recognize that she is wedded to abuse, that she is not loved. That moment of awakening is the moment of heartbreak. Heartbroken women in longtime marriages or partnerships rarely leave their men. They learn to make an identity out of their suffering, their complaint, their bitterness.

Throughout our childhood Mama was the great defender of Dad. He was her knight in shining armor, her beloved. And even when she began to see him, to really see him, as he was and not as she had longed for him to be, she still taught us to admire him and be grateful for his presence, his material provision, his discipline. A fifties woman, she was willing to cling to the fantasy of the patriarchal ideal even as she confronted the brutal reality of patriarchal domination daily. As her children left home, leaving her alone with her husband, her hope that they might find their way to love was soon dashed. She was left face-to-face with the emotionally shut down cold patriarch she had married. After fifty years of marriage she would not be leaving him, but she would no longer believe in love. Only her bitterness found a voice; she now speaks the absence of love, a lifetime of heartache. She is not alone. All over the world women live with men in states of lovelessness. They live and they mourn.

My mother and father were the source figures who shaped my patterns of love and longing. I spent most of the years between twenty and forty seeking to know love with intellectually brilliant men who were simply emotionally unaware, men who could not give what they did not have, men who could not teach what they did not know—men who did not know how to love. In my forties I began a relationship with a much younger man who had been schooled in the art and practice of feminist thinking. He was able to acknowledge having a broken spirit. As a child he had been a victim of patriarchal tyranny. He knew there was something wrong within, even though he had not yet found a language to articulate what was missing.

“Something missing within” was a self-description I heard from many men as I went around our nation talking about love. Again and again a man would tell me about early childhood feelings of emotional exuberance, of unrepressed joy, of feeling connected to life and to other people, and then a rupture happened, a disconnect, and that feeling of being loved, of being embraced, was gone. Somehow the test of manhood, men told me, was the willingness to accept this loss, to not speak it even in private grief. Sadly, tragically, these men in great numbers were remembering a primal moment of heartbreak and heartache: the moment that they were compelled to give up their right to feel, to love, in order to take their place as patriarchal men.

Everyone who tries to create love with an emotionally unaware partner suffers. Self-help books galore tell us that we cannot change anyone but ourselves. Of course they never answer the question of what will motivate males in a patriarchal culture who have been taught that to love emasculates them to change, to choose love, when the choice means that they must stand against patriarchy, against the tyranny of the familiar. We cannot change men but we can encourage, implore, and affirm their will to change. We can respect the truth of their inner being, a truth that they may be unable to speak: that they long to connect, to love, to be loved.

The Will to Change: Men, Masculinity and Love answers the questions about love asked by men of all ages in our culture. I write in response to questions about love asked me by the men I know most intimately who are still working to find their way back to the open-hearted, emotionally expressive selves they once were before they were told to silence their longings and close their hearts.

The Will to Change is the offering I bring to the feast of male reclamation and recovery of self, of their emotional right to love and be loved. Women have believed that we could save the men in our lives by giving them love, that this love would serve as the cure for all the wounds inflicted by toxic assaults on their emotional systems, by the emotional heart attacks they undergo every day. Women can share in this healing process. We can guide, instruct, observe, share information and skills, but we cannot do for boys and men what they must do for themselves. Our love helps, but it alone does not save boys or men. Ultimately boys and men save themselves when they learn the art of loving.





2


Understanding Patriarchy




Patriarchy is the single most life-threatening social disease assaulting the male body and spirit in our nation. Yet most men do not use the word “patriarchy” in everyday life. Most men never think about patriarchy—what it means, how it is created and sustained. Many men in our nation would not be able to spell the word or pronounce it correctly. The word “patriarchy” just is not a part of their normal everyday thought or speech. Men who have heard and know the word usually associate it with women’s liberation, with feminism, and therefore dismiss it as irrelevant to their own experiences. I have been standing at podiums talking about patriarchy for more than thirty years. It is a word I use daily, and men who hear me use it often ask me what I mean by it.

Nothing discounts the old antifeminist projection of men as all-powerful more than their basic ignorance of a major facet of the political system that shapes and informs male identity and sense of self from birth until death. I often use the phrase “imperialist white-supremacist capitalist patriarchy” to describe the interlocking political systems that are the foundation of our nation’s politics. Of these systems the one that we all learn the most about growing up is the system of patriarchy, even if we never know the word, because patriarchal gender roles are assigned to us as children and we are given continual guidance about the ways we can best fulfill these roles.

Patriarchy is a political-social system that insists that males are inherently dominating, superior to everything and everyone deemed weak, especially females, and endowed with the right to dominate and rule over the weak and to maintain that dominance through various forms of psychological terrorism and violence. When my older brother and I were born with a year separating us in age, patriarchy determined how we would each be regarded by our parents. Both our parents believed in patriarchy; they had been taught patriarchal thinking through religion.

At church they had learned that God created man to rule the world and everything in it and that it was the work of women to help men perform these tasks, to obey, and to always assume a subordinate role in relation to a powerful man. They were taught that God was male. These teachings were reinforced in every institution they encountered—schools, courthouses, clubs, sports arenas, as well as churches. Embracing patriarchal thinking, like everyone else around them, they taught it to their children because it seemed like a “natural” way to organize life.

As their daughter I was taught that it was my role to serve, to be weak, to be free from the burden of thinking, to caretake and nurture others. My brother was taught that it was his role to be served; to provide; to be strong; to think, strategize, and plan; and to refuse to caretake or nurture others. I was taught that it was not proper for a female to be violent, that it was “unnatural.” My brother was taught that his value would be determined by his will to do violence (albeit in appropriate settings). He was taught that for a boy, enjoying violence was a good thing (albeit in appropriate settings). He was taught that a boy should not express feelings. I was taught that girls could and should express feelings, or at least some of them. When I responded with rage at being denied a toy, I was taught as a girl in a patriarchal household that rage was not an appropriate feminine feeling, that it should be not only not be expressed but be eradicated. When my brother responded with rage at being denied a toy, he was taught as a boy in a patriarchal household that his ability to express rage was good but that he had to learn the best setting to unleash his hostility. It was not good for him to use his rage to oppose the wishes of his parents, but later, when he grew up, he was taught that rage was permitted and that allowing rage to provoke him to violence would help him protect home and nation.

We lived in farm country, isolated from other people. Our sense of gender roles was learned from our parents, from the ways we saw them behave. My brother and I remember our confusion about gender. In reality I was stronger and more violent than my brother, which we learned quickly was bad. And he was a gentle, peaceful boy, which we learned was really bad. Although we were often confused, we knew one fact for certain: we could not be and act the way we wanted to, doing what we felt like. It was clear to us that our behavior had to follow a predetermined, gendered script. We both learned the word “patriarchy” in our adult life, when we learned that the script that had determined what we should be, the identities we should make, was based on patriarchal values and beliefs about gender.

I was always more interested in challenging patriarchy than my brother was because it was the system that was always leaving me out of things that I wanted to be part of. In our family life of the fifties, marbles were a boy’s game. My brother had inherited his marbles from men in the family; he had a tin box to keep them in. All sizes and shapes, marvelously colored, they were to my eye the most beautiful objects. We played together with them, often with me aggressively clinging to the marble I liked best, refusing to share. When Dad was at work, our stay-at-home mom was quite content to see us playing marbles together. Yet Dad, looking at our play from a patriarchal perspective, was disturbed by what he saw. His daughter, aggressive and competitive, was a better player than his son. His son was passive; the boy did not really seem to care who won and was willing to give over marbles on demand. Dad decided that this play had to end, that both my brother and I needed to learn a lesson about appropriate gender roles.

One evening my brother was given permission by Dad to bring out the tin of marbles. I announced my desire to play and was told by my brother that “girls did not play with marbles,” that it was a boy’s game. This made no sense to my four- or five-year-old mind, and I insisted on my right to play by picking up marbles and shooting them. Dad intervened to tell me to stop. I did not listen. His voice grew louder and louder. Then suddenly he snatched me up, broke a board from our screen door, and began to beat me with it, telling me, “You’re just a little girl. When I tell you to do something, I mean for you to do it.” He beat me and he beat me, wanting me to acknowledge that I understood what I had done. His rage, his violence captured everyone’s attention. Our family sat spellbound, rapt before the pornography of patriarchal violence. After this beating I was banished—forced to stay alone in the dark. Mama came into the bedroom to soothe the pain, telling me in her soft southern voice, “I tried to warn you. You need to accept that you are just a little girl and girls can’t do what boys do.” In service to patriarchy her task was to reinforce that Dad had done the right thing by putting me in my place, by restoring the natural social order.

I remember this traumatic event so well because it was a story told again and again within our family. No one cared that the constant retelling might trigger post-traumatic stress; the retelling was necessary to reinforce both the message and the remembered state of absolute powerlessness. The recollection of this brutal whipping of a little-girl daughter by a big strong man, served as more than just a reminder to me of my gendered place, it was a reminder to everyone watching/remembering, to all my siblings, male and female, and to our grown-woman mother that our patriarchal father was the ruler in our household. We were to remember that if we did not obey his rules, we would be punished, punished even unto death. This is the way we were experientially schooled in the art of patriarchy.

There is nothing unique or even exceptional about this experience. Listen to the voices of wounded grown children raised in patriarchal homes and you will hear different versions with the same underlying theme, the use of violence to reinforce our indoctrination and acceptance of patriarchy. In How Can I Get Through to You? family therapist Terrence Real tells how his sons were initiated into patriarchal thinking even as their parents worked to create a loving home in which antipatriarchal values prevailed. He tells of how his young son Alexander enjoyed dressing as Barbie until boys playing with his older brother witnessed his Barbie persona and let him know by their gaze and their shocked, disapproving silence that his behavior was unacceptable:





Without a shred of malevolence, the stare my son received transmitted a message. You are not to do this. And the medium that message was broadcast in was a potent emotion: shame. At three, Alexander was learning the rules. A ten-second wordless transaction was powerful enough to dissuade my son from that instant forward from what had been a favorite activity. I call such moments of induction the “normal traumatization” of boys.





To indoctrinate boys into the rules of patriarchy, we force them to feel pain and to deny their feelings.

My stories took place in the fifties; the stories Real tells are recent. They all underscore the tyranny of patriarchal thinking, the power of patriarchal culture to hold us captive. Real is one of the most enlightened thinkers on the subject of patriarchal masculinity in our nation, and yet he lets readers know that he is not able to keep his boys out of patriarchy’s reach. They suffer its assaults, as do all boys and girls, to a greater or lesser degree. No doubt by creating a loving home that is not patriarchal, Real at least offers his boys a choice: they can choose to be themselves or they can choose conformity with patriarchal roles. Real uses the phrase “psychological patriarchy” to describe the patriarchal thinking common to females and males. Despite the contemporary visionary feminist thinking that makes clear that a patriarchal thinker need not be a male, most folks continue to see men as the problem of patriarchy. This is simply not the case. Women can be as wedded to patriarchal thinking and action as men.

Psychotherapist John Bradshaw’s clear-sighted definition of patriarchy in Creating Love is a useful one: “The dictionary defines ‘patriarchy’ as a ‘social organization marked by the supremacy of the father in the clan or family in both domestic and religious functions….’ Patriarchy is characterized by male domination and power.” He states further that “patriarchal rules still govern most of the world’s religious, school systems, and family systems.” Describing the most damaging of these rules, Bradshaw lists “blind obedience—the foundation upon which patriarchy stands; the repression of all emotions except fear; the destruction of individual willpower; and the repression of thinking whenever it departs from the authority figure’s way of thinking.” Patriarchal thinking shapes the values of our culture. We are socialized into this system, females as well as males. Most of us learned patriarchal attitudes in our family of origin, and they were usually taught to us by our mothers. These attitudes were reinforced in schools and religious institutions.

The contemporary presence of female-headed households has led many people to assume that children in these households are not learning patriarchal values because no male is present. They assume that men are the sole teachers of patriarchal thinking. Yet many female-headed households endorse and promote patriarchal thinking with far greater passion than two-parent households. Because they do not have an experiential reality to challenge false fantasies of gender roles, women in such households are far more likely to idealize the patriarchal male role and patriarchal men than are women who live with patriarchal men every day. We need to highlight the role women play in perpetuating and sustaining patriarchal culture so that we will recognize patriarchy as a system women and men support equally, even if men receive more rewards from that system. Dismantling and changing patriarchal culture is work that men and women must do together.

Clearly we cannot dismantle a system as long as we engage in collective denial about its impact on our lives. Patriarchy requires male dominance by any means necessary, hence it supports, promotes, and condones sexist violence. We hear the most about sexist violence in public discourses about rape and abuse by domestic partners. But the most common forms of patriarchal violence are those that take place in the home between patriarchal parents and children. The point of such violence is usually to reinforce a dominator model, in which the authority figure is deemed ruler over those without power and given the right to maintain that rule through practices of subjugation, subordination, and submission.

Keeping males and females from telling the truth about what happens to them in families is one way patriarchal culture is maintained. A great majority of individuals enforce an unspoken rule in the culture as a whole that demands we keep the secrets of patriarchy, thereby protecting the rule of the father. This rule of silence is upheld when the culture refuses everyone easy access even to the word “patriarchy.” Most children do not learn what to call this system of institutionalized gender roles, so rarely do we name it in everyday speech. This silence promotes denial. And how can we organize to challenge and change a system that cannot be named?

It is no accident that feminists began to use the word “patriarchy” to replace the more commonly used “male chauvanism” and “sexism.” These courageous voices wanted men and women to become more aware of the way patriarchy affects us all. In popular culture the word itself was hardly used during the heyday of contemporary feminism. Antimale activists were no more eager than their sexist male counterparts to emphasize the system of patriarchy and the way it works. For to do so would have automatically exposed the notion that men were all-powerful and women powerless, that all men were oppressive and women always and only victims. By placing the blame for the perpetuation of sexism solely on men, these women could maintain their own allegiance to patriarchy, their own lust for power. They masked their longing to be dominators by taking on the mantle of victimhood.

Like many visionary radical feminists I challenged the misguided notion, put forward by women who were simply fed up with male exploitation and oppression, that men were “the enemy.” As early as 1984 I included a chapter with the title “Men: Comrades in Struggle” in my book Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center urging advocates of feminist politics to challenge any rhetoric which placed the sole blame for perpetuating patriarchy and male domination onto men:





Separatist ideology encourages women to ignore the negative impact of sexism on male personhood. It stresses polarization between the sexes. According to Joy Justice, separatists believe that there are “two basic perspectives” on the issue of naming the victims of sexism: “There is the perspective that men oppress women. And there is the perspective that people are people, and we are all hurt by rigid sex roles.”…Both perspectives accurately describe our predicament. Men do oppress women. People are hurt by rigid sexist role patterns. These two realities coexist. Male oppression of women cannot be excused by the recognition that there are ways men are hurt by rigid sexist roles. Feminist activists should acknowledge that hurt, and work to change it—it exists. It does not erase or lessen male responsibility for supporting and perpetuating their power under patriarchy to exploit and oppress women in a manner far more grievous than the serious psychological stress and emotional pain caused by male conformity to rigid sexist role patterns.





Throughout this essay I stressed that feminist advocates collude in the pain of men wounded by patriarchy when they falsely represent men as always and only powerful, as always and only gaining privileges from their blind obedience to patriarchy. I emphasized that patriarchal ideology brainwashes men to believe that their domination of women is beneficial when it is not:





Often feminist activists affirm this logic when we should be constantly naming these acts as expressions of perverted power relations, general lack of control of one’s actions, emotional powerlessness, extreme irrationality, and in many cases, outright insanity. Passive male absorption of sexist ideology enables men to falsely interpret this disturbed behavior positively. As long as men are brainwashed to equate violent domination and abuse of women with privilege, they will have no understanding of the damage done to themselves or to others, and no motivation to change.





Patriarchy demands of men that they become and remain emotional cripples. Since it is a system that denies men full access to their freedom of will, it is difficult for any man of any class to rebel against patriarchy, to be disloyal to the patriarchal parent, be that parent female or male.

The man who has been my primary bond for more than twelve years was traumatized by the patriarchal dynamics in his family of origin. When I met him he was in his twenties. While his formative years had been spent in the company of a violent, alcoholic dad, his circumstances changed when he was twelve and he began to live alone with his mother. In the early years of our relationship he talked openly about his hostility and rage toward his abusing dad. He was not interested in forgiving him or understanding the circumstances that had shaped and influenced his dad’s life, either in his childhood or in his working life as a military man.

In the early years of our relationship he was extremely critical of male domination of women and children. Although he did not use the word “patriarchy,” he understood its meaning and he opposed it. His gentle, quiet manner often led folks to ignore him, counting him among the weak and the powerless. By the age of thirty he began to assume a more macho persona, embracing the dominator model that he had once critiqued. Donning the mantle of patriarch, he gained greater respect and visibility. More women were drawn to him. He was noticed more in public spheres. His criticism of male domination ceased. And indeed he begin to mouth patriarchal rhetoric, saying the kind of sexist stuff that would have appalled him in the past.

These changes in his thinking and behavior were triggered by his desire to be accepted and affirmed in a patriarchal workplace and rationalized by his desire to get ahead. His story is not unusual. Boys brutalized and victimized by patriarchy more often than not become patriarchal, embodying the abusive patriarchal masculinity that they once clearly recognized as evil. Few men brutally abused as boys in the name of patriarchal maleness courageously resist the brainwashing and remain true to themselves. Most males conform to patriarchy in one way or another.

Indeed, radical feminist critique of patriarchy has practically been silenced in our culture. It has become a subcultural discourse available only to well-educated elites. Even in those circles, using the word “patriarchy” is regarded as passé. Often in my lectures when I use the phrase “imperialist white-supremacist capitalist patriarchy” to describe our nation’s political system, audiences laugh. No one has ever explained why accurately naming this system is funny. The laughter is itself a weapon of patriarchal terrorism. It functions as a disclaimer, discounting the significance of what is being named. It suggests that the words themselves are problematic and not the system they describe. I interpret this laughter as the audience’s way of showing discomfort with being asked to ally themselves with an antipatriarchal disobedient critique. This laughter reminds me that if I dare to challenge patriarchy openly, I risk not being taken seriously.

Citizens in this nation fear challenging patriarchy even as they lack overt awareness that they are fearful, so deeply embedded in our collective unconscious are the rules of patriarchy. I often tell audiences that if we were to go door-to-door asking if we should end male violence against women, most people would give their unequivocal support. Then if you told them we can only stop male violence against women by ending male domination, by eradicating patriarchy, they would begin to hesitate, to change their position. Despite the many gains of contemporary feminist movement—greater equality for women in the workforce, more tolerance for the relinquishing of rigid gender roles—patriarchy as a system remains intact, and many people continue to believe that it is needed if humans are to survive as a species. This belief seems ironic, given that patriarchal methods of organizing nations, especially the insistence on violence as a means of social control, has actually led to the slaughter of millions of people on the planet.

Until we can collectively acknowledge the damage patriarchy causes and the suffering it creates, we cannot address male pain. We cannot demand for men the right to be whole, to be givers and sustainers of life. Obviously some patriarchal men are reliable and even benevolent caretakers and providers, but still they are imprisoned by a system that undermines their mental health.

Patriarchy promotes insanity. It is at the root of the psychological ills troubling men in our nation. Nevertheless there is no mass concern for the plight of men. In Stiffed: The Betrayal of the American Man, Susan Faludi includes very little discussion of patriarchy:





Ask feminists to diagnose men’s problems and you will often get a very clear explanation: men are in crisis because women are properly challenging male dominance. Women are asking men to share the public reins and men can’t bear it. Ask antifeminists and you will get a diagnosis that is, in one respect, similar. Men are troubled, many conservative pundits say, because women have gone far beyond their demands for equal treatment and are now trying to take power and control away from men…. The underlying message: men cannot be men, only eunuchs, if they are not in control. Both the feminist and antifeminist views are rooted in a peculiarly modern American perception that to be a man means to be at the controls and at all times to feel yourself in control.





Faludi never interrogates the notion of control. She never considers that the notion that men were somehow in control, in power, and satisfied with their lives before contemporary feminist movement is false.

Patriarchy as a system has denied males access to full emotional well-being, which is not the same as feeling rewarded, successful, or powerful because of one’s capacity to assert control over others. To truly address male pain and male crisis we must as a nation be willing to expose the harsh reality that patriarchy has damaged men in the past and continues to damage them in the present. If patriarchy were truly rewarding to men, the violence and addiction in family life that is so all-pervasive would not exist. This violence was not created by feminism. If patriarchy were rewarding, the overwhelming dissatisfaction most men feel in their work lives—a dissatisfaction extensively documented in the work of Studs Terkel and echoed in Faludi’s treatise—would not exist.

In many ways Stiffed was yet another betrayal of American men because Faludi spends so much time trying not to challenge patriarchy that she fails to highlight the necessity of ending patriarchy if we are to liberate men. Rather she writes:





Instead of wondering why men resist women’s struggle for a freer and healthier life, I began to wonder why men refrain from engaging in their own struggle. Why, despite a crescendo of random tantrums, have they offered no methodical, reasoned response to their predicament: Given the untenable and insulting nature of the demands placed on men to prove themselves in our culture, why don’t men revolt?…Why haven’t men responded to the series of betrayals in their own lives—to the failures of their fathers to make good on their promises—with something coequal to feminism?





Note that Faludi does not dare risk either the ire of feminist females by suggesting that men can find salvation in feminist movement or rejection by potential male readers who are solidly antifeminist by suggesting that they have something to gain from engaging feminism.

So far in our nation visionary feminist movement is the only struggle for justice that emphasizes the need to end patriarchy. No mass body of women has challenged patriarchy and neither has any group of men come together to lead the struggle. The crisis facing men is not the crisis of masculinity, it is the crisis of patriarchal masculinity. Until we make this distinction clear, men will continue to fear that any critique of patriarchy represents a threat. Distinguishing political patriarchy, which he sees as largely committed to ending sexism, therapist Terrence Real makes clear that the patriarchy damaging us all is embedded in our psyches:





Psychological patriarchy is the dynamic between those qualities deemed “masculine” and “feminine” in which half of our human traits are exalted while the other half is devalued. Both men and women participate in this tortured value system. Psychological patriarchy is a “dance of contempt,” a perverse form of connection that replaces true intimacy with complex, covert layers of dominance and submission, collusion and manipulation. It is the unacknowledged paradigm of relationships that has suffused Western civilization generation after generation, deforming both sexes, and destroying the passionate bond between them.





By highlighting psychological patriarchy, we see that everyone is implicated and we are freed from the misperception that men are the enemy. To end patriarchy we must challenge both its psychological and its concrete manifestations in daily life. There are folks who are able to critique patriarchy but unable to act in an antipatriarchal manner.

To end male pain, to respond effectively to male crisis, we have to name the problem. We have to both acknowledge that the problem is patriarchy and work to end patriarchy. Terrence Real offers this valuable insight: “The reclamation of wholeness is a process even more fraught for men than it has been for women, more difficult and more profoundly threatening to the culture at large.” If men are to reclaim the essential goodness of male being, if they are to regain the space of openheartedness and emotional expressiveness that is the foundation of well-being, we must envision alternatives to patriarchal masculinity. We must all change.





3


Being a Boy




Boys are not seen as lovable in patriarchal culture. Even though sexism has always decreed that boy children have more status than girls, status and even the rewards of privilege are not the same as being loved. Patriarchal assault on the emotional life of boys begins at the moment of their birth. Contrary to sexist mythology, in the real world of male and female babies, male babies express themselves more. They cry longer and louder. They come into the world wanting to be seen and heard. Sexist thinking at its worst leads many parents to let male infants cry without a comforting touch because they fear that holding baby boys too much, comforting them too much, might cause them to grow up wimpy. Thankfully, there has been enough of a break with rigid sexist roles to allow aware parents to reject this faulty logic and give boy babies the same comfort that they give or would give girls.

In recent years it has become clear to researchers working on promoting the emotional life of boys that patriarchal culture influences parents to devalue the emotional development of boys. Naturally this disregard affects boys’ capacity to love and be loving. Dan Kindlon and Michael Thompson, authors of Raising Cain: Protecting the Emotional Life of Boys, stress that their research shows that boys are free to be more emotional in early childhood because they have not yet learned to fear and despise expressing dependence: “Every child, boys included, comes into this world wanting to love and be loved by his parents. Forty years of research on emotional attachment shows that without it children die or suffer severe emotional damage.” Despite these powerful insights they do not talk about the impact of patriarchy. They do not tell readers that to truly protect the emotional life of boys, we must tell the truth about the power of patriarchy. We must dare to face the way in which patriarchal thinking blinds everyone so that we cannot see that the emotional lives of boys cannot be fully honored as long as notions of patriarchal masculinity prevail. We cannot teach boys that “real men” either do not feel or do not express feelings, then expect boys to feel comfortable getting in touch with their feelings.

Much of the traditional research on the emotional life of boys draws the connection between notions of male dominance and the shutting down of emotions in boyhood even as the researchers act as though patriarchal values can remain intact. Popular bestselling books such as Raising Cain and James Garbarino’s Lost Boys: Why Our Sons Turn Violent and How We can Save Them outline the way boys are being emotionally damaged, but they fail to offer a courageous alternative vision, one that would fundamentally challenge patriarchal masculinity. Instead these books imply that within the existing patriarchal system, boyhood should be free of patriarchal demands. The value of patriarchy itself is never addressed. In Raising Cain the authors conclude by contending: “What boys need, first and foremost, is to be seen through a different lens than tradition prescribes. Individually, and as a culture, we must discard the distorted view of boys that ignores or denies their capacity for feelings, the view that colors even boys’ perception of themselves as above or outside a life of emotions.” Kindlon and Thompson carefully depoliticize their language. Their use of the word “tradition” belies the reality that the patriarchal culture which has socialized almost everyone in our nation to dismiss the emotional life of boys is an entrenched social and political system. Nor is it an accident of nature. Antifeminist women like Christina Hoff Sommers curry patriarchal favor with men by spreading the idea, put forward in Sommers’s book The War against Boys, that “feminism is harming our young men.” Sommers falsely assumes that educating boys to be antipatriarchal is “resocializing boys in the direction of femininity.” Conveniently, she ignores that feminist thinkers are as critical of sexist notions of femininity as we are of patriarchal notions of masculinity. It is patriarchy, in its denial of the full humanity of boys, that threatens the emotional lives of boys, not feminist thinking. To change patriarchal “traditions” we must end patriarchy, in part by envisoning alternative ways of thinking about maleness, not only boyhood.

Without ever using the word “patriarchy” (he uses the phrase “traditional masculinity”), psychologist James Garbarino does suggest in Lost Boys that the cultivation of an androgynous selfhood, one that combines the traits deemed masculine and feminine, would affirm for boys their right to be emotional. In his section on “What Boys Need” Garbarino writes:





Where and how do boys learn what it means to be a man? They seem to learn it all too often from the mass media and from the most visible males in their community, particularly their peers. Boys’ friends are the arbitrators of what is masculine and what is feminine, so resilience among the boys in a community depends upon changing macho attitudes among male peer groups and broadening their concept of what a real man is and does.





Garbarino’s is a powerful work, very much on target in the descriptions and information it offers about all the ways boys are traumatized by the demand that they deny their emotions. But it is also a disturbing one because the author himself seems unwilling to connect his recognition of the damage done to boys with a critique of patriarchal thinking and practice. It is as if he believes that somehow all that is needed is a revamping of patriarchal values so that boys’ emotions can be supported, at least until the boys grow up.

Frankly, it is difficult to understand why these men who know so much about the way patriarchal thinking damages boys are unable to call the problem by its true name and by so doing free themselves to envision a world where the feelings of boys can really matter. Perhaps they are silent because any critique of patriarchy necessarily leads to a discussion of whether conversion to feminist thinking and practice is the answer. It has been hard for many male thinkers about the emotional life of boys to see feminism as a helpful theory because to a grave extent antimale sentiments among some feminists have led the movement to focus very little attention on the development of boys.

One of the tremendous failings of feminist theory and practice has been the lack of a concentrated study of boyhood, one that offers guidelines and strategies for alternative masculinity and ways of thinking about maleness. Indeed the feminist rhetoric that insisted on identifying males as the enemy often closed down the space where boys could be considered, where they could be deemed as worthy of rescue from patriarchal exploitation and oppression as were their female counterparts. Like the researchers who write about the emotional lives of boys from a nonfeminist perspective, feminist researchers are often unwilling or reluctant to target patriarchal thinking. Family therapist Olga Silverstein in The Courage to Raise Good Men says little about patriarchy even as she does offer alternative strategies for raising boys. There are two major barriers preventing researchers from targeting patriarchy. Researchers fear that overtly political analysis will alienate readers on one hand, and on the other hand they may simply have no alternative visions to offer.

Feminist theory has offered us brilliant critiques of patriarchy and very few insightful ideas about alternative masculinity, especially in relation to boys. Many feminist women who birthed boys found themselves reluctant to challenge conventional aspects of patriarchal masculinity when their boys wanted to embrace those values. They found they did not want to deny their sons access to toy guns or to tell them to just be passive when another boy was attacking them on the playground. For many enlightened, single-parent feminist mothers with limited economic resources, the effort to consistently map for their sons alternatives to patriarchal masculinity simply takes too much time.

One of my very best friends is a single mother with two children, an older daughter and a younger son. When her son was born I suggested we name him Ruby. His biological dad jokingly made the point that “she should have her own son and name him Ruby.” Well, his middle name is Ruby. When he was around the age of five he decided he wanted to use the name Ruby. The boys at school let him know through teasing that this was a girl’s name. As an intervention he and his mom brought to school pictures of all the men through history named Ruby. Then later on he wanted to paint his nails with fingernail polish and wear it to school. Again the boys let him know that boys do not use nail polish. His mother and sister gathered all the “cool” adult guys knew they to come to school and show that males can use nail polish. These were my friend’s graduate student years, however; when she began working full-time, such vigilance became harder to maintain. Just recently her son told her how much he likes the way she smells. She shared with him that he could smell the same. He let her know that there was no way he could go to school smelling sweet. He had gotten the message that “boys don’t smell good.” Instead of urging him to rise to the latest challenge, she now allows him to choose and does not judge his choice. Yet she feels sad for him, sad that conformity to patriarchal standards interfered with his longings.

Many antipatriarchal parents find that the alternative masculinities they support for their boy children are shattered not by grown-ups but by sexist male peers. Progressive parents who strive to be vigilant about the mass media their boys have access to must constantly intervene and offer teachings to counter the patriarchal pedagogy that is deemed “normal.” In How Can I Get Through to You? Terrrence Real, father of two sons, states:





Our sons learn the code early and well, don’t cry, don’t be vulnerable; don’t show weakness—ultimately, don’t show that you care. As a society, we may have some notion that raising whole boys and girls is a good idea, but that doesn’t mean that we actually do. Even though you or I might be committed to raising less straitjacketed kids, the culture at large, while perhaps changing, is still far from changed. Try as we might, in movie theaters, classrooms, playgrounds our sons and daughters are bombarded with traditional messages about masculinity and femininity, hour by hour, day by day.





Again, Real uses the word “traditional” rather than “patriarchal.” Yet traditions are rarely hard to change. What has been all but impossible to change is widespread cultural patriarchal propaganda. Yet we begin to protect the emotional well-being of boys and of all males when we call this propaganda by its true name, when we acknowledge that patriarchal culture requires that boys deny, suppress, and if all goes well, shut down their emotional awareness and their capacity to feel.

Little boys are the only males in our culture who are allowed to be fully, wholly in touch with their feelings, allowed moments when they can express without shame their desire to love and be loved. If they are very, very lucky, they are able to remain connected to their inner selves or some part of their inner selves before they enter a patriarchal school system where rigid sex roles will be enforced by peers as rigorously as they are in any adult male prison. Those rare boys who happen to live in antipatriarchal homes learn early to lead a double life: at home they can feel and express and be; outside the home they must conform to the role of patriarchal boy. Patriarchal boys, like their adult counterparts, know the rules: they know they must not express feelings, with the exception of anger; that they must not do anything considered feminine or womanly. A national survey of adolescent males revealed their passive acceptance of patriarchal masculinity. Researchers found that boys agreed that to be truly manly, they must command respect, be tough, not talk about problems, and dominate females.

Every day across this country boys consume mass media images that send them one message about how to deal with emotions, and that message is “Act out.” Usually acting out means aggression directed outward. Kicking, screaming, and hitting get attention. Since patriarchal parenting does not teach boys to express their feelings in words, either boys act out or they implode. Very few boys are taught to express with words what they feel, when they feel it. And even when boys are able to express feelings in early childhood, they learn as they grow up that they are not supposed to feel and they shut down.

The confusion boys experience about their identity is heightened during adolescence. In many ways the fact that today’s boy often has a wider range of emotional expression in early childhood but is forced to suppress emotional awareness later on makes adolescence all the more stressful for boys. Tragically, were it not for the extreme violence that has erupted among teenage boys throughout our nation, the emotional life of boys would still be ignored. Although therapists tell us that mass media images of male violence and dominance teach boys that violence is alluring and satisfying, when individual boys are violent, especially when they murder randomly, pundits tend to behave as though it were a mystery why boys are so violent.

Progressive feminist research on adolescent males has debunked the heretofore accepted notion that it is natural for boys to go through an antisocial stage where they disassociate and disconnect. Recent studies indicate that it is actually emotionally damaging to young males to be isolated and without emotional care or nurturance. In the past it was assumed that aggression was part of the ritual of separation, a means for the growing boy to assert his autonomy. Yet clearly, just as girls learn how to be autonomous and how to create healthy distance from parents without becoming antisocial, boys can do the same. In healthy families boys are able to learn and assert autonomy without engaging in antisocial behavior, without isolating themselves. All over the world terrorist regimes use isolation to break people’s spirit. This weapon of psychological terrorism is daily deployed in our nation against teenage boys. In isolation they lose the sense of their value and worth. No wonder then that when they reenter a community, they bring with them killing rage as their primary defense.

Even though masses of American boys will not commit violent crimes resulting in murder, the truth that no one wants to name is that all boys are being raised to be killers even if they learn to hide the killer within and act as benevolent young patriarchs. (More and more girls who embrace patriarchal thinking also embrace the notion that they must be violent to have power.) Talking to teenage girls of all classes who are being secretly hit or beaten by boyfriends (who say that they are “disciplining” them), one hears the same Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde narratives that grown women tell when talking about their relationships with abusive men. These girls describe seemingly nice guys who have rageful outbursts. Time and time again we hear on our national news about the seemingly kind, quiet young male whose violent underpinnings are suddenly revealed. Boys are encouraged by patriarchal thinking to claim rage as the easiest path to manliness. It should come as no surprise, then, that beneath the surface there is a seething anger in boys, a rage waiting for the moment to be heard.

Much of the anger boys express is itself a response to the demand that they not show any other emotions. Anger feels better than numbness because it often leads to more instrumental action. Anger can be, and usually is, the hiding place for fear and pain. In The Heart of the Soul authors Gary Zukav and Linda Francis explore the ways anger barricades the feeling self:





Anger prevents love and isolates the one who is angry. It is an attempt, often successful, to push away what is most longed for—companionship and understanding. It is a denial of the humanness of others, as well as a denial of your own humanness. Anger is the agony of believing that you are not capable of being understood, and that you are not worthy of being understood. It is a wall that separates you from others as effectively as if it were concrete, thick, and very high. There is no way through it, under it, or over it.





Certainly in almost all the situations where boys have killed, we discover narratives of rage that describe the emotional realities before they happen. Importantly, this anger is expressed cross a broad spectrum of class, race, and family circumstance. Violent boys from affluent homes often are as emotionally alienated as their ghetto counterparts.

At a time in our nation’s history when more boys than ever are being raised in single-parent, female-headed homes, mass media send the message that a single mother is unfit to raise a healthy boy child. All over our nation mothers worry that their parenting may be damaging their sons. This is the issue Olga Silverstein tackles head-on in The Courage to Raise Good Men. Commenting that many people still believe that mothers compromise their sons’ masculinity, she writes: “Most women, like most men, feel that a mother’s influence will ultimately be harmful to a male child, that it will weaken him and that only the example of a man can lead a son into manhood. Single mothers in particular are haunted by the dread of producing a sissy.” Homophobia underlies the fear that allowing boys to feel will turn them gay; this fear is often most intense in single-parent homes. As a consequence mothers in these families may be overly harsh and profoundly emotionally withholding with their sons, believing that this treatment will help the boys to be more masculine.

No matter that information abounds that lets the public know that many gay males come from two-parent homes and can be macho and woman-hating, misguided assumptions about what makes a male gay still flourish. Every day boys who express feelings are psychologically terrorized, and in extreme cases brutally beaten, by parents who fear that a man of feeling must be homosexual. Gay men share with straight men the same notions about acceptable masculinity. Luckily there have been and are individual gay men who dare to challenge patriarchal masculinity. However, most gay men in our culture are as embracing of sexist thinking as are heterosexuals. Their patriarchal thinking leads them to construct paradigms of desirable sexual behavior that is similar to that of patriarchal straight men. Hence many gay men are as angry as their straight counterparts.

Just as maternal sadism flourishes in a world where women are made to feel that their emotional cruelty to sons makes them better prepared for manhood, paternal sadism is the natural outcome of patriarchal values. In the book The Man I Might Become: Gay Men Write about Their Fathers, edited by Bruce Shenitz, many of the stories of boyhood describe rituals of paternal sadism. As James Saslow writes in “Daddy Was a Hot Number”:





All children suffer that aching stab of inadequacy when Papa turns his face away; it’s just twice as sharp when he’s your object of desire as well as your mentor and role model. Only mother love is unconditional…. But fatherly love is also about licking the child into shape…. Fathers challenge and then judge us—their role in socializing the next generation. In this mythic battle of wills, persuasion and example are the preferred weapons, but if they don’t work, the drill sergeant will have to unleash the A-bomb of familial warfare: rejection.





Most patriarchal fathers in our nation do not use physical violence to keep their sons in check; they use various techniques of psychological terrorism, the primary one being the practice of shaming. Patriarchal fathers cannot love their sons because the rules of patriarchy dictate that they stand in competition with their sons, ready to prove that they are the real man, the one in charge. In his essay “Finding the Light and Keeping It in Front of Me,” Bob Vance describes walking behind his father as a boy longing to connect but knowing intuitively that no connection was possible: “Something inhibits me from asking him for what I need. I know, if a very young boy can intuit such things, that I am left out of his world and am somehow forbidden to ask him what I can do to have him take me into his world, to hold me playfully or tenderly. The rift begins here. This is the earliest memory I have of my father.”

To the patriarchal dad, sons can only be regarded as recruits in training, hence they must constantly be subjected to sadomasochistic power struggles designed to toughen them up, to prepare them to maintain the patriarchal legacy. As sons they inhabit a world where fathers strive to keep them in the one-down position; as patriarchs in training they must learn how to assume a one-up role. Real explains:





Sustaining relationships with others requires a good relationship to ourselves. Healthy self-esteem is an internal sense of worth, that pulls one neither into “better than” grandiosity nor “less than” shame…. Contempt is why so many men have such trouble staying connected. Since healthy self-esteem—being neither one up nor down—is not yet a real option, and since riding in the one-down position elicits disdain, in oneself and in others, most men learn to hide the chronic shame that dogs them…running from their own humanity and from closeness to anyone else along with it.





This flight from closeness is most intense in the lives of adolescent boys because in that liminal zone between childhood and young adulthood they are experiencing a range of emotions that leave them feeling out of control, fearful that they will not measure up to the standards of patriarchal masculinity. Suppressed rage is the perfect hiding place for all these fears.

Despite major changes in gender roles in public life, in private many boys are traumatized by relationships with distant or absent fathers. Working with groups of men, listening as they talk about boyhood, I hear the stories they tell about their fathers’ lack of emotional connection. As they attempt to measure up to patriarchal expectations, many boys fear the wrath of the father. In Man Enough: Fathers, Sons, and the Search for Masculinity, Frank Pittman recalls: “Fearing I didn’t have enough of it, I was in awe of masculinity. I thought my father had some magical power he wasn’t passing on to me, a secret he hadn’t told me.” Again and again the same assumption appears, which suggests that there exists a masculine ideal that young males are not sure how to attain and that undermines their self-esteem. And the crisis of this longing seems most deeply felt by boys with absent fathers. Without a positive connection to a real adult man, they are far more likely to invest in a hypermasculine patriarchal ideal. Fear of not being able to attain the right degree of manliness is often translated into rage. Many teenage boys are angry because the fantasy emotional connection between father and son, the love that they imagine will be there, is never realized. In its place there is just a space of empty longing. Even when it becomes evident that the fantasy will not be fulfilled, that the “father wound” will not be healed, boys hold on to the longing. It may give them a sense of quest and purpose to feel they will someday find the father or, through having children, become the father they dream about.

Frustrated in their quest for father bonding, boys often feel tremendous sorrow and depression. They can mask these feelings because they are allowed to isolate themselves, to turn away from the world and escape into music, television, video games, etc. There is no emotional outlet for the grief of the disappointed teenage boy. Being able to mourn the loss of emotional connection with his father would be a healthy way to cope with disappointment. But boys have no space to mourn. This need for a space to grieve is poignantly portrayed in the film Life as a House. Learning that he has cancer and only a short time to live, the father in the film seeks to connect with his sexually confused, angry, drug-using teenage son, who lives with his mother and stepfather. In the short time he lives with his dad, the son is able to develop an emotional connection. When the son finds out that his dad is dying, he rages about being offered love that is not going to last. In Donald Dutton’s study of abusive men, The Batterer, he observes that there are few male models for grieving, and he emphasizes that “men in particular seem incapable of grieving and mourning on an individual basis. Trapped by a world that tells them boys should not express feelings, teenage males have nowhere to go where grief is accepted.” As much as grown-ups complain about adolescent male anger, most adults are more comfortable confronting a raging teenager than one who is overwhelmed by sorrow and cannot stop weeping. Boys learn to cover up grief with anger; the more troubled the boy, the more intense the mask of indifference. Shutting down emotionally is the best defense when the longing for connection must be denied.

Teenagers are the most unloved group in our nation. Teenagers are often feared precisely because they are often exposing the hypocrisy of parents and of the world around them. And no group of teenagers is more feared than a pack of teenage boys. Emotionally abandoned by parents and by society as a whole, many boys are angry, but no one really cares about this anger unless it leads to violent behavior. If boys take their rage and sit in front of a computer all day, never speaking, never relating, no one cares. If boys take their rage to the mall, no one cares, as long as it is contained. In Lost Boys therapist James Garbarino testifies that when it comes to boys, “neglect is more common than abuse: more kids are emotionally abandoned than are directly attacked, physically or emotionally.” Emotional neglect lays the groundwork for the emotional numbing that helps boys feel better about being cut off. Eruptions of rage in boys are most often deemed normal, explained by the age-old justification for adolescent patriarchal mis-behavior, “Boys will be boys.” Patriarchy both creates the rage in boys and then contains it for later use, making it a resource to exploit later on as boys become men. As a national product, this rage can be garnered to further imperialism, hatred, and oppression of women and men globally. This rage is needed if boys are to become men willing to travel around the world to fight wars without ever demanding that other ways of solving conflict be found.

Ever since masses of American boys began, in the wake of the civil rights struggle, sexual liberation, and feminist movement, to demand their right to be psychologically whole and expressed those demands most visibly by refusing to fight in the Vietnam War, mass media as a propaganda tool for imperialist white-supremacist capitalist patriarchy have targeted young males and engaged in heavy-handed brainwashing to reinforce psychological patriarchy. Today small boys and young men are daily inundated with a poisonous pedagogy that supports male violence and male domination, that teaches boys that unchecked violence is acceptable, that teaches them to disrespect and hate women. Given this reality and the concomitant emotional abandonment of boys, it should surprise no one that boys are violent, that they are willing to kill; it should surprise us that the killing is not yet widespread.

Ruthless patriarchal assault on the self-esteem of teenage boys has become an accepted norm. There is a grave silence about adult male tyranny in relation to teenage boys. Much of the adult male terrorism of and competition with little boys and young males is conducted through mass media. Much of the mass media directed at young male consumers is created by self-hating, emotionally shutdown adult men who have only the pornography of violence to share with younger men. To that end they create images that make killing alluring and the sexual exploitation of females the seductive reward. In the wake of feminist, antiracist, and postcolonial critiques of imperialist white-supremacist capitalist patriarchy, the backlash that aims to reinscribe patriarchy is fierce. While feminism may ignore boys and young males, capitalist patriarchal men do not. It was adult, white, wealthy males in this country who first read and fell in love with the Harry Potter books. Though written by a British female, initially described by the rich white American men who “discovered” her as a working-class single mom, J. K. Rowling’s Harry Potter books are clever modern reworkings of the English schoolboy novel. Harry as our modern-day hero is the supersmart, gifted, blessed, white boy genius (a mini patriarch) who “rules” over the equally smart kids, including an occasional girl and an occasional male of color. But these books also glorify war, depicted as killing on behalf of the “good.”

The Harry Potter movies glorify the use of violence to maintain control over others. In Harry Potter: The Chamber of Secrets violence when used by the acceptable groups is deemed positive. Sexism and racist thinking in the Harry Potter books are rarely critiqued. Had the author been a ruling-class white male, feminist thinkers might have been more active in challenging the imperialism, racism, and sexism of Rowling’s books.

Again and again I hear parents, particularly antipatriarchal parents, express concern about the contents of these books while praising them for drawing more boys to reading. Of course American children were bombarded with an advertising blitz telling them that they should read these books. Harry Potter began as national news sanctioned by mass media. Books that do not reinscribe patriarchal masculinity do not get the approval the Harry Potter books have received. And children rarely have an opportunity to know that any books exist which offer an alternative to patriarchal masculinist visions. The phenomenal financial success of Harry Potter means that boys will henceforth have an array of literary clones to choose from.

Literature for children is just as fixated on furthering patriarchal attitudes as television. There are just few a books with male characters focusing on boys that challenge the patriarchal norm in anyway. Since these books do not abound there is no way to know what impact they might have in teaching boys alternative masculinities. Writing a series of children’s book for boys, I was initially amazed by how difficult it was for me, a visionary feminist theorist, to imagine new images and texts for boys. Shopping for books for my nephew first alerted me to the absence of progressive literature for boys. In my first children’s book with male characters, Be Boy Buzz, I wanted to celebrate boyhood without reinscribing patriarchal norms. I wanted to write a text that would just express love for boys. It is a book aimed at little boys. This book strives to honor the holistic well-being of boys and to express love of them whether they are laughing, acting out, or just sitting still. The books I have written are aimed at offering boys ways to cope with their emotional selves. The point is to stimulate in boys emotional awareness and to affirm that awareness.

To truly protect and honor the emotional lives of boys we must challenge patriarchal culture. And until that culture changes, we must create the subcultures, the sanctuaries where boys can learn to be who they are uniquely, without being forced to conform to patriarchal masculine visions. To love boys rightly we must value their inner lives enough to construct worlds, both private and public, where their right to wholeness can be consistently celebrated and affirmed, where their need to love and be loved can be fulfilled.





4


Stopping Male Violence




Every day in America men are violent. Their violence is deemed “natural” by the psychology of patriarchy, which insists that there is a biological connection between having a penis and the will to do violence. This thinking continues to shape notions of manhood in our society despite the fact that it has been documented that cultures exist in the world where men are not violent in everyday life, where rape and murder are rare occurrences. Every day in our nation there are men who turn away from violence. These men do not write books about how they manage to navigate the terrain of patriarchal masculinity without succumbing to the lure of violence. As women have gained the right to be patriarchal men in drag, women are engaging in acts of violence similar to those of their male counterparts. This serves to remind us that the will to use violence is really not linked to biology but to a set of expectations about the nature of power in a dominator culture.

Over the decades no matter how many television shows and movies we have watched in which the hero is the good man who uses violence to win the fight with bad men, many people have long felt that feminist thinkers exaggerate the degree to which men are violent in their daily lives. Radical feminist Andrea Dworkin has courageously and consistently dared to name the widespread scope of male violence against women. In Scapegoat she writes: “A recent United Nations report says that ‘violence against women is the world’s most pervasive form of human rights abuse.’ In the United States the Justice Department says that ‘one out of twelve women will be stalked at some point in her lifetime.’ The American Medical Association concluded that ‘sexual assault and family violence are devastating the United States physical and emotional well-being;’ in 1995 the AMA reported that ‘more than 700,000 women in the United States are sexually assaulted each year, or one every 45 seconds.’ ” These facts address actual physical assault and do not cover the widespread emotional abuse that has practically become an accepted norm in male-female relationships whether between husband and wife, father and daughter, brother and sister, or girlfriend and boyfriend.

In How Can I Get Through to You? Terrence Real includes a chapter titled “A Conspiracy of Silence,” in which he emphasizes that we are not allowed in this culture to speak the truth about what relationships with men are really like. This silence represents our collective cultural collusion with patriarchy. To be true to patriarchy we are all taught that we must keep men’s secrets. Real points out that the fundamental secret we share is that we will remain silent: “When girls are inducted into womanhood, what is it exactly that they have to say that must be silenced. What is the truth women carry that cannot be spoken. The answer is simple and chilling. Girls, women—and also young boys—all share this in common. None may speak the truth about men.” One of the truths that cannot be spoken is the daily violence enacted by men of all classes and races in our society—the violence of emotional abuse. In her groundbreaking work Emotional Abuse Marti Tamm Loring explains that emotional abuse is “an ongoing process in which one individual systematically diminishes and destroys the inner self of another. The essential ideas, feelings, perception, and personality characteristics of the victim are constantly belittled…. The most salient identifying characteristic of emotional abuse is its patterned aspect…. It is…the ongoing effort to demean and control, that constitutes emotional abuse.” Significantly, emotional abuse in families is not just a component of the couple bond; it can determine the way everyone in a family relates. If a woman is patriarchal, it can be present in a single-parent home with no adult males present. In many homes patriarchal power resides with teenage boys who are abusive to single-parent moms; this is male violence against women.

When Real breaks the silence, the stories he shares are from family therapy sessions where clients openly reveal the way fathers have enacted rituals of power, using shaming, withdrawal, threats, and if all else fails, physical violence to maintain their position of dominance. In my family of origin our dad in a booming, angry voice would often scream repeatedly at Mom, “I will kill you.” For years my nightmares were filled with an angry father sometimes killing Mom, sometimes killing me for trying to protect Mom. In our family, Dad was not consistently enraged, but the intense emotional and physical abuse that he unleashed on those rare occasions when he did act out violently kept everyone in check, living on the edge, living in fear. Usually a cold, silent, reserved man, Dad found his voice when speaking in anger.

The two men I have had as my primary relational bonds in my adult life are both quiet and reserved like my dad and my beloved grandfather. Unlike my grandfather, whom I never witnessed expressing anger, much less rage, these two men I chose as partners both needed to exercise dominance now and then through rituals of power. One of them was physically violent on a few occasions, a fact he always felt did not matter, and emotionally unkind quite consistently. My second longtime partner I chose in part because he was a major advocate for stopping violence against women, but as our bond progressed he began to be emotionally abusive now and then. It was as though he felt that I was too powerful, and that perception empowered him to challenge that power, to wound and hurt. I was stunned that the past was being reenacted in the present.

In self-help books galore the notion that women choose men who will treat them badly again and again is presented as truth. These books rarely talk about patriarchy or male domination. They rarely acknowledge that relationships are not static, that people change through time, that they adjust to circumstances. Men who may have seeds of negativity and domination within them along with positive traits may find the negative burgeoning at times of crisis in their lives.

The two men I chose as partners, like all the men I have loved, were victims of various degrees of emotional neglect and abandonment in their childhoods. They did not love their fathers or truly know them intimately. Growing from young adulthood into manhood they simply passively accepted the lack of communication with their fathers. They both felt that all attempts at reconciliation should have come from the father to the son. And yet as they matured into manhood, both these men began to behave not unlike the fathers whose actions they had condemned and hated. Observing them through time, I found that both of them had been rebellious and antipatriarchal in their twenties and early thirties, but as they moved more into the work world, they began to assume more of the patriarchal manners that identify one as a powerful and successful man. Though they had not been living with their fathers when it came time to be “men,” the early models of their lives were unconsciously reenacted. They could have protected themselves from this intimate repetition only by consciously working to be different, only by being disloyal to the dominator model.

No man who does not actively choose to work to change and challenge patriarchy escapes its impact. The most passive, kind, quiet man can come to violence if the seeds of patriarchal thinking have been embedded in his psyche. Much of the Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde behavior women describe in men who are alternately caring, then abusive has its root in this fundamental allegiance to patriarchal thinking. Indoctrination into the mind-set begun in childhood includes a psychological initiation that requires boys to accept that their willingness to do violent acts makes them patriarchal men. A distinction can and must be made between the willingness to do violent acts and actually doing them. When researchers looking at date rape interviewed a range of college men and found that many of them saw nothing wrong with forcing a woman sexually, they were astounded. Their findings seemed to challenge the previously accepted notion that raping was aberrant male behavior. While it may be unlikely that any of the men in this study were or became rapists, it was evident that given what they conceived as the appropriate circumstance, they could see themselves being sexually violent. Unconsciously they engage in patriarchal thinking, which condones rape even though they may never enact it.

This is a patriarchal truism that most people in our society want to deny. Whenever women thinkers, especially advocates of feminism, speak about the widespread problem of male violence, folks are eager to stand up and make the point that most men are not violent. They refuse to acknowledge that masses of boys and men have been programmed from birth on to believe that at some point they must be violent, whether psychologically or physically, to prove that they are men. Terrence Real calls this early indoctrination into patriarchal thinking the “normal traumatization” of boys:





When I first began looking at gender issues, I believed that violence was a by-product of boyhood socialization. But after listening more closely to men and their families, I have come to believe that violence is boyhood socialization. The way we “turn boys into men” is through injury: We sever them from their mothers, research tells us, far too early. We pull them away from their own expressiveness, from their feelings, from sensitivity to others. The very phrase “Be a man” means suck it up and keep going. Disconnection is not fallout from traditional masculinity. Disconnection is masculinity.





This indoctrination happens irrespective of whether a boy is raised in a two-parent household or in a single female-headed household.

The perpetuation of male violence through the teaching of a dominator model of relationships comes to boy children through both women and men. Patriarchy breeds maternal sadism in women who embrace its logic. A great many women stand by and bear witness to their sons’ brutalization at the hands of fathers, boyfriends, brothers, and so on because they feel by doing so they show their allegiance to patriarchy. No wonder then that male rage is often most directed at women in intimate relationships. Such relationships clearly trigger for many males the anger and rage they felt in childhood when their mothers did not protect them or ruthlessly severed emotional bonds in the name of patriarchy.

Contrary to popular myths, single mothers are often the most brutal when it comes to coercing their sons to conform to patriarchal standards. The single mom who insists that her boy child “be a man” is not antipatriarchal; she is enforcing patriarchal will. Researching boyhood, Olga Silverstein observed: “In single-parent families, it’s common to see boys who have become their mother’s ‘little man.’ Often these boys are very bossy children who patronize their mothers, who in fact do uncanny imitations of a certain kind of husband, being alternately possessive, protective, and seductive.” Whether in single-parent or two-parent households, boys who are allowed to assume the role of “mini patriarch” are often violent toward their mothers. They hit and kick when their wishes are not satisfied. Obviously, as small boys they do not have the strength to overpower their mothers, but it is clear that they see the use of violence to get their needs met as acceptable. And while mothers of boys who hit them may feel that hitting is wrong, they may simultaneously feel that it is their job to meet the needs of any male, especially one who is coercive.

Many teenage boys have violent contempt and rage for a patriarchal mom because they understand that in the world outside the home, sexism renders her powerless; he is pissed that she has power over him at home. He does not see her autocratic rule in the home as legitimate power. As a consequence, he may be enraged at his mom for using the tactics of psychological terrorism to whip him into shape and yet respond with admiration toward the male peer or authority figure who deploys similar tactics. In patriarchal culture boys learn early that the authority of the mother is limited, that her power comes solely from being a caretaker of patriarchy. When she colludes with adult male abuse of her son, she (or later a symbolic mother substitute) will be the target of his violence.

Years ago the television show The Incredible Hulk was the favorite of many boys. It featured a mild-mannered scientist who turned into an angry green monster whenever he felt intense emotions. A sociologist interviewing boys about their passion for this show asked them what they would do if they had the power of the Hulk. They replied that they would “smash their mommies.” In her groundbreaking work The Mermaid and the Minotaur feminist theorist Dorothy Dinnerstein highlighted the extent to which boys respond to the autocratic power of mothers with rage. Like many feminist researchers today, she insisted that male engagement with parenting was needed to break this projection onto the mother as an all-powerful figure who must be rebelled against and in some cases destroyed.

Clearly, patriarchal mothers who have rage at grown men act out with sons. They may either force the son to enter into an inappropriate relationship in which he must provide for her the emotional connection grown men deny her or engage in emotional abuse in which the son is constantly belittled and shamed. These acts of patriarchal violence serve to reinforce in the mind of boy children that their violence toward females is appropriate. It simply feels like justifiable vengeance. Feminist idealization of mother-hood made it extremely difficult to call attention to maternal sadism, to the violence women enact with children, especially with boys. And yet we know that whether it is a consequence of power dynamics in dominator culture or simply a reflection of rage, women are shockingly violent toward children. This fact should lead everyone to question any theory of gender differences that suggests that women are less violent than men.

In patriarchal culture women are as violent as men toward the groups that they have power over and can dominate freely; usually that group is children or weaker females. Like its male counterpart, much female violence toward children takes the form of emotional abuse, especially verbal abuse and shaming, hence it is difficult to document. Maternal sadism must be studied, however, if we are to understand the roots of adult male violence toward women. To some extent the reformist feminist thinkers who have focused on women as the more ethical, kinder, gentler sex have stood in the way of an in-depth study of maternal sadism, of the ways women in patriarchal society act out violently with boys.

In our household growing up it was clear that our mother believed wholeheartedly that it was the role of the man to be a disciplinarian, to be in charge. When our dad used excessive violence, she merely saw it as his right. Lots of women who believe that it is the right of men to dominate feel that they should not resist male violence toward themselves or their children. Not surpisingly, these women, my mother included, use all manner of violence to discipline children. Fearful of being the objects of a grown man’s rage, they may desire their children to be perfectly behaved so as not to arouse Daddy’s ire.

In conversations with men whose mothers were passive as their sons were victimized by fathers or other male parental caregivers, I found that the men were far more likely than other men to idealize their moms, seeing them as victims without choice. While they did not direct anger toward their mothers and were often unable to even consider that she could have acted to protect their rights, these men were themselves violent in their intimate relationships with women. Their behavior affirms Terrence Real’s insight that “the choreography of patriarchy, this unholy fusion of love, loss, and violence, spares no one.” Mothers who ally themselves with patriarchy cannot love their sons rightly, for there will always come a moment when patriarchy will ask them to sacrifice their sons. Usually this moment comes in adolescence, when many caring and affectionate mothers stop giving their sons emotional nurturance for fear it will emasculate them. Unable to cope with the loss of emotional connection, boys internalize the pain and mask it with indifference or rage.

Usually adult males who are unable to make emotional connections with the women they choose to be intimate with are frozen in time, unable to allow themselves to love for fear that the loved one will abandon them. If the first woman they passionately loved, the mother, was not true to her bond of love, then how can they trust that their partner will be true to love. Often in their adult relationships these men act out again and again to test their partner’s love. While the rejected adolescent boy imagines that he can no longer receive his mother’s love because he is not worthy, as a grown man he may act out in ways that are unworthy and yet demand of the woman in his life that she offer him unconditional love. This testing does not heal the wound of the past, it merely reenacts it, for ultimately the woman will become weary of being tested and end the relationship, thus reenacting the abandonment. This drama confirms for many men that they cannot put their trust in love. They decide that it is better to put their faith in being powerful, in being dominant. In Man Enough Frank Pittman says of men that “while most of us want to be loved, controllers are willing to forego love if that is what it takes to be the boss.” Being the boss does not require any man to be emotionally healthy, able to give and receive love.

Ever since I started writing about love, I have defined it in a way that blends M. Scott Peck’s notion of love as the will to nurture one’s own and another’s spiritual and emotional growth, with Eric Fromm’s insight that love is action and not solely feeling. Working with men who wanted to know love, I have advised them to think of it as a combination of care, commitment, knowledge, responsibility, respect, and trust. Most of our relationships have one or two of these aspects. Patriarchal men are schooled in the art of being responsible and giving instrumental care. As a teenager, when I complained about Dad’s emotional neglect and abuse and his sporadic violence to Mama, she was always quick to remind me that he worked hard and provided for his family, that he was home almost every night, and for that reason alone we should respect and honor him. The fact that men often mix being caring and being violent has made it hard for everyone in our culture to face the extent to which male violence stands in the way of males’ giving and receiving love.

The first act of violence that patriarchy demands of males is not violence toward women. Instead patriarchy demands of all males that they engage in acts of psychic self-mutilation, that they kill off the emotional parts of themselves. If an individual is not successful in emotionally crippling himself, he can count on patriarchal men to enact rituals of power that will assault his self-esteem. Feminist movement offered to men and women the information needed to challenge this psychic slaughter, but that challenge never became a widespread aspect of the struggle for gender equality. Women demanded of men that they give more emotionally, but most men really could not understand what was being asked of them. Having cut away the parts of themselves that could feel a wide rage of emotional response, they were too disconnected. They simply could not give more emotionally or even grasp the problem without first reconnecting, reuniting the severed parts.

Describing a couple in family therapy, Real recalls the qualities the wife wanted from her husband: “Sensitivity to others, the capacity to identify and share his feelings, a willingness to put his needs aside in the service of the family.” These are the same qualities, Real points out, that “most boys, even in these enlightened times, have had stamped out of them.” He concludes: “In our culture, boys and men are not, nor have they ever been, raised to be intimate.” Women seeking intimacy from men often find their expressions of longing belittled. Many men respond to females’ wanting emotional connection with emotional withdrawal and, in worst case scenarios, with abuse.

Emotionally self-mutilated, disconnected, many men make overtures of emotional connection only to later undermine these with emotional abuse. They simply do not get that love and abuse cannot go together. And why should they get it, when television shows, movies, and so much else in popular culture gives the message that any time there is intense passion between a couple, violence can erupt? Teaching men to understand that women and children do not feel loved when they are being abused, is one of the primary goals of groups that work to end male violence. Kay Leigh Hagan’s autobiographical essay “A Good Man Is Hard to Bash” begins with the story of her dating a man who she felt was abusive and was potentially capable of physical violence. She calls his best male friend for advice about how much abuse she should endure, saying, “ ‘If I’m serious about him, and if I want the relationship to work, to last, there will be ups and downs. I don’t think I should run away when it gets hard. I should be willing to tolerate a little abuse if I really love him.’ ” The friend looks her directly in the eyes and tells her, “ ‘Kay, in a loving relationship, abuse in unacceptable. You should not have to tolerate any abuse to be loved.’ ”

With characteristic boldness and radical honesty Hagan shares that her “understanding of love and power changed forever in that moment.” She had imagined that her lover’s friend would take his side: “Instead, his reaction encouraged me to love myself, to take responsibility for my own well-being, and to reject violence even in its subtler forms.” Hagan was lucky to receive this wisdom early in life. The fate of most women is dramatically different, especially females who worship at the throne of patriarchy. These women feel, as Hagan did initially, that to choose to be with a patriarchal man is automatically to sign up for some level of abuse, however relative. Every day women explain away male violence and cruelty by insisting on gender differences that normalize abuse. Heterosexual women who are single and want to be with men feel that they cannot escape being victimized at some point by emotional and/or physical abuse at the hands of male partners. Collective female acceptance of male violence in love relationships, even if the appearance of acceptance masks rage, fear, or outright terror, makes it difficult to challenge and change male violence.

When the seemingly mild-mannered professor I lived with moved from emotional abuse to physical violence, I felt I should be understanding, forgiving. Like me, he had been raised in a dysfunctional family. However, even though he went to therapy, even though his physical violence stopped, he never really believed that he had done anything wrong. He harbored the notion, as many men who act violently do, that I was responsible for his bad behavior. In Donald Dutton’s work with men who are violent, he identifies women’s seeing behind the male mask as a catalyst for male violence:





He may apologize and feel shame immediately after, but he can’t sustain that emotion; it’s too painful, too reminiscent of hurts long buried. So he blames it on her. If it happens repeatedly with more than one woman, he goes from blaming her to blaming “them.” His personal shortcomings become rationalized by an evolving misogyny…. At this point the abusiveness is hardwired into the system. The man is programmed for intimate violence.





Often men who have been emotionally neglected and abused as children by dominating mothers bond with assertive women, only to have their childhood feelings of being engulfed surface. While they could not “smash their mommy” and still receive her love, they find that they can engage in intimate violence with partners who respond to their acting out by trying harder to connect with them emotionally, hoping that the love offered in the present will heal the wounds of the past. If only one party in a relationship is working to create love, to create the space of emotional connection, the dominator model remains in place and the relationship just becomes a site for continuous power struggle.

Women who stay in long-term relationships with men who are emotionally abusive or violent usually end up closing the door to their hearts. They stop working to create love. Often they stay in these relationships because a basic cynicism, rooted in their experience, affirms that most men are emotionally withholding, so they do not believe that they can find a loving relationship with any man. When I wanted to leave my first longtime partner, who had been continuously emotionally abusive and occasionally physically abusive, it was other women (my mother, close friends, acquaintances) who cautioned me about ending the relationship, letting me know that the man I was with was better than most men, that I was lucky. Leaving him was a gesture of self-love and self-reliance that I have not regretted. Yet I found that the observations of the women who cautioned me about what most men were like were fairly accurate.

The man I had lived with in partnership for almost fifteen years exhibited a mixture of patriarchal masculinity and alternative masculinity. We met during the heyday of feminist movement, and he was willing to work at creating gender equality. As it is for many men today, it was much easier for him to accept equal pay for equal work, sharing housework, and reproductive rights than it was for him to accept the need for shared emotional development. It is more difficult for men to do the work of emotional development because this work requires individuals to be emotionally aware—to feel. Patriarchy rewards men for being out of touch with their feelings. Whether engaged in acts of violence against women and children or weaker men, or in the socially sanctioned violence of war, men are better able to fulfill the demands of patriarchy if they do not feel. Men of feeling often find themselves isolated from other men. This fear of isolation often acts as the mechanism to prevent males from becoming more emotionally aware.

When large numbers of young men in this nation rebelled against patriarchy to oppose the war in Vietnam, many of them were concerned with justice, many of them did not want to kill, but a great many simply did not want to die. To oppose war and the imperalism that promotes war placed these young men at odds with imperialist white-supremacist capitalist patriarchy. They suffered by choosing to take a stand. They were ridiculed by other men, more often than not represented as traitors. In the past ten years mass media have produced a number of movies aimed at boys that glorify war (Saving Private Ryan, Independence Day, Men in Black, Blackhawk Down, Pearl Harbor, to name a few) that once again make it appear heroic to die alone, away from home, fighting for a cause you may or may not understand. These movies are part of patriarchal antifeminist backlash. They glorify the patriarchal masculinity that enlightened women and men critique. They serve as propaganda, recruiting the hearts and imaginations of boys. Like gangsta rap, they celebrate male violence on all fronts, including the domination of women.

Conservative mass media offer daily lessons in patriarchal pedagogy; they tell boys what they must do to be men. In those homes where enlightened fathers daily work to repudiate violence, television reaffirms its importance, making courting death glamorous and sexy. Poor and working-class male children and grown men often embody the worst strains of patriarchal masculinity, acting out violently because it is the easiest, cheapest way to declare one’s “manhood.” If you cannot prove that you are “much of a man” by becoming president, or becoming rich, or becoming a public leader, or becoming a boss, then violence is your ticket in to the patriarchal manhood contest, and your ability to do violence levels the playing field. On that field, the field of violence, any man can win.

Men who win on patriarchal terms end up losing in terms of their substantive quality of life. They choose patriarchal manhood over loving connection, first foregoing self-love and then the love they could give and receive that would connect them to others. Feminist researchers have long since exposed the widespread domestic violence in our society. Yet since that exposure, violence against women has not declined and in some cases it has intensified. Antifeminist pundits seek to blame the intensification of male violence on women’s greater equality. Yet most studies of family life indicate that in that sphere gender relations did not undergo any major revolution. Sociologist Arlie Hochschild has provided important data showing that domestic gender dynamics between men and women remain fairly sexist; women work outside the home but continue to do the lion’s share of work in the home. Of course men who were covert misogynists before feminist movement felt more entitled to unleash their rage overtly as the movement gained momentum, but the rage was already present.

Male violence in general has intensified not because feminist gains offer women greater freedom but rather because men who endorse patriarchy discovered along the way that the patriarchal promise of power and dominion is not easy to fulfill, and in those rare cases where it is fulfilled, men find themselves emotionally bereft. The patriarchal manhood that was supposed to satisfy does not. And by the time this awareness emerges, most patriarchal men are isolated and alienated; they cannot go back and reclaim a past happiness or joy, nor can they go forward. To go forward they would need to repudiate the patriarchal thinking that their identity has been based on. Rage is the easy way back to a realm of feeling. It can serve as the perfect cover, masking feelings of fear and failure.

My father and mother have been married now for more than fifty years. Dad has never relinquished his patriarchal status and she has never challenged it. Yet by clinging to patriarchal thinking, they forfeited their chance to be happy together. The threat of violence, of emotional abuse, is always there, standing in the way of intimacy, keeping them from forgiving one another and starting over. Sadly, they are stuck in the trap of patriarchy. And it remains the breeding ground for everyday violence, the subtle, intimate terrorism that intensifies resentment and closes off the possibility of knowing joy.

It is not easy for males, young or old, to reject the codes of patriarchal masculinity. Men who choose against violence are simultaneously choosing against patriarchy, whether they can articulate that choice or not. In his insightful essay “Gender Politics of Men,” R. W. Connell calls attention to the fact that men who oppose patriarchy remain at odds with the world they are living in:





Men who try to develop a politics in support of feminism, whether gay or straight, are not in for an easy ride. They are likely to be met with derision from many other men, and from some women. It is almost a journalistic cliché that women despise Sensitive New Age Guys. They will not necessarily get warm support from feminist women.





Ultimately the men who choose against violence, against death, do so because they want to live fully and well, because they want to know love. These are men who are true heroes, the men whose lives we need to know about, honor, and remember.





5


Male Sexual Being




Most men and women are not having satisfying and fulfilling sex. We have all heard the notion that men come to relationships looking for sex and not love and that women come to relationships looking for love and not sex. In actuality, men come to sex hoping that it will provide them with all the emotional satisfaction that would come from love. Most men think that sex will provide them with a sense of being alive, connected, that sex will offer closeness, intimacy, pleasure. And more often than not sex simply does not deliver the goods. This fact does not lead men to cease obsessing about sex; it intensifies their lust and their longing.

If women have been taught through sexist socialization that a journey through the difficult terrain of sex will lead us to our heart’s desire, men have been taught that their heart’s desire should be for sex and more sex. Coming in the wake of sexual liberation, women’s liberation seemed to promise heterosexual and bisexual men that women would begin to think the same way males do about sexuality, that female sexuality would become just as predatory, just as obsessive as male sexual desire. Lots of men thought this was the promise of paradise. Finally they were going to be able to go for the sexual gusto without having to worry about commitment. Sexist logic had convinced them and convinces them still that they can have connection and intimacy without commitment, that “Have dick will travel” meant that their needs could and would be met on command, at any time, anywhere.

In our culture these attitudes toward sexuality have been embraced by most men and many post–sexual liberation, postfeminist women. They are at the root of our cultural obsession with sex. When I first began to write books on love, to talk to lone individuals and then large audiences about the subject, I realized that it was practically impossible to have a serious discussion about love—that discussions of love, especially public conversations, are taboo in our society. Yet everyone talks about sex. We see all manner of sexual scenes on our television and movie screens. Talking about sex is acceptable. Talk shows engage audiences daily with explicit discussions of sexuality. Discussions of sex are fundamentally easier to engage in because in patriarchal culture sex has been presented to us as a “natural” desire. Most folks believe we are hardwired biologically to long for sex but they do not believe we are hardwired to long for love. Almost everyone believes that we can have sex without love; most folks do not believe that a couple can have love in a relationship if there is no sex.

Feminist movement was able to challenge and change notions of female inequality on many fronts, particularly in such arenas as work, education, and religion. However, sexism continues to shape the ways most people think about sexual relations. No matter how many men in our nation are celibate or have only occasional sexual experiences, people still believe that sex is something men have to have. Underlying this assumption is the belief that if men are not sexually active, they will act out or go crazy. This is why male-on-male sexual violence is accepted in our nation’s prisons. This is why rape—whether date rape, marital rape, or stranger rape—is still not deemed a serious crime. This is why the rape of children, especially when conducted by mild-mannered, nice men, is allowed. If this were not so, celebrities accused of sexually abusing children would no longer be cultural icons. The assumption that “he’s gotta have it” underlies much of our culture’s acceptance of male sexual violence. It is why many people continue to believe that anyone who is raped may have “asked for it” by “seductive” dress or behavior, no matter how many television programs have aired the facts about sexual violence.

Children today learn more about sex from mass media than from any other source. Whether watching daytime soap operas, a porn channel, or X-rated movies, children in our nation are more aware of the body and of sexuality than ever before. Yet much of what they are learning about sexuality conforms to outmoded patriarchal scripts about the sexual nature of men and women, of masculine and feminine. They learn that in the world of sexual relations there is always a dominant party and a submissive party. They learn that males should dominate females, that strong men should dominate weaker men. They learn that whether he is homosexual or heterosexual, a man deprived of sexual access will ultimately be sexual with any body. If deprived long enough, even if he is straight he will have sex with another man; if he’s gay, deprivation will lead him to engage in desperate sexual acts with women. Again and again children hear the message from mass media that when it comes to sex, “he’s gotta have it.” Adults may know better, from their own experience, but children become true believers. They think that men will go mad if they cannot act sexually. This is the logic that produces what feminist thinkers call “a rape culture.”

Males, whether gay or straight, learn early on in life that one of the primary rewards offered to them for obedience to patriarchal thought and practice is the right to dominate females sexually. And if no female is around, they have the right to place a weaker male in the “female” position. In the anthology Victims No Longer: Men Recovering from Incest and Other Sexual Child Abuse, men who have been victimized by stronger boys, brothers, and other male peers share how the logic of patriarchal thinking about the right of the strong to do as they wish with those whom they deem weak was presented to them by their abusers. This same logic has usually shaped the thinking about sexuality embraced by adult abusers. Ed writes of his older brother’s sexual abuse of him: “I learned about sex when I was nine years old. I was giving blow jobs at ten. While other kids were out playing with guns, I was learning how to ‘please’ a man. I was taught how to be a ‘woman.’ My brother liked to act out fantasies in which he was the ‘man’ and I was the ‘woman.’ ” This older brother married and took with him into marriage the notion that it was his right to have sex with anyone he desired, whether they wanted to or not. His need to dominate was the salient feature in all his sexual relationships.

Within a culture of domination struggles for power are enacted daily in human relationships, often assuming their worst forms in situations of intimacy. The patriarchal man who would never respond to demands from his boss with overt rage and abuse will respond with fury when intimates want him to change his behavior. Men who do not daily lie and cheat at their jobs do so in their intimate bonds. This lying is usually connected to inappropriate sexual behavior or to discomfort about sexual behavior. In his powerful essay “Who He Was,” Eric Guitierrez recounts how he told lies to cover up the reality that his father was gay: “About the same time I began lying about my father I began lying about myself. I didn’t offer my lies indiscriminately…. Rather than making up comforting details that would portray my flashing, gay father more like the hardworking, lawn-mowing dads that lined our street, I instead embellished his shortcomings, his weaknesses, his rages, into real perversity…. I enthralled my classmates with stories of how my father would tie us up or throw crystal goblets at my terrorized mother…. I was an accomplished liar, building false identities for my father and myself by overstating truth on its own trajectory.” Lying about sexuality is an accepted part of patriarchal masculinity. Sex is where many men act out because it is the only social arena where the patriarchal promise of dominion can be easily realized. Without these perks, masses of men might have rebelled against patriarchy long ago.

Little boys learn early in life that sexuality is the ultimate proving ground where their patriarchal masculinity will be tested. They learn early that sexual desire should not be freely expressed and that females will try to control male sexuality. For boys this issue of control begins with the mother’s response to his penis; usually she does not like it and she does not know what to do with it. Her discomfort with his penis communicates that there is something inherently wrong with it. She does not communicate to the boy child that his penis is wonderful, special, marvelous. This same fear of the boy’s penis is commonly expressed by fathers who simply do not concern themselves with educating boys about their bodies. Sadly, unenlightened approaches to child abuse lead many parents to fear celebration of their child’s body, especially the boy body, which may respond to playful physical closeness with an erection. In patriarchal culture everyone is encouraged to see the penis, even the penis of a small boy, as a potential weapon. This is the psychology of a rape culture. Boys learn that they should identify with the penis and the potential pleasure erections will bring, while simultaneously learning to fear the penis as though it were a weapon that could backfire, rendering them powerless, destroying them. Hence the underlying message boys receive about sexual acts is that they will be destroyed if they are not in control, exercising power.

Adolescent sexual socialization is the vulnerable moment in a boy’s life when he is required to identify his selfhood and his sexuality with patriarchal masculinity; it is the meeting place of theory and practice. During these formative years, when a boy’s sexual lust is often intense, he learns that patriarchal culture expects him to covertly cultivate that lust and the will to satisfy it while engaging in overt acts of sexual repression. This splitting is part of the initiation into patriarchal masculinity; it is a rite of passage. The boy learns as well that females are the enemy when it comes to the satisfaction of sexual desire. They are the group that will impose on the boy the need to repress his sexual longings, and yet to prove his manhood, he must dare to move past repression and engage in sexual acts.

Sexual repression fuels the lust of boys and men. Shedding light on the negative impact of this socialization in the essay “Fuel for Fantasy: The Ideological Construction of Male Lust,” Michael S. Kimmel demonstrates that sexual repression creates the world in which males must engage constantly in sexual fantasy, eroticizing the nonsexual. Exploring the link between sexual repression and sexism, he explains:





Sexual pleasure is rarely the goal in a sexual encounter, something far more important than mere pleasure is on the line, our sense of ourselves as men. Men’s sense of sexual scarcity and an almost compulsive need for sex to confirm manhood feed each other, creating a self-perpetuating cycle of sexual deprivation and despair. And it makes men furious at women for doing what women are taught to do in our society: saying no.





Despair and rage are the feelings men bring to sex, whether with women or with other men.

Encouraged to relate to sex in an addictive way by the patriarchal thinking which says “he’s gotta have it,” males must then adjust to a world where they can rarely get it, or never get it as much as they want, or where they can get it only by coercing and manipulating someone who does not want it, usually someone female. In The Heart of the Soul Gary Zukav and Linda Francis describe the characteristics of individuals addicted to sexual obsessions: “They cannot rest from thoughts of sex. They move from one encounter to the next. Each sexual experience brings only temporary relief from their craving, and it quickly returns. No amount of sexual activity can satisfy it.” They explain that the “sexual craving is not for sex, but for something deeper.” The fact that the craving always returns is the clue that addictive sexuality is not simply about getting sex. For the patriarchal male, be he straight or gay, addictive sexuality is fundamentally about the need to constantly affirm and reaffirm one’s selfhood. If it is only through sex that he can experience selfhood, then sex has to be constantly foregrounded. Zukav and Francis explain: “The more intense the pain of fear, unworthiness, and feeling unlovable becomes, the more obsessive becomes the need to have a sexual interaction.”

Sex, then, becomes for most men a way of self-solacing. It is not about connecting to someone else but rather about releasing their own pain. The addict is often an individual in acute pain. Patriarchal men have no outlet to express their pain, so they simply seek release. Zukav and Francis stress that the sex addict fears being inadequate and he fears rejection: “The stronger these emotions are, when there is no willingness to feel them, the stronger becomes the obsession with sex.” Male sexual obsession tends to be seen as normal. Thus the culture as a whole colludes in requiring of men that they discount and disown their feelings, displacing them all onto sex. Steve Bearman makes this point in the essay “Why Men Are So Obsessed with Sex,” explaining that “even if we do not engage compulsively in anonymous casual sex, pornography, masturbation, or fetishistic attempts to recover what has been forgotten, sex nevertheless takes on an addictive character.” Whether straight or gay, male sexuality assumes this addictive character.

Since it is neither possible biologically nor practical, given the few hours in a day available for leisure activity, for men to be in sexual interactions constantly, patriarchal pornography available in myriad forms becomes the site of sublimation, the place where the sexual addict can get a quick fix. Patriarchal men can do pornography anywhere all day long. They can watch movies, look at magazines, look at real females with a pornographic gaze, undress them, fuck them, dominate them. Kimmel contends that male consumption of pornography is fed by the sexual lust males are taught to feel all the time and their rage that this lust cannot be satisfied:





Pornography can sexualize that rage, and it can make sex look like revenge…. Everywhere, men are in power, controlling virtually all the economic, political, and social institutions of society. Yet individual men do not feel powerful—far from it. Most men feel powerless and are often angry at women, whom they perceive as having sexual power over them: the power to arouse them and to give or withhold sex. This fuels both sexual fantasies and the desire for revenge.





Many men are angry at women, but more profoundly, women are the targets for displaced male rage at the failure of patriarchy to make good on its promise of fulfillment, especially endless sexual fulfillment.

Men may be too terrified to confront the facts of their lives and tell the truth that possessing the right to engage in rituals of domination and subordination is not all that patriarchy promised it would be. If, as Terrence Real says, patriarchy were a disease, it would be a disease of “disordered desire”; to cure this disease, then, we would all need to reconsider the way we see men and male desire. Rather than seeing the violence men do as an expression of power, we would need to call it by its true name—pathology. Patriarchal violence is a mental illness. That this illness is given its most disordered expression in the sexual lives of men is powerful because it makes it hard to document since we do not witness what men do sexually like we witness what they do at work or in civic life. To take the inherent positive sexuality of males and turn it into violence is the patriarchal crime that is perpetuated against the male body, a crime that masses of men have yet to possess the strength to report. Men know what is happening. They simply have been taught not to speak the truth of their bodies, the truth of their sexualities.

Robert Jensen’s powerful and courageous essay “Patriarchal Sex” drives this message home. Defining patriarchal sex, he writes: “Sex is fucking. In patriarchy, there is an imperative to fuck—in rape and in ‘normal’ sex, with strangers and girlfriends and wives and estranged wives and children. What matters in patriarchal sex is the male need to fuck. When that need presents itself, sex occurs.” Boldly Jensen explains:





Attention to the meaning of the central male slang term for sexual intercourse—“fuck”—is instructive. To fuck a woman is to have sex with her. To fuck someone in another context…means to hurt or cheat a person. And when hurled as a simple insult (“fuck you”) the intent is denigration and the remark is often a prelude to violence or the threat of violence. Sex in patriarchy is fucking. That we live in a world in which people continue to use the same word for sex and violence, and then resist the notion that sex is routinely violent and claim to be outraged when sex becomes overtly violent, is testament to the power of patriarchy.





One might add that it is a supreme testament to patriarchy’s power that it can convince men and women to pretend that sexual violence satisfies.

Much popular music from rock to rap shares this message. Whether it’s Iggy Pop’s lyrics, “I got my cock in my pocket and it’s shoving up through my pants. I just wanna fuck, this ain’t no romance” or the rap group Mystikals’ lyrics, “When it’s finished, over and done with it, I’m gonna smash a blount and knock the pussy off some bitch.” Of course the truth of men’s lives is that patriarchal sexuality has not satisfied. It has fueled the compulsive need to be more sexual, to be more violent in the hopes that there is a way to be more satisfied. Patriarchal pornography, no longer isolated but ever-present in popular mass media, has become so widespread because males brainwashed by the patriarchal mind-set cannot find the courage to tell the truth. They cannot find the courage to say, “I can’t get no satisfaction.” Patriarchal pornography has become an inescapable part of everyday life because the need to create a pretend culture where male sexual desire is endlessly satisfied keeps males from exposing the patriarchal lie and seeking healthy sexual identities.

Gay subcultures have historically articulated with greater honesty and boldness male compulsive sexual desire. And contrary to popular imagination, rather than being antipatriarchal, homosexual predatory sex is the ultimate embodiment of the patriarchal ideal. Jensen observes that “gay-or-straight doesn’t much matter. The question of resistance to patriarchal sex is just as important in that gay men fuck in about the same way straight men do. We all received pretty much the same training…. Fucking is taken to be the thing that gay men do; some might even argue that if you aren’t fucking, you aren’t gay.” More often than not, gay males, unless they have consciously decided otherwise, are as patriarchal in their thinking about masculinity, about sexuality, as their heterosexual counterparts. Their investment in patriarchy is an intensely disordered desire, because they are enamored of the very ideology that fosters and promotes homophobia. Now that patriarchal straight men have been compelled through mass media to face the fact that homosexual males are not “chicks with dicks,” that they can and do embody patriarchal masculinity, straight male sexual dominance of biological females has intensified, for it is really the only factor that distinguishes straight from gay. Concurrently, homophobia becomes amplified among heterosexual men because its overt expression is useful as a way to identify, among apparently similar macho men, who is gay and who is straight.

Patriarchal pornography is a space of shared masculinity for straight and gay men. The images gay men seek are male, but males positioned in the same way as the male and female bodies of straight pornography. Whether catering to gay or straight males, patriarchal pornography is fundamentally a reenactment of dominator culture in the realm of the sexual.

Male “need” of patriarchal pornography that eroticizes domination is no show of male power. While hatred of women can lead to acts of domination that hurt, wound, and destroy, there is no constructive power here. Tragically, if masses of men believe that their selfhood and their patriarchal sexuality are one and the same, they will never find the courage to create liberating, fulfilling sexuality. It is this reality that leads men of conscience in patriarchal society to fear sex with the same intensity that females often fear sex. As Jensen testifies:





I am afraid of sex as sex is defined by the dominant culture, as practiced all around me, and projected onto magazine pages, billboards, and movie screens. I am afraid of sex because I am afraid of domination, cruelty, violence, and death. I am afraid of sex because sex has hurt me and hurt lots of people I know, and because I have hurt others with sex in the past. I know that there are people out there who have been hurt by sex in ways that are beyond words, who have experienced a depth of pain that I will never fully understand. And I know there are people who are dead because of sex. Yes, I am afraid of sex. How could I not be?





Despite the courageous testimony of Jensen and others, despite the radical critique of patriarchal sex, most men are not breaking through denial and telling the truth about sex. They are choking it down, the pain, the despair, the confusion: they are following the patriarchal rules.

Rather than change, patriarchal males and females have exploited the logic of gender equality in the sexual realm to encourage women to be advocates of patriarchal sex and to pretend, like their male counterparts, that this is sexual freedom. Music videos and televisions shows like Sex and the City (written and produced by patriarchal men and women) teach females, especially young females, that the desirable female companion is one who is willing to play either a dominant or a subordinate role, one who can be as nonchalant about sex as any patriarchal man. Socializing women to conform more to patriarchal male sexual norms is one way patriarchy hopes to address male rage. Since this rage covers up the pain that could be the catalyst for critical awakening, it has to be assuaged. It is not just antifeminist backlash that has led to the normalization of pornographic sexual violence in our mass media and in common sexual practice; the desire to keep men from feeling and naming their pain fuels the need for consistent brainwashing.

Male despair, often initially expressed as anger, is a far greater threat to the patriarchal sexual order than feminist movement. While masses of men continue to use patriarchal sex and pornography to numb themselves, many men are weary of numbing and are trying to find a way to reclaim selfhood. This process of recovery includes finding a new sexuality. The assault on the male body by modern diseases, lowered sex drive, and out-and-out impotence has caused individual men not only to question patriarchal sex but to the find new ways of being sexual that can satisfy.

If unenlightened men are suffering their version of the “problem that has no name” when it comes to sexuality, they can ease their pain by breaking through denial and repudiating the patriarchal script of domination and submission. With keen insight Bearman in the essay “Why Men Are So Obsessed with Sex” reminds males that they have a choice:





Directly and indirectly, we are handed sexuality as the one vehicle through which it might still be possible to express and experience essential aspects of our humanness that have been slowly and systematically conditioned out of us. Sex was, and is, presented as the road to real intimacy, complete closeness, as the arena in which it is okay to openly love, to be tender and vulnerable and yet remain safe, to not feel so deeply alone. Sex is the one place sensuality seems to be permissible, where we can be gentle with our own bodies and allow ourselves our overflowing passion. This is why men are so obsessed with sex…. But in no way can sex completely fulfill these needs. Such needs can only be fulfilled by healing from the effects of male conditioning and suffusing every area of our lives with relatedness and aliveness.





Compulsive sexuality, like any addiction, is hard for men to change because it takes the place of the healing that is needed if men are to love their bodies and let that love lead them into greater community with other human bodies, with the bodies of women and children.

Bearman reminds men that “no matter how much sex you encounter, it will not be enough to fill your enormous need to love and be close and express your passion and delight in your senses and feel life forces coursing through your muscles and skin.” If masses of men could recover this fundamental passion for their own bodies, that shift away from patriarchal sex might lead us toward a true sexual revolution. To recover the power and passion of male sexuality unsullied by patriarchal assault, males of all ages must be allowed to speak openly of their sexual longing. They must be able to be sexual beings in a space where patriarchal thinking can no longer make violation the only means of attaining sexual pleasure. This is a tough job. And until males learn how to do it, they will not be satisfied.





6


Work: What’s Love

Got to Do with It?




Before feminist movement boys were more likely to be taught, at home and at school, that they would find fulfillment in work. Today boys hear a slightly different message. They are told that money offers fulfillment and that work is a way to acquire money—but not the only way. Winning the lottery, finding a wealthy partner, or committing a crime for which you do not get caught are paths to fulfillment that are as acceptable as working. These attitudes about the nature of work in patriarchal society have changed as capitalism has changed the nature of work. Few men, either now or in the future, can expect a lifetime of full employment. Nowadays working men of all classes experience periods of unemployment. In order to keep the faith, patriarchal culture has had to offer men different criteria for judging their worth than work.

As a primary foundation of patriarchal self-esteem, work has not worked for masses of men for some time. Rather than throw out the whole outmoded patriarchal script so that the nature of work in our culture can be changed, men are offered addictions that make unsatisfying work more bearable. Patriarchal obsession with sex and the pornography it produces are promoted to soothe men subliminally while they perform jobs that are tedious, boring, and oftentimes dehumanizing, jobs where their health and well-being are at risk. Most male workers in our America, like their female counterparts, work in exploitative circumstances; the work they do and the way they are treated by superiors more often than not undermine self-esteem.

One of the antifeminist patriarchal sentiments that has gained ground in recent years is the notion that masses of men used to be content to slave away at meaningless labor to fulfill their role as providers and that it is feminist insistence on gender equality in the workforce that has created male discontent. Underlying this assumption is the notion that women coming into the workforce, no longer looking to their men to be sole providers for the family, have undermined the well-being of men in patriarchal culture. Yet many sociological studies of men at work done prior to feminist movement indicate that males were already expressing grave discontent and depression about the nature and meaning of work in their lives. This discontent does not receive the attention that male workers receive when they blame their unhappiness with the world of work on feminist movement.

In her massive journalistic treatise Stiffed: The Betrayal of the American Man, Susan Faludi documents the reality that some males, especially older men, felt that changes in the valuation and nature of work, as well as competition with women for jobs, robbed them of the pride in being providers, creating what she calls a “masculinity crisis.”





The outer layer of the masculinity crisis, men’s loss of economic authority, was most evident in the recessionary winds of the early nineties, as the devastation of male unemployment grew ever fiercer. The role of family breadwinner was plainly being undermined by economic forces that spat many men back into a treacherous job market during corporate “consolidations” and downsizings. Even the many men who were never laid off were often gripped with the fear that they could be next—that their footholds as providers were frighteningly unsteady.





Masses of men in our culture may believe that their ability to provide for themselves and families is a measure of their manhood, yet they often do not actually use their resources to provide for others.

Feminist theorists, myself included, have for some time now called attention to the fact that the behavior of men who make money yet refuse to pay alimony or child support, or their peers who head households yet squander their paycheck on individual pleasures, challenges the patriarchal insistence that men are eager to be caretakers and providers. Barbara Ehrenreich’s The Hearts of Men was one of the first books highlighting the reality that many men are not eager to be providers, that the very idea of the “playboy” was rooted in the longing to escape this role and to have another means of proving one’s manhood. Male heads of households who give a meager portion of their wages for the needs of their family can still have the illusion that they are providers. Nowadays women’s income can be the backup money that allows many patriarchal men to squander their paycheck on drugs, alcohol, gambling, or sexual adventures even as they lay claim to being the provider.

Today’s male worker struggles to provide economically for himself. And if he is providing for self and family, his struggle is all the more rigorous and the fear of failure all the more intense. Men who make a lot of money in this society and who are not independently wealthy usually work long hours, spending much of their time away from the company of loved ones. This is one circumstance they share with men who do not make much money but who also work long hours. Work stands in the way of love for most men then because the long hours they work often drain their energies; there is little or no time left for emotional labor, for doing the work of love. The conflict between finding time for work and finding time for love and loved ones is rarely talked about in our nation. It is simply assumed in patriarchal culture that men should be willing to sacrifice meaningful emotional connections to get the job done. No one has really tried to examine what men feel about the loss of time with children, partners, loved ones, and the loss of time for self-development. The workers Susan Faludi highlights in Stiffed do not express concern about not having enough time for self-reflection and emotional connection with self and others.

There is very little research that documents the extent to which depression about the nature of work leads men to act violently in their domestic lives. Contemporary patriarchy has offered disappointed male workers a trade-off: the perks of manhood that a depressed economy takes away can be redeemed in the realm of the sexual through domination of women. When that world of sexuality is not fulfilling, males rage. In actuality women are weary of male domination in the sexual sphere particularly, and rather than making for greater “domestic bliss,” men’s turning to sex for the satisfaction that they do not receive at work intensifies strife. The movement of masses of women into the workforce has not undermined male workers economically; they still receive the lion’s share of both jobs and wages. It has made women who work feel more entitled to resist domination than women who stay home dependent on a man’s wages to survive.

Working-class and middle-income women I have spoken with talk about the extent to which working outside the home after years of staying home bolstered their self-esteem and provided them with a different perspective on relationships. These women often begin to place greater demands on male spouses and lovers for emotional engagement. Faced with these demands, working men often wish that the little woman would stay home so that he could wield absolute power, no matter the amount of his paycheck. In many cases when a woman’s paycheck is more than that of her male partner, he acts out to restore his sense of dominance. He may simply confiscate her paycheck and use it as he desires, thus rendering her dependent. He may increase his demands for sexual favors, and if that does not work, he can simply withhold sex, thus making a working woman who desires sex feel her power undermined.

Most women who work long hours come home and work a second shift taking care of household chores. They feel, like their male counterparts, that there is no time to do emotional work, to share feelings and nurture others. Like their male counterparts, they may simply want to rest. Working women are far more likely than other women to be irritable; they are less open to graciously catering to someone else’s needs than the rare woman who stays home all day, who may or may not caretake children. Domestic households certainly suffer when sexism decrees that all emotional care and love should come from women, in the face of the reality that working women, like their male counterparts, often come home too tired to deliver the emotional goods. Sexist men and women believe that the way to solve this dilemma is not to encourage men to share the work of emotional caretaking but rather to return to more sexist gender roles. They want more women, especially those with small children, to stay home.

Of course they do not critique the economy that makes it necessary for all adults to work outside the home; instead they pretend that feminism keeps women in the workforce. Most women work because they want to leave the house and because their families need the income to survive, not because they are feminists who believe that their working is a sign of liberation. When individual men stay home to do the work of homemaking and child rearing, the arrangement is still viewed as “unnatural” by most observers. Rather than being viewed as doing what they should do as people in relationships, homemaking men are seen as especially chivalrous, as sacrificing the power and privileges they could have as privileged male workers outside the home in order to do woman’s work inside the home.

It has been through assuming the role of participatory loving parents that individual men have dared to challenge sexist assumptions and do work in the home that also invites them to learn relational skills. They document the rightness of feminist theory that argues that if men participated equally in child rearing, they would, like their female counterparts, learn how to care for the needs of others, including emotional needs. Even though more men actively parent to some degree than ever before in our nation’s history, the vast majority of men still refuse to play an equal role in the emotional development of their children. They often use work as the excuse for emotional estrangement. Whether they regard themselves as pro- or antifeminist, most women want men to do more of the emotional work in relationships. And most men, even those who wholeheartedly support gender equality in the workforce, still believe that emotional work is female labor. Most men continue to uphold the sexist decree that emotions have no place in the work world and that emotional labor at home should be done by females.

Many men use work as the place where they can flee from the self, from emotional awareness, where they can lose themselves and operate from a space of emotional numbness. Unemployment feels so emotionally threatening because it means that there would be time to fill, and most men in patriarchal culture do not want time on their hands. Victor Seidler expresses his fear of having downtime in Rediscovering Masculinity, confessing, “I have learned how hard it is to give myself time, even an hour for myself a day. There are always things I am supposed to be doing. A feeling of panic and anxiety emerges at the very thought of spending more time with myself.” He argues that most men have such a limited sense of self that they are uncertain that they possess “selves we could want to relate to.” He contends, “We only seem to learn that the ‘self’ is something we have to control tightly, since otherwise it might upset our plans…. We never really give ourselves much chance to know ourselves better or develop more contact with ourselves, since…all this threatens the ‘control’ we have been brought up to identify our masculinity with. We feel trapped, though we do not know how we are constantly remaking this trap for ourselves.” Competition with other men in the workplace can make it all the more difficult for men to express feelings or to take time alone. The male who seeks solitude in the workplace, especially during downtimes, is seen as suspect. Yet when men gather together at work, they rarely have meaningful conversations. They jeer, they grandstand, they joke, but they do not share feelings. They relate in a scripted, limited way, careful to remain within the emotional boundaries set by patriarchal thinking about masculinity. The rules of patriarchal manhood remind them that it is their duty as men to refuse relatedness.

Even though male workers like Kenneth Blanchard, author of the One Minute Manager and coauthor of The Power of Ethical Management, share the wisdom that relational skills should be cultivated by men to improve the nature of work and work relations, most work settings remain places where emotional engagement between workers, especially a boss and a subordinate, is deemed bad for business. Were more men in touch with their relational skills and their emotional life, they might choose work that would at least sometimes enhance their well-being. Although women with class privilege such as Susan Faludi or Susan Bordo who write about men express surprise that most men do not see themselves as powerful, women who have been raised in poor and working-class homes have always been acutely aware of the emotional pain of the men in their lives and of their work dissatisfactions. Had Susan Faludi read the work of feminist women of color writing about the poor and working-class men whom we know most intimately, she would not have been “surprised” to find masses of men troubled and discontent. Women with class privilege have been the only group who have perpetuated the notion that men are all-powerful, because often the men in their families were powerful. When Faludi critiques the popular feminist notion that men are all-powerful, she counts on the ignorance of readers about feminist writing to perpetuate the notion that feminists have not understood male pain. It serves her argument to promote this inaccurate portrait.

Visionary feminists were writing about the fact that working-class men, far from feeling powerful, were terribly wounded by the patriarchy long before Faludi conceived of Stiffed, and it is difficult to imagine that she was not aware of that writing. It is disingenuous of her as well to act as though the liberation movement that women created to confront their “problem with no name” addressed women cross class lines. Feminist movement has had very little impact on the masses of working-class women who were in the workforce prior to the movement and who still remain there, just as dissatisfied and discontent with their lot as the men in their lives. Poor and working-class women have always known that the everyday work experience places men in an environment where they feel powerless and where they are unable to articulate that on patriarchal terms; to use Faludi’s words, they feel “less than masculine.”

Just as feminist gains in this nation primarily had a positive impact on women with class privilege, the “working” men who have been given permission within the contours of patriarchal culture to reconfigure the nature of work in their lives tend to have class power. In the late eighties and early nineties a number of popular movies portrayed powerful men either through illness or crisis evaluating their lives and choosing to make profound changes in the nature of work. In the recent film Life as a House a white male architect whose work is being devalued quits, finds out that he has cancer and only a short time to live, then engages in a process of rethinking patriarchy, though of course that term is not used. Evaluating his life, he chooses to use his remaining months to make emotional connections with family, especially his teenage son, and with friends. He spends his time learning how to give and receive love. His ex-wife’s wealthy businessman husband, inspired by the example of the dying man, and rethinks the nature of his life and resolves to give less time to work and more time to emotional connections. This film, like its predecessors, makes clear that working men must make time to get in touch with their emotional selves if they are to become men of feeling.

The immensely popular Academy Award–winning movie American Beauty showed the primary character, Lester Burnham, depressed about his life, his work, his marriage, and his family; he has lost his capacity to feel. He stops taking work seriously and by the end is getting in touch with his feelings, yet he cannot redeem his life. He also dies, like the protagonist in Life as a House. These movies seduce audiences with images of men in the process of growing up, but then they betray their characters and us by never letting these men live. They echo the patriarchal message that if a man stops work, he loses his reason for living. In Rediscovering Masculinity Victor Seidler states that the male who defines his self through work seeks to do so because “this is the only identity that can traditionally belong to us…believing we can still prove our masculinity by showing we do not need anything from others.” In American Beauty Lester suffers alone. His critical investigation of his feelings takes place in his head. And he cannot survive being so utterly vulnerable and isolated. Ultimately, movies send the message to male audiences that men will not be meaningfully empowered if they learn to love. American Beauty finally tells audiences that there is no hope for depressed men who are willing to critically reflect on their lives. It tells us that even when men are willing to change, there is no place for them in patriarchal culture. The opening lines of the film say it all: “My name is Lester Burnham. I am forty-two. In less than a year I’ll be dead. Of course, I don’t know that yet. And anyway, I’m dead already.” Popular culture offers us few or no redemptive images of men who start out emotionally dead. Unlike Sleeping Beauty, they cannot be brought back to life. In actuality, individual men are engaged in the work of emotional recovery every day, but the work is not easy because they have no support systems within patriarchal culture, especially if they are poor and working-class. And it is no accident that Life as a House, which shows a man rejecting patriarchy and finding his way, is not as successful as American Beauty.

Poor and working-class men suffering job depression, despair about the quality of their intimate lives, a feeling of alienation, or a sense of being lost often turn to substance abuse to ease their pain. When they begin to seek recovery, AA is one of the few places they can go to do the work of getting well. In healing groups they learn first and foremost that it is important to be in touch with their feelings, that they have a right to name those feelings. The success of AA is tied to the fact that the practice of recovery takes place in the context of community, one in which shame about failure can be expressed and male longing for healing validated. Visionary male healers, such as John Bradshaw, found the way to healing in these settings. Working-class men I have interviewed who found in recovery the way back to emotional connection share that it is profoundly difficult to engage in this work, which is fundamentally antipatriarchal, and then leave these settings to reenter patriarchal culture. One man talked about how his female partner was turned off by his willingness to express feelings, to tell his story; in her eyes this was weakness. She insisted that now that he was sober he did not need to “express these feelings” anymore.

Despite changes in the nature of gender roles, ours is still a patriarchal culture where sexism rules the day. If it were not so men could see periods of unemployment as timeouts where they could do the work of self-actualization, where they could do the work of healing. Many working men in our culture can barely read or write. Imagine if time away from work could be spent in exciting literacy programs for poor and working-class men. Imagine a wage offered for this work of self-development. When patriarchy no longer rules the day, it will be possible for men to view themselves holistically, to see work as part of life, not their whole existence. In Love and Survival Dean Ornish, sharing his personal struggle to work less, to make time for self-actualization, offers this insight:





If the intention behind the work is to seek recognition and power—“hey, look at me, I’m special, I’m important, I’m worthy of your love and respect”—then you are setting yourself apart from others as a way of trying to feel connected to them. Setting yourself apart from others as a way of trying to feel connected to them: It seems so clear why this is self-defeating, and yet it is often the norm in our culture…. When my self-worth was defined by what I did, then I had to take every important opportunity that came along, even if relationships suffered.





When he began to choose to live holistically, Ornish was able to change this thinking about work.

Gail Sheehy’s Understanding Men’s Passages contains autobiographical accounts by men wrestling with the knowledge that the work they do is promoting severe depression and unhappiness. These men grapple with choosing their emotional well-being over the paycheck, over the image of themselves as a provider. Lee May recalls, “I was faced with two hard choices. One, stay in the job I was doing and choke, strangle, die psychologically, or quit and face the possibility that we would crumble financially.” He admits that his unhappiness with work had undermined the spirit of well-being in his home: “Our household was an unhappy place. But had I stayed at the old jobs, my unhappiness would have pervaded our relationship.” May was able to make the choice to leave his unhappy job, and the work he went on to do—writing a book about his life as a globe-trotting journalist, writing a popular column on gardening—was all work that enhanced his self-awareness, his self-actualization. His honest portrayal of his fears in breaking through denial is a model for many men who would learn to honor their inner selves rightly in a world that tells them every day that their inner selves do not matter.

Courageously writing about how hard it was to break with the patriarchal values that had governed his thinking for years, Ornish shares that the practice of intimacy is healing: “I am learning that the key to our survival is love. When we love someone and feel loved by them, somehow along the way our suffering subsides, our deepest wounds begin healing, our hearts start to feel safe enough to be vulnerable and to open a little wider. We begin experiencing our own emotions and the feelings of those around us.” Imagine a nonpatriarchal culture where counseling was available to all men to help them find the work that they are best suited to, that they can do with joy. Imagine work settings that offer timeouts where workers can take classes in relational recovery, where they might fellowship with other workers and build a community of solidarity that, at least if it could not change the arduous, depressing nature of labor itself, could make the workplace more bearable. Imagine a world where men who are unemployed for any reason could learn the way to self-actualization. Women workers find that leaving the isolation of the home and working in a communal setting enhances their emotional well-being, even when wages are low and in no way liberating (as some feminist thinkers naïvely suggested they might be). If men followed this example and used the workplace as a setting to practice relational skills, building community, the male crisis around work could be addressed more effectively.

Many men who have retired from jobs, particularly men over sixty in our culture, often feel that aging allows them to break free of the patriarchy. With time on their hands, they are often compelled by extreme loneliness, alienation, a crisis of meaning, or other circumstances, to develop emotional selves. They are the elders who can speak to younger generations of men, debunking the patriarchal myth of work; those voices need to be heard. They are the voices that tell younger men, “Don’t wait until your life is near it’s end to find your feeling, to follow your heart. Don’t wait until it’s too late.” Work can and should be life-enhancing for all men. When daring men come to work loved and loving, the nature of work will be transformed and the workplace will no longer demand that the hearts of men be broken to get the job done.





7


Feminist Manhood




Say that you are feminist to most men, and automatically you are seen as the enemy. You risk being seen as a man-hating woman. Most young women fear that if they call themselves feminist, they will lose male favor, they will not be loved by men. Popular opinion about the impact of feminist movement on men’s lives is that feminism hurt men. Conservative antifeminist women and men insist that feminism is destroying family life. They argue that working women leave households bereft of homemakers and children without a mother’s care. Yet they consistently ignore the degree to which consumer capitalist culture, not feminism, pushed women into the workforce and keeps them there.

When feminist women told the world that patriarchy promotes woman-hating, the response was that feminists were being too extreme, exaggerating the problem. Yet when men who knew nothing about feminism claimed that feminists were man-hating, there was no response from the nonfeminist world saying that they were being too extreme. No feminists have murdered and raped men. Feminists have not been jailed day after day for their violence against men. No feminists have been accused of ongoing sexual abuse of girl children, including creating a world of child pornography featuring little girls. Yet these are some of the acts of men that led some feminist women to identify men as woman-hating.

Even though not all men are misogynists, feminist thinkers were accurate when we stated that patriarchy in its most basic, unmediated form promotes fear and hatred of females. A man who is unabashedly and unequivocally committed to patriarchal masculinity will both fear and hate all that the culture deems feminine and womanly. However, most men have not consciously chosen patriarchy as the ideology they want to govern their lives, their beliefs, and actions. Patriarchal culture is the system they were born within and socialized to accept, yet in all areas of their lives most men have rebelled in small ways against the patriarchy, have resisted absolute allegiance to patriarchal thinking and practice. Most men have clearly been willing to resist patriarchy when it interferes with individual desire, but they have not been willing to embrace feminism as a movement that would challenge, change, and ultimately end patriarchy.

Feminist movement was from the outset presented to most males via mass media as antimale. Truthfully, there was a serious antimale faction in contemporary feminist movement. And even though the man-hating women were a small minority of women’s libbers, they received the most attention. Failing to care for women rightly, men through continual acts of domination had actually created the cultural context for feminist rebellion. In the chapter on “Feminist Masculinity” in my recent book Feminism Is for Everybody, I write: “Individual heterosexual women came to the movement from relationships where men were cruel, unkind, violent, unfaithful. Many of these men were radical thinkers who participated in movements for social justice, speaking out on behalf of the workers, the poor, speaking out on behalf of racial justice. However when it came to the issue of gender they were as sexist as their conservative cohorts. Individual women came from these relationships angry. They used that anger as a catalyst for women’s liberation. As the movement progressed, as feminist thinking advanced, enlightened feminist activists saw that men were not the problem, that the problem was patriarchy, sexism, and male domination.”

It was difficult for women committed to feminist change to face the reality that the problem did not lie just with men. Facing that reality required more complex theorizing; it required acknowledging the role women play in maintaining and perpetuating patriarchy and sexism. As more women moved away from destructive relationships with men, it was easier to see the whole picture. It was easier to see that even if individual men divested themselves of patriarchal privilege, the system of patriarchy, sexism, and male domination would still remain intact, and women would still be exploited and oppressed. Despite this change in feminist agendas, visionary feminist thinkers who had never been antimale did not and do not receive mass media attention. As a consequence the popular notion that feminists hate men continues to prevail.

The vast majority of feminist women I encounter do not hate men. They feel sorry for men because they see how patriarchy wounds them and yet men remain wedded to patriarchal culture. While visionary thinkers have called attention to the way patriarchy hurts men, there has never been an ongoing effort made to address male pain. To this day I hear individual feminist women express their concern for the plight of men within patriarchy, even as they share that they are unwilling to give their energy to help educate and change men. Feminist writer Minnie Bruce Pratt states the position clearly: “How are men going to change? The meeting between two people, where one opposes the other, is the point of change. But I don’t want the personal contact. I don’t want to do it…. When people talk about not giving men our energies, I agree with that…. They have to deliver themselves.” These attitudes, coupled with the negative attitudes of most men toward feminist thinking, meant that there was never a collective, affirming call for boys and men to join feminist movement so that they would be liberated from patriarchy.

Reformist feminist women could not make this call because they were the group of women (mostly white women with class privilege) who had pushed the idea that all men were powerful in the first place. These were the women for whom feminist liberation was more about getting their piece of the power pie and less about freeing masses of women or less powerful men from sexist oppression. They were not mad at their powerful daddies and husbands who kept poor men exploited and oppressed; they were mad that they were not being giving equal access to power. Now that many of those women have gained power, and especially economic parity with the men of their class, they have pretty much lost interest in feminism.

As interest in feminist thinking and practice has waned, there has been even less focus on the plight of men than in the heyday of feminist movement. This lack of interest does not change the fact that only a feminist vision that embraces feminist masculinity, that loves boys and men and demands on their behalf every right that we desire for girls and women, can renew men in our society. Feminist thinking teaches us all, males especially, how to love justice and freedom in ways that foster and affirm life. Clearly we need new strategies, new theories, guides that will show us how to create a world where feminist masculinity thrives.

Sadly there is no body of recent feminist writing addressing men that is accessible, clear, and concise. There is little work done from a feminist standpoint concentrating on boyhood. No significant body of feminist writing addresses boys directly, letting them know how they can construct an identity that is not rooted in sexism. There is no body of feminist children’s literature that can serve as an alternative to patriarchal perspectives, which abound in the world of children’s books. The gender equality that many of us take for granted in our adult lives, particularly those of us who have class privilege and elite education, is simply not present in the world of children’s books or in the world of public and private education. Teachers of children see gender equality mostly in terms of ensuring that girls get to have the same privileges and rights as boys within the existing social structure; they do not see it in terms of granting boys the same rights as girls—for instance, the right to choose not to engage in aggressive or violent play, the right to play with dolls, to play dress up, to wear costumes of either gender, the right to choose.

Just as it was misguided for reformist feminist thinkers to see freedom as simply women having the right to be like powerful patriarchal men (feminist women with class privilege never suggested that they wanted their lot to be like that of poor and working-class men), so was it simplistic to imagine that the liberated man would simply become a woman in drag. Yet this was the model of freedom offered men by mainstream feminist thought. Men were expected to hold on to the ideas about strength and providing for others that were a part of patriarchal thought, while dropping their investment in domination and adding an investment in emotional growth. This vision of feminist masculinity was so fraught with contradictions, it was impossible to realize. No wonder then that men who cared, who were open to change, often just gave up, falling back on the patriarchal masculinity they found so problematic. The individual men who did take on the mantle of a feminist notion of male liberation did so only to find that few women respected this shift.

Once the “new man” that is the man changed by feminism was represented as a wimp, as overcooked broccoli dominated by powerful females who were secretly longing for his macho counterpart, masses of men lost interest. Reacting to this inversion of gender roles, men who were sympathetic chose to stop trying to play a role in female-led feminist movement and became involved with the men’s movement. Positively, the men’s movement emphasized the need for men to get in touch with their feelings, to talk with other men. Negatively, the men’s movement continued to promote patriarchy by a tacit insistence that in order to be fully self-actualized, men needed to separate from women. The idea that men needed to separate from women to find their true selves just seemed like the old patriarchal message dressed up in a new package.

Describing the men’s movement spearheaded by Robert Bly in her essay “Feminism and Masculinity,” Christine A. James explains:





Bly claims that women, primarily since feminism, have created a situation in which men, especially young men, feel weak, emasculated, and unsure of themselves, and that older men must lead the way back…. Bly holds up the myth of the Wild Man as an exemplar of the direction men must take and never challenges the hierarchical dualisms that are so integrally linked to the tension he perceives between men and women. Arguably, the notion of the Wild Man merely reinforces clichés about “real masculinity” instead of trying to foster a new relationship between men and women, as well as the masculine and feminine.





The men’s movement was often critical of women and feminism while making no sustained critique of patriarchy. Ultimately it did not consistently demand that men challenge patriarchy or envision liberating models of masculinity.

Many of the New Age models created by men reconfigure old sexist paradigms while making it seem as though they are offering a different script for gender relations. Often the men’s movement resisted macho patriarchal models while upholding a vision of a benevolent patriarchy, one in which the father is the ruler who rules with tenderness and kindness, but he is still in control. In the wake of feminist movement and the diverse men’s liberation movements that did not bring women and men closer together, the question of what the alternative to patriarchal masculinity might be must still be answered.

Clearly, men need new models for self-assertion that do not require the construction of an enemy “other,” be it a woman or the symbolic feminine, for them to define themselves against. Starting in early childhood, males need models of men with integrity, that is, men who are whole, who are not divided against themselves. While individual women acting as single mothers have shown that they can raise healthy, loving boys who become responsible, loving men, in every case where this model of parenting has been successful, women have chosen adult males—fathers, grandfathers, uncles, friends, and comrades—to exemplify for their sons the adult manhood they should strive to achieve.

Undoubtedly, one of the first revolutionary acts of visionary feminism must be to restore maleness and masculinity as an ethical biological category divorced from the dominator model. This is why the term patriarchal masculinity is so important, for it identifies male difference as being always and only about the superior rights of males to dominate, be their subordinates females or any group deemed weaker, by any means necessary. Rejecting this model for a feminist masculinity means that we must define maleness as a state of being rather than as performance. Male being, maleness, masculinity must stand for the essential core goodness of the self, of the human body that has a penis. Many of the critics who have written about masculinity suggest that we need to do away with the term, that we need “an end to manhood.” Yet such a stance furthers the notion that there is something inherently evil, bad, or unworthy about maleness.

It is a stance that seems to be more a reaction to patriarchal masculinity than a creative loving response that can separate maleness and manhood from all the identifying traits patriarchy has imposed on the self that has a penis. Our work of love should be to reclaim masculinity and not allow it to be held hostage to patriarchal domination. There is a creative, life-sustaining, life-enhancing place for the masculine in a nondominator culture. And those of us committed to ending patriarchy can touch the hearts of real men where they live, not by demanding that they give up manhood or maleness, but by asking that they allow its meaning to be transformed, that they become disloyal to patriarchal masculinity in order to find a place for the masculine that does not make it synonymous with domination or the will to do violence.

Patriarchal culture continues to control the hearts of men precisely because it socializes males to believe that without their role as patriarchs they will have no reason for being. Dominator culture teaches all of us that the core of our identity is defined by the will to dominate and control others. We are taught that this will to dominate is more biologically hardwired in males than in females. In actuality, dominator culture teaches us that we are all natural-born killers but that males are more able to realize the predator role. In the dominator model the pursuit of external power, the ability to manipulate and control others, is what matters most. When culture is based on a dominator model, not only will it be violent but it will frame all relationships as power struggles.

No matter how many modern-day seers assure us that power struggles are not an effective model for human relations, imperialist white-supremacist capitalist patriarchal culture continues to insist that domination must be the organizing principle of today’s civilization. In The Heart of the Soul Gary Zukav and Linda Francis make it clear that while humans may have needed to create external power to keep the species alive at one time, this is no longer the case: “With or without reverence, the pursuit of external power leads only to violence and destruction. It is an evolutionary modality that no longer works. It is the wrong medicine, and nothing can make it the right medicine again.” Patriarchal masculinity teaches men that their selfhood has meaning only in relation to the pursuit of external power; such masculinity is a subtext of the dominator model.

Before the realities of men can be transformed, the dominator model has to be eliminated as the underlying ideology on which we base our culture. We already see that within patriarchal culture men can be more emotional, they can parent, they can break with sexist roles, but as long as the underlying principles are in place, men can never be truly free. At any moment this underlying patriarchal ethos can overshadow behaviors that run counter to it. We have already seen that many men changed their thinking for a time when feminist movement was a powerful force for social change, but then when the patriarchal thinking that undergirds our society did not change, as the energy of the movement began to wane, the old order began to reestablish itself. Sexist thought and action that had been harshly critiqued during the height of feminist movement have once again become more acceptable. Clearly, ending patriarchy is necessary for men to have collective liberation. It is the only resolution to the masculinity crisis that most men are experiencing.

To offer men a different way of being, we must first replace the dominator model with a partnership model that sees interbeing and interdependency as the organic relationship of all living beings. In the partnership model selfhood, whether one is female or male, is always at the core of one’s identity. Patriarchal masculinity teaches males to be pathologically narcissistic, infantile, and psychologically dependent for self-definition on the privileges (however relative) that they receive from having been born male. Hence many males feel that their very existence is threatened if these privileges are taken away. In a partnership model male identity, like its female counterpart, would be centered around the notion of an essential goodness that is inherently relationally oriented. Rather than assuming that males are born with the will to aggress, the culture would assume that males are born with the inherent will to connect.

Feminist masculinity presupposes that it is enough for males to be to have value, that they do not have to “do,” to “perform,” to be affirmed and loved. Rather than defining strength as “power over,” feminist masculinity defines strength as one’s capacity to be responsible for self and others. This strength is a trait males and females need to possess. In The Courage to Raise Good Men, Olga Silverstein stresses the need to redefine male sex roles in ways that break with sexist norms. Currently, sexist definitions of male roles insist on defining maleness in relationship to winning, one-upmanship, domination: “Until we are willing to question many of the specifics of the male sex role, including most of the seven norms and stereotypes that psychologist Robert Levant names in a listing of its chief constituents—‘avoiding femininity, restrictive emotionality, seeking achievement and status, self-reliance, aggression, homophobia, and nonrelational attitudes toward sexuality’—we are going to deny men their full humanity. Feminist masculinity would have as its chief constituents integrity, self-love, emotional awareness, assertiveness, and relational skill, including the capacity to be empathic, autonomous, and connected.” The core of feminist masculinity is a commitment to gender equality and mutuality as crucial to interbeing and partnership in the creating and sustaining of life. Such a commitment always privileges nonviolent action over violence, peace over war, life over death.

Olga Silverstein rightly says that “what the world needs now is a different kind of man”—she posits that we need a “good” man—but this binary category automatically invests in a dominator model of either-or. What the world needs now is liberated men who have the qualities Silverstein cites, men who are “empathic and strong, autonomous and connected, responsible to self, to family and friends, and to society, and capable of understanding how those responsibilities are, ultimately, inseparable.” Men need feminist thinking. It is the theory that supports their spiritual evolution and their shift away from the patriarchal model. Patriarchy is destroying the well-being of men, taking their lives daily.

When Silverstein does workshops focusing on changing sexist gender roles, it is women who question her about whether a male with the qualities described above can survive. She responds to their fear by pointing out these truths:





Men aren’t surviving very well! We send them to war to kill and be killed. They’re lying down in the middle of highways to prove their manhood in imitation of a scene in a recent movie about college football. They’re dying of heart attacks in early middle age, killing themselves with liver and lung disease via the manly pursuits of drinking and smoking, committing suicide at roughly four times the rate of women, becoming victims of homicide (generally at the hands of other men) three times as often as women, and therefore living about eight years less than women.





And I would add that many men striving to prove patriarchal masculinity through acts of brutal and unnecessary violence are imprisoned for life. Clearly, lots of women survive leading happy, fulfilling lives because we do not embrace an identity which weds us to violence; men must have the same choice.

Women are not the only group who cannot imagine what the world would be like if males were raised with wholeness of being. There seems to be a fear that if men are raised to be people of integrity, people who can love, they will be unable to be forceful and act violently if needed.

A Masai wise man, when asked by Terrence Real to name the traits of a good warrior, replied, “I refuse to tell you what makes a good morani [warrior]. But I will tell you what makes a great morani. When the moment calls for fierceness, a good morani is very ferocious. And when the moment calls for kindness, a good morani is utterly tender. Now, what makes a great morani is knowing which moment is which.” We see that females who are raised with the traits any person of integrity embodies can act with tenderness, with assertiveness, and with aggression if and when aggression is needed.

Men who are able to be whole, undivided selves can practice the emotional discernment beautifully described by the Masai wise man precisely because they are able to relate and respond rather than simply react. Patriarchal masculinity confines men to various stages of reaction and overreaction. Feminist masculinity does not reproduce the notion that maleness has this reactionary, wild, uncontrolled component; instead it assures men and those of us who care about men that we need not fear male loss of control. The power of patriarchy has been to make maleness feared and to make men feel that it is better to be feared than to be loved. Whether they can confess this or not, men know that it just is not true.

This fear of maleness that they inspire estranges men from every female in their lives to greater or lesser degrees, and men feel the loss. Ultimately, one of the emotional costs of allegiance to patriarchy is to be seen as unworthy of trust. If women and girls in patriarchal culture are taught to see every male, including the males with whom we are intimate, as potential rapists and murderers, then we cannot offer them our trust, and without trust there is no love. When I was a girl, my father was respected as the patriarchal provider and protector in our family. And he was feared. That ability to inspire fear was to him the sign of real manhood. Even though the knowledge that our dad could take care of his own was comforting, the moment he unleashed that will to do violence on us—his loved ones—we lost him. We were left with just our fears and the knowledge that there was no emotional connection great enough to soothe and transform our father’s violence, to keep him connected.

How many men have lost this bond of love via acts of relational violence, acting out the notion embedded in patriarchal masculinity that in every male there is a predator, a hunter hungry and ready for the kill? Silverstein argues that men suffer by the patriarchal insistence that they enact rituals of alienation that lead to “estrangement from women.” She states, “As anybody who works with the elderly will tell you, when octogenarians utter their dying words, it’s ‘Mama’ the men call for, never ‘Daddy.’ These men may not even be calling out for an actual mother but for the symbolic mama who stands for nurturance, care, connectedness, whose loving presence lets us know we are not alone.”

Patriarchal masculinity insists that real men must prove their manhood by idealizing aloneness and disconnection. Feminist masculinity tells men that they become more real through the act of connecting with others, through building community. There is no society in the world made up of one lone man. Even Thoreau in his solitary cabin wrote to his mother every day. When John Gray tells readers in Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus that men will go into their cave—that is, that men will disassociate and disconnect—he is accurately describing patriarchal masculinity. But he never suggests that men can be fulfilled living their lives in the cave. However, many men caught in patriarchy’s embrace are living in a wilderness of spirit where they are utterly and always alone.

Feminism as a movement to end sexist domination and oppression offers us all the way out of patriarchal culture. The men who are awakening to this truth are generally younger men, who were born into a world where gender equality is more a norm. Unlike older generations of men, they do not have to be convinced that women are their equals. These are the young males who take women’s studies classes, who are not afraid to identify themselves as advocates of feminism. They are the feminist sons of feminist mothers. Hence in his afterword to his mother’s book The Courage to Raise Good Men, Michael Silverstein praises his mother’s work: “The notion that men who have lost touch with their mothers have lost touch with parts of themselves is a powerful one—powerful enough to provoke change. I am proud that my mother has had the courage to open these issues for me and herself, and for other mothers and their sons.” These men are the living example of the ways feminist masculinity liberates men.

Older generations of men who have shifted from sexist thinking to feminist masculinity were often moved by the women in their lives to make changes in thought and action, but for many it was the experience of assuming an equal parenting role that really transformed their consciousness and their behavior. I have had many conversations with men who in parenting daughters suddenly find themselves enraged by patriarchal biases that they had been unaware of or cared nothing about until the moment when they saw sexism begin to threaten their daughters’ action and being. Feminist theorists argued from the onset of the movement that were men to participate in parenting in a primary way, they would be changed. They would develop the relational skills often seen as innate in women. Parenting remains a setting where men can practice love as they let go of a dominator model and engage mutually with women who parent with them the children they share. Male domination does not allow mutual intimacy to emerge; it keeps fathers from touching the hearts of their children.

As long as men dominate women, we cannot have love between us. That love and domination can coexist is one of the most powerful lies patriarchy tells us all. Most men and women continue to believe it, but in truth, love transforms domination. When men do the work of creating selves outside the patriarchal box, they create the emotional awareness needed for them to learn to love. Feminism makes it possible for women and men to know love.

Visionary feminism is a wise and loving politics. It is rooted in the love of male and female being, refusing to privilege one over the other. The soul of feminist politics is the commitment to ending patriarchal domination of women and men, girls and boys. Love cannot exist in any relationship that is based on domination and coercion. Males cannot love themselves in patriarchal culture if their very self-definition relies on submission to patriarchal rules. When men embrace feminist thinking and practice, which emphasizes the value of mutual growth and self-actualization in all relationships, their emotional well-being will be enhanced. A genuine feminist politics always brings us from bondage to freedom, from lovelessness to loving.





“Mutual partnership is the foundation of love. Feminist thought and action create the conditions under which mutuality can be nurtured.”



A true comrade and advocate of feminist politics, John Stoltenberg has consistently urged men to develop an ethical sensibility that would enable them to love justice more than manhood. In his essay “Healing from Manhood” he shares that “loving justice more than manhood, is not only a worthy pursuit, it is the future.” As Stoltenberg explains, “Choosing loyalty to manhood over selfhood leads inevitably to injustice…loving justice more than manhood relocates personal identity in selfhood—relationally, reciprocally, realistically.” He, like other male advocates of feminist thinking, knows firsthand that it is no easy task for men to rebel against patriarchal thinking and learn to love themselves and others. Feminist masculinity offers men a way to reconnect with selfhood, uncovering the essential goodness of maleness and allowing everyone, male and female, to find glory in loving manhood.





8


Popular Culture:

Media Masculinity




Mass media do the work of continually indoctrinating boys and men, teaching them the rules of patriarchal thinking and practice. One of the primary reasons the feminist demand that we challenge and change patriarchy had so little impact on males was that the theory was primarily expressed in books. Most men were not buying or reading feminist books. During the peak moments of white female-led contemporary feminist movement, the late sixties and early seventies, male authors contributed books that took on the issues of destructive masculinity, critiquing patriarchy. Books such as The Male Machine, Men’s Liberation, The Liberated Man, The Limits of Masculinity, For Men against Sexism, Being a Man, and White Hero, Black Beast challenged male passive acceptance of stereotyped sex roles.

These books and the discussions they generated had nowhere near the impact on male consciousness that feminist books focusing on womanhood were having on female consciousness. For the most part these white male writers did not strive to reconceptualize masculinity; instead they encouraged men to learn behavior patterns previously associated with females. They all agreed that economic changes coupled with changes in the status of women had produced a crisis in masculinity.

Within modern advanced capitalist society, masculine power was traditionally seen as synonymous with the ability of males to provide financially. However, as more and more women have gained access to the work sphere, the sphere of provision, this centrally defining attribute of patriarchal masculinity has lost significance. Gender equality in the workforce freed lots of men to speak their truth that they were not necessarily interested in the role of provider. Many men were happy with the idea that feminism was teaching women that they should pay their own way. Concurrently, as feminist movement and the so-called sexual revolution changed the notion that sexual action and initiation were exclusively the province of males, another signifier of patriarchal masculinity lost meaning. Gender-based changes in the workforce and in sexual politics meant that sex roles were modified for a vast majority of people, especially females, yet even so, patriarchal notions of masculinity remained intact, even when those notions did not have a reality base. Hence the crisis in masculinity. A traditional institutionalized patriarchal social order was being challenged and changed even as there were no major changes in sexist thinking.

Men experiencing this crisis could either cling for security and safety to the underlying assumptions of patriarchal ideology or they could ally themselves with feminist efforts and struggle to create new conceptions of masculinity, new possibilities for the social formation of male identity. The men who chose change, who dared to ally themselves with feminist movement, were often gay or bisexual or in heterosexual relationships with radical feminist women. Many women in these relationships found that the men in their lives lost interest in transforming masculinity after the initial feminist fervor subsided.

Mainstream mass media, particularly movies and television, reflected the contradictions even as they continued to reinforce patriarchal thinking and action. Most men chose not to change, and conservative mass media supported their staying in place. Men’s continued allegiance to a notion of masculinity that could no longer be fully realized on the old terms led them to place greater emphasis on their ability to dominate and control by physical force and abusive psychological terrorism. Compelled to work in a public arena where men no longer asserted patriarchal control (job supervisors and higher-ranking bosses might be female), these men could fully enact rituals of patriarchal domination only in the private sphere. As a consequence, despite feminist changes in the area of work, incidences of male violence against women and children were escalating. Mass media, especially television talk shows, focused on male violence without linking that focus to ending patriarchy. Male domination of women simply became a new form of mass entertainment (hence the money-making spectacle of the O. J. Simpson trial). In social relationships with other men outside the sphere of work, men were more compelled than ever to enact rituals of domination. Among black males, black-on-black homicide fast became the leading cause of death for males between the ages of sixteen and forty-five.

In the world of television, shows directed at children never stopped their sexist myth making. One of the most popular children’s shows with a subtext about masculinity was The Incredible Hulk. A favorite of boys from diverse class and racial backgrounds, this show was instrumental in teaching the notion that for a male, the exertion of physical force (brutal and monstrous) was a viable response to all situations of crisis. When a sociologist asked young male viewers what they would do if they had the power of the Hulk, they said that they would smash their mommies. The Hulk was the precursor for the Power Ranger toys that are still popular along with more recent video games which allow boys to engage in violent ritualized play.

The hero of The Incredible Hulk, like the many television and movie heroes that have come in his wake, is the perfect candidate for inclusion in Barbara Ehrenreich’s book The Hearts of Men: American Dreams and the Flight from Commitment. He is a man always on the run, unable to develop lasting ties or intimacy. A scientist by training (the ultimate personification of rational man), when he experiences anger, he turns into a creature of color and commits violent acts. After committing violence, he changes back to his normal white-male rational self. He has no memory of his actions and therefore cannot assume responsibility for them. Since he is (like the hero of a popular adult drama, The Fugitive) unable to form sustained emotional bonds with friends or family, he cannot love. He thrives on disconnection and disassociation. Like the men of the Beat generation, like the more recent men of Generation X, he is the symbol of the ultimate patriarchal man—alone, on the road, forever drifting, driven by the beast within.

The Incredible Hulk linked sexism and racism. The cool, level-headed, rational white-male scientist turned into a colored beast whenever his passions were aroused. Tormented by the knowledge of this transformation, he searches for a cure, a way to disassociate himself from the beast within. Writing about the connection between racism and the construction of masculinity in White Hero, Black Beast, Paul Hoch contends, “There is indeed a close interaction between the predominant Western conception of manhood and that of racial (and species) domination. The notion, originally from myth and fable, is that the summit of masculinity—the ‘white hero’—achieves his manhood, first and foremost, by winning victory over the ‘dark beast’ or over the barbarian beasts of other—in some sense, ‘darker’—races, nations and social castes.” Recent movies like Men in Black, Independence Day, and The Matrix rely on these racialized narratives of dark versus light to valorize patriarchal white masculinity in the realm of fantasy. In our actual lives the imperialist white-supremacist policies of our government lead to enactments of rituals of white-male violent domination of a darker universe, as in both the Gulf War and the most recent war against Iraq. By making it appear that the threatening masculinity—the rapist, the terrorist, the murderer—is really a dark other, white male patriarchs are able to deflect attention away from their own misogyny, from their violence against women and children.

The popularization of gangsta rap, spearheaded by white male executives in the music industry, gave a public voice to patriarchy and woman-hating. However, by promoting the voices of young black males (in the beginning many of whom were coming from the underclass), ruling-class white males could both exploit their clients’ longing for the trappings of patriarchal masculinity (money, power, sex) and simultaneously make their antifeminist messages the lessons that young white males would learn. Just as the conservative white men who control our government use individual black males—for example, Colin Powell—to preach the gospel of war to the American public (affirming the idea that the darker other is the threat that the heroic white male must annihilate), mass media demonization of black males as the epitome of brutal patriarchal masculinity deflects attention away from the patriarchal masculinity of white men and its concomitant woman-hating.

One of the ways patriarchal white males used mass media to wage the war against feminism was to consistently portray the violent woman-hating man as aberrant and abnormal. A perfect example of the lengths to which patriarchal white men will go to deny their patriarchal violence is offered in the PBS documentary about the Hillside Strangler. Viewers are able to watch psychiatrists talk with a white male serial killer who murdered adult women and two girls. It is a tale told in parts, each part highly dramatic and suspenseful. Viewers learn that the accused is a handsome, all-American white boy (I use the word “boy” because the commentators refer again and again to his boyish qualities) with a lovely blond wife and a baby son. We are told that he does not have the appearance of a villain, a killer. We learn that he is hardworking, well liked, etc. All these qualities made detectives and police (all white and male) reluctant to arrest him. He seemed to them to be an “unlikely suspect.” Even after his arrest, white-male mental health care professionals were brought on the case to at least provide documentation that if this all-American white male did indeed commit all these violent crimes against females, he did so because he was insane.

Finally a shrewd doctor uncovers that the accused has been pretending to be insane to escape punishment. It seems he studied psychology before he committed his crimes so that he would know how to appear crazy. When the doctor finally “unmasks” him, the Hillside Strangler states, “A woman is nothing to me. I can kill her in a minute.” As the trial closes and the white male judge reads his final comments on the case, he tells viewers that the Hillside Strangler was a misogynist, a man who hated women. Yet the judge does not link this misogyny to patriarchy or sexism or male domination. Instead we are told that the man’s mother whipped him to express her anger toward a violent, no-good gambler husband. In the final analysis a woman is blamed for this man’s violence against women—another case of “She made me do it.” Nothing is said of his rationally thought-out strategy of dissimulation or of the way he deceived many women and other people by pretending to be a nice guy, by impersonating the benevolent patriarch.

Since contemporary feminist movement, the genre of the mystery novel has exploited such feminist issues as domestic violence, rape, and incest to create male villains who are misogynists. Novels from Jagged Edge to the more recent The Analysand exploit feminist themes even as they uphold the need for patriarchal violence. In a real world where more than 90 percent of violent crimes are committed by men, it is not surprising that popular culture offers both negative and positive models of the masculine. Woman-hating dominator men are consistently depicted as loners, who may have been abused as children and who were not able to adjust in normal society. Ironically, these “bad” men share the same character traits as the “good” men who hunt them down and slaughter them. In both cases the men dissimulate (take on various appearances and disguises to manipulate others’ perception of their identity), and they lack the ability to connect emotionally with others.

In contemporary films such as Good Will Hunting the sensitive man is shown to have a violent undercurrent. In the movie Will is the working-class young adult who has the opportunity to become a healthy male if he can confront his traumatic childhood and learn to feel again. He is a cinematic portrait of a man in patriarchal culture trying to reclaim connections. Terrence Real writes about the film:





As Will Hunting shows us, a man cannot connect with others and remain cut off from his own heart. Intimacy generates too many raw feelings. Contending with them is requisite work for staying close. Yet the stoicism of disconnection, the strategy of avoiding one’s feelings, is precisely the value in which boys are schooled…. Empathy to oneself and others lies in a realm that has remained devalued and unexplored—the domain of women…. Both the roots of Will’s pain and also his entitlement to run from it, inflicting it instead, on those he most cares for, lie at the heart of patriarchy—the masculine code into which all boys are inducted.





This patriarchal code is passed own through generations. The award-winning film Monster’s Ball depicts three generations of white men: the ruling patriarch, who is a victim of hard living, drinking, and smoking, his obedient patriarchal son, who works as a prison warden, and the third generation, the grandson, who is also following in the footsteps of his elders.

To realize the patriarchal masculine ideal, these white men must learn to disconnect from their feelings. The ruling patriarch addresses his son with verbal abuse, telling him that “Your mother wasn’t shit.” Shaming is the way he maintains control. Racist and misogynist, he is blindly followed by his son until that moment when the grandson, who is deemed weak because he is antiracist and able to feel, confronts his father. The boy asks why the father does not love him and then shoots himself in the mouth. His suicide brings an end to the patriarchal cycle and leads to the transformation of his dad, who seeks redemption among the black people he has previously hated. No other contemporary film exposes the evil of patriarchy as masterfully as Monster’s Ball. The path to redemption requires the repudiation of white-male patriarchal rule. Yet as in many of the films that portray men resisting patriarchy, in the end the shift is merely a move from violent dominator patriarch to benevolent nice-guy patriarch.

Contemporary books and movies offer clear portraits of the evils of patriarchy without offering any direction for change. Ultimately they send the message that male survival demands holding on to some vestige of patriarchy. In Monster’s Ball the male who is really different, who is humantistic, feeling, antiracist, and longing to move past patriarchal pornographic objectification to genuine intimacy is a victim. He kills himself. Watching this film, no male will be inspired to truly challenge the system. In another film, Igby Goes Down, the father, who is in touch with his feelings, is schizophrenic. When he shares feelings of being unable to bear the weight of patriarchal responsibility with his son, Igby cannot make an emotional connection. Driven by his hatred for his mother, Igby embraces the cruelty of the world around him and only escapes being violent by choosing to become a fugitive, a man on the run in search of a self he cannot find. The vast majority of contemporary films send the message that males cannot escape the beast within. They can pretend. They can dissimulate, but they can never break patriarchy’s hold on their consciousness.

Until we can create a popular culture that affirms and celebrates masculinity without upholding patriarchy, we will never see a change in the way that masses of males think about the nature of their identity. In Good Will Hunting, when faced with the possibility of knowing love, Will must make a choice. He must let go of his feelings of worthlessness and shame engendered by his traumatic past; he must choose life over death. His choice to love, to live, is the break with the patriarchal model that liberates his spirit. As viewers we celebrate his new awareness of his essential goodness, his redemption. His recovery gives us hope.

Mass media are a powerful vehicle for teaching the art of the possible. Enlightened men must claim it as the space of their public voice and create a progressive popular culture that will teach men how to connect with others, how to communicate, how to love.





9


Healing Male Spirit




Men cannot speak their pain in patriarchal culture. Boys learn this in early childhood. As a girl, I was awed by a man in my church, a deacon, who would stand before the congregation and speak his love for the divine spirit. Often in the midst of his testimony he would begin to weep, sobbing tears into a big white handkerchief. The girls and boys who witnessed his tears were embarrassed for him, for in their eyes he was showing himself to be weak. When he wept, the men who stood beside him turned their eyes away. They were ashamed to see a man express intense feeling.

I remembered this beautiful man of feeling in the autobiography of my girlhood, Bone Black:





To her child mind old men were the only men of feeling. They did not come at one smelling of alcohol and sweet cologne. They approached one like butterflies, moving light and beautiful, staying still for only a moment…. They were the brown-skinned men with serious faces who were the deacons of the church, the right-hand men of god. They were the men who wept when they felt his love, who wept when the preacher spoke of the good and faithful servant. They pulled wrinkled handkerchiefs out of their pockets and poured tears in them, as if they were pouring milk into a cup. She wanted to drink those tears that like milk could nourish her and help her grow.





To counter patriarchal representations of men as being without feeling, in both the books I write for adults and those I write for children, I have endeavored to create images of men that demonstrate their beauty and integrity of spirit.

Though we rarely use the word “patriarchy,” everyone knows how sexist masculinity has assaulted the spirits of men. Though wrong-minded in his implied blaming of women for the emotional deadness males feel, poet Robert Bly called on men to find the Wild Man within in hopes that they would in a safe space let their hearts speak, that they would howl, and cry, and dance, and play, and find again the spirit within. Of course men who participated in workshops such as those Bly conducted, let loose for a while and then journeyed back to their patriarchal world, leaving the wild spirit behind. Any reader of Robert Bly’s Iron John can hear the mother blame in his words. And Bly is right to demand that we all look at the role mothers play in deadening the spirits of boy children, but he fails to acknowledge that such mothers in their acts of maternal sadism are really doing the work of patriarchal caretaking, doing what they were taught a good mother should do.

It is highly ironic that we are now living in a time when we are told to question whether mothers can raise sons, when so many patriarchal men have been taught the beliefs and values of patriarchy by mothers, firsthand. Many mothers in patriarchal culture express their rage at adult men by directing anger at their sons. In The Power of Partnership Riane Eisler explains: “Some women direct their suppressed anger against men they feel are weak or vulnerable—their sons for example. The psychologist David Winter found that women living in countries or periods of extreme male dominance tend to be very controlling of their sons, who are the only males it is safe for them to vent against. Women in these circumstances are often subtly, or not so subtly, abusive of their sons.” Many mothers in patriarchal culture silence the wild spirit in their sons, the spirit of wonder and playful tenderness, for fear their sons will be weak, will not be prepared to be macho men, real men, men other men will envy and look up to.

Much of the anger men direct at mothers is a response to the maternal failure to protect the spirit of the boy from patriarchal harm. In one of the family therapy sessions Terrence Real writes about in How Can I Get Through to You? a son describes that moment when patriarchal culture intrudes on the emotional bond with his mother, and her acquiescence. The son recalls, “ ‘She was telling me. Let me go, darling. Just let me go. We know that your father’s a brute. We live together in a world of refined feeling he can never understand. But you see, darling, I am helpless, aren’t I? What am I to do?’ ” Every day mothers are ruthlessly and brutally terminating their emotional connection with male children in order to turn them over to patriarchy, whether to an actual unfeeling father or to a symbolic father. Boys feel the pain. And they have no place to lay it down; they carry it within. They take it to the place where it is converted into rage.

Learning to dissimulate, men learn to cover up their rage, their sense of powerlessness. Yet when men learn to create a false self as a way to maintain male domination, they have no sound basis on which to build healthy self-esteem. To always wear a mask as a way of asserting masculine presence is to always live the lie, to be perpetually deprived of an authentic sense of identity and well-being. This falseness causes males to experience intense emotional pain. Rituals of domination help mediate the pain. They provide an illusory sense of self, an identity. Poet and farmer Wendell Berry in The Unsettling of America: Culture and Agriculture suggests that “if we removed the status and compensation from the destructive exploits we classify as ‘manly,’ men would be found to be suffering as much as women. They would be found to be suffering for the same reason: they are in exile from the communion of men and women, which is the deepest connection with the communion of all creatures.” Many men in our society have no status, no privilege; they receive no freely given compensation, no perks with capitalist patriarchy. For these men domination of women and children may be the only opportunity to assert a patriarchal presence. These men suffer. Their anguish and despair has no limits or boundaries. They suffer in a society that does not want men to change, that does not want men to reconstruct masculinity so that the basis for the social formation of male identity is not rooted in an ethic of domination. Rather than acknowledge the intensity of their suffering, they dissimulate. They pretend. They act as though they have power and privilege when they feel powerless. Inability to acknowledge the depths of male pain makes it difficult for males to challenge and change patriarchal masculinity.

Broken emotional bonds with mothers and fathers, the traumas of emotional neglect and abandonment that so many males have experienced and been unable to name, have damaged and wounded the spirits of men. Many men are unable to speak their suffering. Like women, those who suffer the most cling to the very agents of their suffering, refusing to resist sexism or sexist oppression. Their refusal is rooted in the fear that their weakness will be exposed. They fear acknowledging the depths of their pain. As their pain intensifies, so does their need to do violence, to coercively dominate and abuse others. Barbara Deming explains: “I think the reason that men are so very violent is that they know, deep in themselves, that they’re acting a lie, and so they’re furious. You can’t be happy living a lie, and so they’re furious at being caught in the lie. But they don’t know how to break out of it, so they just go further into it.” For many men the moment of violent connection may be the only intimacy, the only attainable closeness, the only space where the agony is released. When feminist women insist that all men are powerful oppressors who victimize from the location of power, they obscure the reality that many victimize from the location of victimization. The violence they do to others is usually a mirroring of the violence enacted upon and within the self. Many radical feminists have been so enraged by male domination that they cannot acknowledge the possibility of male suffering or forgive. Failure to examine the victimization of men keeps us from understanding maleness, from uncovering the space of connection that might lead more men to seek feminist transformation. Urging women to overcome their fear of male anger, Barbara Deming writes that men are “in a rage because they are acting out a lie—which means that in some deep part of themselves they want to be delivered from it, are homesick for the truth.” She explains that “their fury gives us reason to fear, but also gives us reason to hope.”

It has been terribly difficult for advocates of feminism to create new ways of thinking about maleness, feminist paradigms for the reconstruction of masculinity. Despite the successes of feminist movement, the socialization of boys—the making of patriarchal masculine identity—has not been radically altered. Feminist writing, whether fiction or theory, rarely focuses on male change. I am always disturbed when male students request references to literature that will serve as a guide as they struggle to interrogate patriarchy and create progressive identities, because there is so little literature to offer them. By contrast, I can offer countless references to any female student who tells me she is trying to critically understand and change sexist female roles. There needs to be more feminist work that specifically addresses males. They need feminist blueprints for change.

In a course on feminist theory I asked students to comment on a book, film, television show, or any personal experience that offers them examples of reconstructed, feminist masculinity. In a class of more than forty students there were few positive responses. Several students talked about the old John Sayles movie The Brother from Another Planet and his most recent film, Sunshine State. I called attention to Alice Walker’s novel The Color Purple. Often when this novel is discussed, Celie’s transformation from object to subject receives attention but no one talks about the fact that the novel also chronicles Mister’s transformation, his movement away from patriarchal masculinity toward a caring, nurturing self who is able to participate in community.

In feminist fiction radically new roles for men emerge. As a fantasy, The Color Purple provides a utopian vision of the process by which men who embody a destructive sexist masculinity change. In The Color Purple Walker portrays the techniques of patriarchal domination used by males to maintain power in the domestic household, writing graphic accounts of abuse and terrorism, yet she also portrays the process by which the dominating male acquires a new consciousness and new habits of being. Her utopian vision of male transformation does not place the sole burden of change on men.

Celie also must change her attitudes toward men. She must not only affirm Albert’s transformation, she must understand and forgive him. Her acceptance enables him to rejoin the community, to embrace a vision of mutual partnership. At the end of the novel Celie says of Albert:





After all the evil he done I know you wonder why I don’t hate him. I don’t hate him for two reason. One, he love Shug. And two, Shug use to love him. Plus, look like he trying to make something out of himself. I don’t mean just that he work and he clean up after himself and he appreciate some of the things God was playful enough to make. I mean when you talk to him now he really listen, and one time, out of nowhere in the conversation us was having, he said, Celie, I’m satisfied this the first time I ever lived on Earth as a natural man. It feel like a new experience.





To change, Albert must understand why he has abused women. He locates that will to abuse in the trauma of his upbringing when he is coerced to choose against his true self as part of being indoctrinated into patriarchy. Dehumanized himself, it is easy for him to feel justified in dehumanizing others. Near the end of the book, Albert becomes a contemplative thinker who seeks to understand the reason for human existence. He says, “I think us here to wonder, myself. To wonder. To ast. And that in wondering bout the big things, and asking about the big things you learn about the little ones, almost by acident. But you never know nothing more bout the big things that you start out with. The more I wonder, he say, the more I love.” As a patriarch Albert was unable to love.

Unlike Walker’s fictional character Albert, most men are not compelled by circumstances beyond their control to change. Most men who are suffering a crisis of masculinity do not know where to turn to seek change. In the film Antwone Fisher (which is based on a true story), the troubled young black male expresses his crisis by saying, “I don’t know what to do.” A feminist future for men can enable transformation and healing. As advocates of feminism who seek to end sexism and sexist oppression, we must be willing to hear men speak their pain. Only when we courageously face male pain without turning away will we model for men the emotional awareness healing requires.

To heal, men must learn to feel again. They must learn to break the silence, to speak the pain. Often men, to speak the pain, first turn to the women in their lives and are refused a hearing. In many ways women have bought into the patriarchal masculine mystique. Asked to witness a male expressing feelings, to listen to those feelings and respond, they may simply turn away. There was a time when I would often ask the man in my life to tell me his feelings. And yet when he began to speak, I would either interrupt or silence him by crying, sending him the message that his feelings were too heavy for anyone to bear, so it was best if he kept them to himself. As the Sylvia cartoon I have previously mentioned reminds us, women are fearful of hearing men voice feelings. I did not want to hear the pain of my male partner because hearing it required that I surrender my investment in the patriarchal ideal of the male as protector of the wounded. If he was wounded, then how could he protect me?

As I matured, as my feminist consciousness developed to include the recognition of patriarchal abuse of men, I could hear male pain. I could see men as comrades and fellow travelers on the journey of life and not as existing merely to provide instrumental support. Since men have yet to organize a feminist men’s movement that would proclaim the rights of men to emotional awareness and expression, we will not know how many men have indeed tried to express feelings, only to have the women in their lives tune out or be turned off. Talking with men, I have been stunned when individual males would confess to sharing intense feelings with a male buddy, only to have that buddy either interrupt to silence the sharing, offer no response, or distance himself. Men of all ages who want to talk about feelings usually learn not to go to other men. And if they are heterosexual, they are far more likely to try sharing with women they have been sexually intimate with. Women talk about the fact that intimate conversation with males often takes place in the brief moments before and after sex. And of course our mass media provide the image again and again of the man who goes to a sex worker to share his feelings because there is no intimacy in that relationship and therefore no real emotional risk.

Being “vulnerable” is an emotional state many men seek to avoid. Some men spend a lifetime in a state of avoidance and therefore never experience intimacy. Sadly, we have all colluded with the patriarchy by faking it with men, pretending levels of intimacy and closeness we do not feel. We tell men we love them when we feel we have absolutely no clue as to who they really are. We tell fathers we love them when we are terrified to share our perceptions of them, our fear that if we disagree, we will be cast out, excommunicated. In this way we all collude with patriarchal culture to make men feel they can have it all, that they can embrace patriarchal manhood and still hold their loved ones dear. In reality, the more patriarchal a man is, the more disconnected he must be from feeling. If he cannot feel, he cannot connect. If he cannot connect, he cannot be intimate.

Significantly, Terrence Real suggests that most men do not know what intimacy is, that the “one-up, one-down world of masculinity leaves little space for tenderness…one is either controlled or controlling, dominator or dominated.” He shares the powerful insight that “when they speak of fearing intimacy, what they really mean is that they fear subjugation.” This fear of subjugation is often triggered by the reality that boys parented by patriarchal women are controlled via their longing for maternal closeness. In maternal sadism, the manipulative woman exploits the boy’s emotional vulnerability to bind him to her will, to subjugate him. This early experience resides at the heart of many a man’s fear of being intimate with a grown woman. And it may explain why so many men in patriarchal culture seek intimacy with girls or women young enough to be their daughters.

There is little feminist discussion of maternal sadism in relation to boys because it has been difficult for feminist thinkers to find a language to name the power mothers wield over children in a patriarchal culture, where in the larger social context mothers are so powerless. Yet it may be that very powerlessness in relation to grown men in patriarchy that leads so many women to exert emotional power over boys in a damaging manner. For this reason single-parent homes where mothers are dysfunctional and maternal sadism abounds are as unhealthy a place to raise boys as dysfunctional two-parent homes, where maternal sadism is the norm. In the two-parent home, the boy child may be fortunate to have an adult male who serves to intervene against maternal sadism, who acts as an enlightened witness. Such intervention is absent in the single female-headed household.

Women are not inherently more loving than men; women may give care and still be emotionally abusive. There has been such a strong tendency in patriarchal culture to simply assume that women are loving and capable of being intimate, that female failure to acquire the relational skills that would make intimacy possible, often goes unnoticed. Most females are encouraged to learn relational skills, yet damaged self-esteem may prevent us from applying those skills in a healthy manner. If we are to begin to create a culture in which feminist masculinity can thrive, then women who mother will need to educate themselves for critical consciousness. In the near future we may hope to have more data to show us the ways boys fare better when they have loving parents, whether together or apart, who teach them how to be intimate. Meanwhile let us create the space where males who lack relational skills can learn them.

As Zukav and Francis boldly state in The Heart of the Soul, “Intimacy and the pursuit of external power—the ability to manipulate and control—are incompatible.” Before most men can be intimate with others, they have to be intimate with themselves. They have to learn to feel and to be aware of their feelings. Men who mask feelings or suppress them simply do not want to feel the pain. Since emotional pain is the feeling that most males have covered up, numbed out, or closed off, the journey back to feeling is frequently through the portal of suffering. Much male rage covers up this place of suffering: this is the well-kept secret. Often when a female gets close to male pain, penetrating the male mask to see the emotional vulnerability beneath, she becomes a target for the rage.

Shame at emotional vulnerability is often what men who are closed down emotionally seek to hide. Since shaming is often used to socialize boys away from their feeling selves toward the patriarchal male mask, many grown men have an internal shaming voice. Studies indicate that patriarchal fathers are rarely killed by their children; mothers are murdered more, for the rage many males feel from father shaming is usually transferred to female authority figures. With females, especially, the wounded boy inside the man can rage with no fear of reprisals. The more intimate the relationship, the more likely she is to be both the target of the rage and the secret keeper, telling no one that he is addicted to rage. This is especially the case where the acting-out male is a son who is physically hitting a mother or weaker siblings. The violence of sons, especially adolescent boys, toward mothers is rarely talked about in our culture. Now that so many adult single men return home to live with female parents or never even leave, there is a growing problem of domestic discord, both emotional and physical, that is covered up.

Intimate terrorism in male-female couple relationships is identified as a problem, particularly emotional abuse. Yet very little is said about the intimate terrorism between adult children and parents. The recent film The Piano Teacher graphically showed the sadomasochistic violence that can exist between an adult child and a parent, assuming the form of both emotional and physical abuse. In this film the adults shown are female, and audiences are allowed to interpret what they see according to traditional sexist notions of female competition. Yet in real life there is tremendous emotional abuse happening in single mother/adult son relationships that is not named. Women in patriarchal culture are trained to cover up and hide male abuse, all the more so when the culprit is a son and the victim his mother. These situations of unhealthy intimacy exist because of our cultural failure to teach women and men what intimacy is. And as long as women remain the primary parental caregivers, we will have the lion’s share of the responsibility for learning how to be intimate ourselves and sharing that knowledge with male and female children.

Learning how to be intimate is a relational skill that teaches us the value of self-knowledge. Offering a broader, more meaningful definition of intimacy than the old notion of simply being close and vulnerable to someone, Gary Zukav and Linda Francis state that you “create intimacy when you shift from the pursuit of external power—the ability to manipulate and control—to the pursuit of authentic power—the alignment of your personality with your soul.” In recent years there have been a number of self-help books published that urge readers to care for their souls. Such books by James Hillman, Thomas Moore, and Gary Zukav have been national bestsellers. Ironically, these men speak of the necessity of caring for our souls as though the path to that care is the same for women and men. In the introduction to Thomas Moore’s Care of the Soul he tells readers, “Fulfilling work, rewarding relationships, personal power, and relief from symptoms are all gifts of the soul. They are particularly elusive in our time because we don’t believe in the soul and therefore give it no place in our hierarchy of values…. We live in a time of deep division, in which mind is separated from body and spirituality is at odds with materialism. But how do we get out of this split?” Visionary thinkers believe that by exposing the way the logic of domination has created the split and choosing the model of interbeing and interdependency, we can begin the work of restoring integrity, and with integrity comes care of the soul.

Men caught up in the logic of patriarchal masculinity have difficulty believing that their souls matter. It is perhaps a patriarchal bias that leads Thomas Moore to suggest at the conclusion of his clarion call for all of us to cultivate soulfulness that “care of the soul is not a project of self-improvement…. It is not at all concerned with living properly or with emotional health.” This need to deny the relationship of care of the soul to self-nurturance is itself indicative of the very binary splits in consciousness Moore critiques. There is no one who cares for her or his soul rightly who does not experience an enhancement of emotional well-being.

Men need to hear that their souls matter and that the care of their souls is the primary task of their being. Were all men seeking to uncover greater soulfulness in their lives rather than seeking power through a dominator model, then the world as we know it would be transformed for the better.

It cannot be a mere accident of fate that the visionary male teachers who are offering us messages about ways to care for the soul that will enhance life on the planet are men of color from poor countries, men who live in exile, men who have been victimized by imperialist male violence. Two men who come to mind are His Holiness the Dalai Lama and the Vietnamese Buddhist monk Thich Nhat Hanh. In Ethics for the New Millennium the Dalai Lama calls for a spiritual revolution. He shares his belief that all humans desire happiness and that a principal characteristic of genuine happiness is inner peace, which he links to developing concern for others. His soulful message echoes that of feminist thinkers who are telling the world that men can heal their spirits by developing relational skills—the ability to experience empathy, to care for others.

The existence of visionary male teachers who offer males and females spiritual guidance is a constant reminder to us that the hearts of men are transformed by love and compassion. Consistently, the Dalai Lama teaches us about the need to cultivate the practice of compassion. Whether males ever see themselves as working to end patriarchy, the fact remains that any man who chooses the way of compassion heals the spirit and moves away from domination. The Dalai Lama offers this wisdom:





Compassion is one of the principal things that make our lives meaningful. It is the source of all lasting happiness and joy. And it is the foundation of a good heart. Through kindness, through affection, through honesty, through truth and justice toward all others we ensure our own benefit. This is not a matter for complicated theorizing. It is a matter of common sense…. There is no denying that our happiness is inextricably bound up with the happiness of others. There is no denying that if society suffers, we ourselves suffer…. Thus we can reject everything else: religion, ideology, all received wisdom. But we cannot escape the necessity of love and compassion.





This is the care of the soul that males and females must attend to if we are to sustain life on the planet, if we are to live fully and well.

Most men in our society believe in higher powers, and yet they have learned to devalue spiritual life, to violate their own sense of the sacred. Hence the work of spiritual restoration—of seeing the souls of men as sacred—is essential if we are to create a culture in which men can love. When the hearts of men are full of compassion and open to love, then, as the Dalai Lama states, “there is no need for temple or church, for mosque or synagogue, no need for complicated philosophy, doctrine or dogma, for our own heart, our own mind, is the temple and the doctrine is compassion.”

When contemporary feminist movement was at its most militant, those of us who worshipped male deities were often made to feel as though we were traitors. Yet many of us found it especially useful in maintaining our love for males and appreciation for the sacredness of the male soul to separate patriarchal ideology from the powerful images of nurturing and loving kindness embodied in male religious figures. Many of us who were wounded daughters from Christian backgrounds found it useful to meditate daily on the twenty-third psalm because it evoked for us the image of a father caring for our souls, affirming and assuring us that we would survive, that goodness and mercy would be accorded us and that the father would keep us forever in his care.

This image of loving fatherhood embodies feminist masculinity in its most divine form. Healing the spirit, caring for the souls of boys and men, we must dare to proclaim our adoration, to bow down not to the male as dominator, but to the male as embodied divine spirit with whom we can unite in love, with no threat of separation, knowing a perfect love that is without fear.





10


Reclaiming Male Integrity




Healing the crisis in the hearts of men requires of us all a willingness to face the fact that patriarchal culture has required of men that they be divided souls. We know that there are men who have not succumbed to this demand but that most men have surrendered their capacity to be whole. The quest for integrity is the heroic journey that can heal the masculinity crisis and prepare the hearts of men to give and receive love.

Learning to wear a mask (that word already embedded in the term “masculinity”) is the first lesson in patriarchal masculinity that a boy learns. He learns that his core feelings cannot be expressed if they do not conform to the acceptable behaviors sexism defines as male. Asked to give up the true self in order to realize the patriarchal ideal, boys learn self-betrayal early and are rewarded for these acts of soul murder. Therapist John Bradshaw explains the splitting that takes place when a child learns that the way he organically feels is not acceptable. In response to this lesson that his true self is inappropriate and wrong, the boy learns to don a false self. Bradshaw explains, “The feeling that I have done something wrong, that I really don’t know what it is, that there’s something terribly wrong with my very being, leads to a sense of utter hopelessness. This hopelessness is the deepest cut of the mystified state. It means there is no possibility for me as I am; there is no way I can matter or be worthy of anyone’s love as long as I remain myself. I must find a way to be someone else—someone who is lovable. Someone who is not me.” Sexist roles restrict the identity formation of male and female children, but the process is far more damaging to boys because not only are the roles required of them more rigid and confining, but they are much more likely to receive severe punishment when they deviate from these roles.

Contemporary feminist movement created a socially sanctioned space where girls can create a sense of self that is distinct from sexist definitions; the same freedom has not been extended to boys. No wonder then that boys in patriarchal culture continue the tradition of creating a false self, of being split. That split in boys and men is often characterized by the capacity to compartmentalize. It is this division in the psyches and souls of males, fundamentally wounding, that is the breeding ground for mental illness. When males are required to wear the mask of a false self, their capacity to live fully and freely is severely diminished. They cannot experience joy and they can never truly love.

Anyone who has a false self must be dishonest. People who learn to lie to themselves and others cannot love because they are crippled in their capacity to tell the truth and therefore unable to trust. This is the heart of the psychological damage done to men in patriarchy. It is a form of abuse that this culture continues to deny. Boys socialized to become patriarchs are being abused. As victims of child abuse via socialization in the direction of the patriarchal ideal, boys learn that they are unlovable. According to Bradshaw they learn that “relationships are based on power, control, secrecy, fear, shame, isolation, and distance.” These are the traits often admired in the patriarchal adult man.

Emotionally wounding boys is socially acceptable and even demanded in patriarchal culture. Denying them their right to be whole, to have integrity, is not only encouraged, it is seen as the right way to do things. Terrence Real says that “we force our children out of the wholeness and connectedness in which they begin their lives” and then encourage them “to bury their deepest selves, to stop speaking, or attending to the truth, to hold in mistrust, or even in disdain, the state of closeness we all, by our natures, most crave.” Exposing the harsh reality of the psychological impact of patriarchy, Real has the courage to speak this truth: “We live in an antirelational, vulnerability-despising culture, one that not only fails to nurture the skills of connection but actively fears them.” Teaching boys to despise their vulnerability is one way to socialize them to engage in self-inflicted soul murder. This wound in the male spirit, caused by learned acts of splitting, of disassociation and disconnection, can only be healed by the practice of integrity. Wounded males must recover all the parts of the self they abandoned in serving the needs of patriarchal maleness. Such recovery is the necessary groundwork for restoring integrity to male being.

Speaking about the meaning of integrity in his most recent book, Living a Life That Matters, Rabbi Harold Kushner offers this clear definition: “Integrity means being whole, unbroken, undivided. It describes a person who has united the different parts of his or her personality, so that there is no longer a split in the soul.” Patriarchy encourages men to surrender their integrity and to live lives of denial. By learning the arts of compartmentalization, dissimulation, and disassociation, men are able to see themselves as acting with integrity in cases where they are not. Their learned state of psychological denial is severe. Adding to the definition of integrity in Further along the Road Less Traveled, M. Scott Peck discusses the root meaning of the term “integrity,” which is the verb “to integrate,” emphasizing that this is the opposite of compartmentalization. “Individuals without integrity naturally compartmentalize. And patriarchal masculinity normalizes male compartmentalization.”

Peck argues that compartmentalization is a way to avoid feeling pain: “We’re all familiar with the man who goes to church on Sunday morning, believing that he loves God and God’s creation and his fellow human beings, but who, on Monday morning, has no trouble with his company’s policy of dumping toxic wastes in the local stream. He can do this because he has religion in one compartment and his business in another.” Since most men have been socialized to believe that compartmentalization is a positive practice, it feels right, it feels comfortable. To practice integrity, then, is difficult; it hurts. Peck makes the crucial point: “Integrity is painful. But without it there can be no wholeness.” To be whole men must practice integrity.

Integrity is needed for healthy self-esteem. Most males have low self-esteem because they are constantly lying and dissimulating (taking on false appearances) in order to perform the sexist male role. Identifying the practice of integrity as a core pillar of self-esteem in his groundbreaking work on the subject, Six Pillars of Self-Esteem, Nathaniel Branden talks about the way in which lying wounds self-esteem. He confesses that, like many men, he once convinced himself that it was important to tell lies to protect other people, but eventually he had to face the truth that “lies do not work.” To honor his self-esteem, to practice integrity, he learned that the truth had to be told, that “by procrastinating and delaying I merely made the consequences for everyone more terrible.” Furthermore, he writes, “I succeeded in protecting no one, least of all myself. If part of my motive was to spare people I cared about, I inflicted a worse pain than they would otherwise have experienced. If part of my motive was to protect my self-esteem by avoiding a conflict among my values and loyalties, it was my self-esteem that I damaged.” This faulty logic he describes is the same that many patriarchal men use to avoid telling the truth and practicing integrity.

All too often we are led to believe that men gain more power through lying and compartmentalization. It just simply is not so. The stress of guarding and protecting a false self is harmful to male emotional well-being; it erodes self-esteem. Much of the depression men suffer is directly related to their inability to be whole. Even though they have been socialized to create and maintain false selves, most men remember the true self that once existed. And it is that memory of loss—coupled with rage at the world, which encouraged the surrender of the self—that engenders depression. This suffering, the source of which often goes unidentified in adult males, is constant. It leads many men to addiction, whether to workaholism or substance abuse. Workaholism is the most common addiction in men because it is usually rewarded and not taken seriously as detrimental to their emotional well-being.

Work is often the space where men detach from feelings. Zukav and Francis describe workaholism as a flight from emotions: “It is a drug that is as effective as the most powerful anesthetic…. Workaholism is a deep sleep. It is a self-induced trance that temporarily keeps painful emotions away from your awareness.” At the moment when addictions stop keeping the pain at bay, many men sink into depression. And as with so much male pain, it is only in recent years that men have been given societal permission to confront depression. Men suffer depression frequently because of their own unfulfilled expectations or their perfectionism (which can never be satisfied since to be human is to be imperfect). Often it is suggested that feminist movement has taken away or undermined “male power,” and as a consequence, men feel bereft. Underlying this notion is the idea that women are to blame for male depression, although it is difficult to believe that men feel at all threatened by masses of women entering a workforce where they receive less pay than men and come home after long hours to do a second shift. Since a woman outside the home is no longer under the rule of the individual patriarchal head of household, this movement outside may threaten male power more than what women do on the outside.

One dimension of feminist movement that did have a profound impact on men was its insistence that women had the right to critique men both collectively and individually. In the patriarchal home I was raised in, a significant aspect of Dad’s power was that he was beyond critique. Even though Mom never became a feminist, after forty years of submission she did begin to critique Dad in ways that echoed feminist challenges to male power and privilege. Like many women, she challenged her husband’s lack of emotional engagement. Like many women, she has wanted him to be interested in personal growth. For years patriarchal culture has taught men that their selfhood, their manhood, is affirmed by a lack of interest in personal growth; all of a sudden in the wake of feminist movement, women were bombarding men with new emotional expectations. Collectively men responded with a feeling of depression.

Popular psychotherapist M. Scott Peck reminds us that anytime any of us takes significant steps to grow, we go through a process of denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and acceptance (the same stages Elisabeth Kübler-Ross identified as those we go through when we confront dying). He gives the example of his being criticized for character flaws by loved ones and resisting the critique:





If they truly do love me enough to keep on criticizing, then maybe I get to the point where I think, “Could they be right? Could there possibly be something wrong with the great Scott Peck?” And if I answer yes, then that’s depressing. But if I can hang in there with that depressing notion—that maybe there really is something wrong with me—and start to wonder what it might be, if I contemplate it and analyze it and isolate it, and identify it, then I can go about the process of killing it and purifying myself of it. Having done—fully completed—the work of depression, I will then emerge at the other end as a new man, a resurrected human being, a better person.





Often, however, men find themselves stuck in the place of rage.

No wonder then that many men seeking to be whole must first name the intensity of their rage and the pain it masks. Writing in the face of the knowledge that he is dying, Joseph Beam confesses in “Brother to Brother: Words from the Heart”:





What is most important to me must be spoken, made verbal and shared, even at the risk of having it bruised or misunderstood. I know anger. My body contains as much anger as water. It is the material from which I have built my house: blood red bricks that cry in the rain…. It is the face and posture I show the world. It is the way, sometimes the only way, I am granted an audience. It is sometimes the way I show affection. I am angry because of the treatment I am afforded as a Black man. That fiery anger is stoked with the fuels of contempt and despisal shown me by my community because I am gay. I cannot go home as I am.





Anger often hides depression and profound sorrow.

Depression often masks the inability to grieve. Males are not given the emotional space to grieve. Girls and women can cry, can express sorrow throughout our lives. We can just let it out. Males are still being taught to keep it in and, worse, to deny that they feel like crying. Donald Dutton in his chapter “Love and Rage” says that male refusal to acknowledge loss is a key component of male rage:





Male models for grieving are few…. Men in particular seem incapable of grieving and mourning on an individual basis. Perhaps that is why the blues are so popular with men. They serve a socially sanctioned form of expression for this lost and unattainable process…. When blues artist Robert Johnson sings, “I’ve been mis-treated and I don’t mind dying,” a multitude of men can feel their own unmet yearnings and nod in assent.





Many adolescent girls go through a grieving process as they make the transition from being a small child to mature girlhood. Girls are allowed to mourn changes. Males have no rituals of mourning, as boys or men.

One of the reasons the church has been so important in the lives of black men is that it is one of the locations where they are allowed to express emotions, where they can grieve. James Baldwin describes this release of emotions in church in The Fire Next Time: “Nothing that has happened to me since equals the power and the glory that I sometimes felt when, in the middle of a sermon, I knew that I was somehow, by some miracle, really carrying, as they said, ‘the Word’—when the church and I were one. Their pain and their joy were mine, and mine were theirs—they surrendered their joy to me, I surrendered mine to them.” It was in the church of my childhood that I first saw men mourn.

To grow psychologically and spiritually, men need to mourn. The men who are doing the work of self-recovery testify that it is only when they are able to feel the pain that they can begin to heal. With courage and insight Neale Lundgren speaks about this inner struggle in his autobiographical essay about boyhood, “The Night When Sleep Awoke,” confessing his longing to find a father model, to reconnect with manhood. “Just when I thought I had exhausted my search for the father, I began to reach out for therapeutic help. After several episodes of chronic, unexplainable depression, I made a decision to finally stop avoiding the hurt and anger. With assistance and support from therapeutically literate men and women, I began to explore the feared terrain of my wounded heart. I began to grieve past losses and attachments.” When a man’s emotional capacity to mourn is arrested, he is likely to be frozen in time and unable to complete the process of growing up. Men need to mourn the old self and create the space for a new self to be born if they are to change and be wholly transformed.

If a man is not willing to break patriarchal rules that say that he should never change—especially to satisfy someone else, particularly a female—then he will choose being right over being loved. He will turn away from loved ones and choose his manhood over his personhood, isolation over connectedness. Therapist George Edmond Smith remembers learning early that men will respond with rage and rejection if they are perceived to be out of control or making a mistake:





I also recall early in life that when I asked my father a question to which he did not know the answer, he became angry, as if to say, “Look, I don’t know the answer to your question and because of that I should kick your ass!” Of course, I realized this almost immediately and I stopped looking to my father for answers. Perhaps if he had taken the time to say to me, “Son, I don’t know the answer to that, let’s look it up together and find out.”





Only a father capable of being whole can have the integrity to acknowledge ignorance to his son without feeling diminished.

Men who are whole can speak their fear without shame. They do not need to wear the false mask of fearlessness. Fathers have been unable to share with their sons that they are afraid. They fear not measuring up to the expectations of sons. They fear that the son will see their jealousy and envy of the boy who has not yet severed his relation to feeling, who is not emotionally closed off. Writing about his boyhood, Neale Lundgren recalls, “I was in awe of my father, and it seemed to me that I often sensed he was afraid of me. Perhaps he was intimidated by my heart that was as his used to be when he was a boy: big, full, open, strong, and tender.”

Unable to acknowledge feelings, fathers often cover them up with rage, cruelly severing their own attachment to the son and refusing his love and admiration. The competitive performance model of patriarchy teaches men who father that a son is or will be his adversary, that he has to fear the son’s stealing his glory. Our myths and religious stories are full of narratives in which the son is depicted as the father’s enemy, ever poised to steal his power. The dysfunctional model suggests to men that separation can only be forged through violence and death. Only the man who chooses a healthy model—wherein the father figure, the adult man of integrity, the guide who shelters, protects, and nurtures the son—can gracefully attend the assertion of his own son’s healthy autonomy.

When father figures are healthy, they know when to let go; they can affirm the boy every step of the way. As Thomas Moore declares in his essay about boyhood, “Little Boy Found,” “If the fathers speak to us, we can preserve our golden spirits…. Fathers and sons need each other, for they sustain each other. We need to let our fathers be slow to grow up…. They need to take our childlike foolishness seriously, giving their lives for it, so that we can be fathers ourselves from our place in the sun.” Caring fathers with bold strength and integrity shield the open, tender hearts of their sons, protecting them from patriarchy’s hardhearted assaults.

When men practice integrity, they accept that part of the work of wholeness is learning to be flexible, learning how to negotiate, how to embrace change in thought and action. The ability to critique oneself and change and to hear critique from others is the condition of being that makes us capable of responsibility.

To be able to respond to family and friends, men have to have practice assuming responsibility. This is another component of healthy self-esteem. Nathaniel Brandon equates our capacity to be responsible with our capacity to experience joy, to be personally empowered. This sense of personal agency lets us break with imposed sex roles. This is true freedom and independence:





I am responsible for accepting or choosing the values by which I live. If I live by values I have accepted or adopted passively and unthinkingly, it is easy to imagine that they are just “my nature,” just “who I am,” and to avoid recognizing that choice is involved. If I am willing to recognize that choices and decisions are crucial when values are adopted, then I can take a fresh look at my values, question them, and if necessary revise them. Again, it is taking responsibility that sets me free.





The patriarchal model that tells men that they must be in control at all times is at odds with cultivating the capacity to be responsible, which requires knowing when to control and when to surrender and let go.

Responsible men are capable of self-criticism. If more men were doing the work of self-critique, then they would not be wounded, hurt, or chagrined when critiqued by others, especially women with whom they are intimate. Engaging in self-critique empowers responsible males to admit mistakes. When they have wronged others, they are willing to acknowledge wrongdoing and make amends. When others have wronged them, they are able to forgive. The ability to be forgiving is part of letting go of perfectionism and accepting vulnerability.

At the same time, constructive criticism works only when it is linked to a process of affirmation. Giving affirmation is an act of emotional care. Wounded men are not often able to say anything positive. They are the grump-and-groan guys; cloaked in cynicism, they stand at an emotional distance from themselves and others. Affirmation brings us closer together. It is the highest realization of compassion and empathy with others. One of the negative aspects of antimale feminist critiques of masculinity was the absence of any affirmation of that which is positive and potentially positive in male being. When individuals, including myself, wrote about the necessity of affirming men and identifying them as comrades in struggle, we were often labeled male-identified. The women who attacked us did not understand that it was possible to critique patriarchy without hating men. Indeed, recognizing all the ways that males have been victimized by patriarchy (even though they received rewards) was a way of including men in feminist movement, welcoming their presence and honoring their contribution.

Critical analysis is useful when it promotes growth, but it is never enough. The work of affirmation is what brings us together. When men learn to affirm themselves and others, giving this soul care, then they are on the path to wholeness. When men are able to do little acts of mercy, they can be in communion with others without the need to dominate. No longer separate, no longer apart, they bring a wholeness that can be joined with the wholeness of others. This is interbeing. As whole people they can experience joy. Unlike happiness, joy is a lasting state that can be sustained even when everything is not the way we want it to be. In the essay “Celebrating Life” Jesuit priest Henri Nouwen declares that “where there is joy there is life.” Nouwen left his prestigious professorships at Ivy League schools to work in a community for the mentally handicapped. As spiritual guide and hands-on caretaker, he found his integrity affirmed through the act of serving others. Therapist George Edmond Smith in Walking Proud: Black Men Living beyond the Stereotypes testifies that his psychological growth was enhanced when he began “doing very simple things that are unselfish.” He tells readers that if men “would commit to good and not evil during each waking moment, their lives would change dramatically.”

Men of integrity are not ashamed to serve. They are caretakers, guardians, keepers of the flame. They know joy. I have written in praise of my grandfather, the man who loved me in my childhood consistently and unconditionally, in the memoir of my growing up, Bone Black: “His smells fill my nostrils with the scent of happiness. With him all the broken bits and pieces of my heart come together again.” This is the true meaning of reunion, living the knowledge that the damage can be repaired, that we can be whole again. It is the ultimate fulfillment that comes when men dare to challenge and change patriarchy.





11


Loving Men




Growing up, I knew my father as the strong man who did not talk, who did not show feelings, who did not give time or attention. He was the provider, the protector, the warrior guarding the gate. He was the stranger in the house. We were not allowed to know him, to hear his boyhood stories, to revel in his memories. His life was shrouded in mystery. We searched for him. Standing in front of the photos of him as a young soldier, of him as a boxer, Dad at the pool hall in his glory, Dad on the basketball court. We stood in front of the photo of the all-black infantry unit he served in during World War II. A favorite game of our childhood was to find Dad in the photo, our father, the quintessential patriarch—a man of his times, raised for war.

To write about men and love, I must speak of war. Time and time again we have been told that civilization cannot survive men’s loving, for if men love, they will not be able to kill on command. However, if men were natural-born killers, hardwired by biology and destiny to take life, then there would be no need for patriarchal socialization to turn them into killers. The warrior’s way wounds boys and men; it has been the arrow shot through the heart of their humanity. The warrior’s way has led men in the direction of an impoverishment of spirit so profound that it threatens all life on planet Earth.

Writing about his boyhood and the warrior way, in the essay “My War Story” Shepherd Bliss openly confesses that he is “a child of trauma, a specific kind of trauma—military trauma, war trauma.” Having grown up in the military, become a soldier, then having grown into an advocate of peace, Bliss takes a stand against war and the warrior’s way:





The warrior ethic has damaged us. As we move into the twenty-first century we need to mature beyond war and warriors. I disagree with those men’s movement writers and activists who speak so highly of the warrior. I appreciate some of his traits—like courage, teamwork, loyalty—but the archetype itself is bankrupt at this point in history. We surely need guardians, boundary-setters, husbandmen, and citizens. If we are to survive on this planet, so threatened by war and warriors, we must get beyond the obsolete archetype of the warrior and value images such as the peacemaker, the partner, and the husbandman who cares for the earth and animals.





Even though war is failing as a strategy for sustaining life and creating safety, our nation’s leaders force us into battle, giving new life to the dying patriarchy.

War was in its earliest forms inclusive of women and men. Detailing its history in Blood Rites, Barbara Ehrenreich reminds us that “by assigning the triumphant predator status to males alone, humans have helped themselves to ‘forget’ that nightmarish prehistory in which they were, male and female, prey to larger, stronger animals…. Gender, in other words, is an idea that coincidentally obliterates our common past as prey, and states that the predator status is innate and ‘natural’—at least to men.” Calling attention to the fact that war has been not simply a male occupation but rather “an activity that has often served to define manhood itself,” Ehrenreich argues that “warfare and aggressive masculinity” are mutually reinforcing. The gendered nature of war makes men predators and women prey. We cannot speak of men and love, of love between women and men, without speaking of the need to bring an end to war and all thinking that makes war possible.

The slogan “Make love not war” was popular at that moment in our nation’s history when individual males were most conscious of their need to resist patriarchal masculinity. It is no accident that Daniel Berrigan, imprisoned for antiwar activities, would talk with Thich Nhat Hanh about the need for solidarity, for everyone to learn how to make community. These two men of integrity talk together in The Raft Is Not the Shore about the need for communities of resistance. Thich Nhat Hanh says:





And resistance, at root, I think must mean more than resistance against war. It is a resistance against all kinds of things that are like war. Because living in modern society, one feels that he cannot easily retain integrity, wholeness. One is robbed permanently of humanness, the capacity of being oneself…. So perhaps, first of all, resistance means opposition to being invaded, occupied, assaulted, and destroyed by the system. The purpose of resistance, here, is to seek the healing of yourself in order to be able to see clearly…. Communities of resistance should be places where people can return to themselves more easily, where the conditions are such that they can heal themselves and recover their wholeness.





Berrigan asks that relationships, committed partnerships, be seen as vital communities of resistance.

In dominator cultures most families are not safe places. Dysfunction, intimate terrorism, and violence make them breeding grounds for war. Since we have yet to end patriarchal culture, our struggles to end domination must begin where we live, in the communities we call home. It is there that we experience our power to create revolutions, to make life-transforming change. We already know that men do not have to remain wedded to patriarchy. Individual men have again and again staked a different claim, claiming their rights to life and love. They are beacons of hope embodying the truth that men can love.

If we are to create a culture in which all males can learn to love, we must first reimagine family in all its diverse forms as a place of resistance. We must be willing to see boyhood differently, not as a time when boys are indoctrinated into a manhood that is about violence and death but rather as a time when boys learn to glory in the connection with others, in the revelry and joy of intimacy that is the essential human longing. We should follow the wisdom of Thomas Moore when he calls for nonpatriarchal adoration of the boy:





What a mystery it is to be a boy, so close to death and birth, so uneducated and therefore so fresh and uncynical. We should end our disparagement of the boy, of our own immaturities, of our tardiness in growing up, of our sheer delight in beauty, of our love of the sun, of our vertical inclinations, and of our wanderings and great falls…. We could speak words of encouragement to this boy where we find him—in our friends and students, in our institutions, and in our own hearts. If we do not speak to him in this way, he will be lost, and we will have lost with him, all tenderness and grace.





To create the culture that will enable boys to love, we must see the family as having as its primary function the giving of love (providing food and shelter are loving acts).

Learning how to love in family life, boys (and girls) learn the relational skills needed to build community at home and in the world. Poet Wendell Berry speaks of such a movement as a return to a respect for the innate holiness of all beings:





If we are lucky enough as children to be surrounded by grown-ups who love us, then our sense of wholeness is not just the sense of completeness in ourselves but also is the sense of belonging to others and to our place; it is an unconscious awareness of community, of having in common. It may be that this double sense of singular integrity and of communal belonging is our personal standard of health for as long as we live…we seem to know instinctively that health is not divided.





When our families are functional and not shaped by a dominator model and the patriarchal thinking that comes in its wake, the model of health Berry describes can become the norm.

In such a world boys may think of games that do not center around the causing of pain, the creation of death, but will indeed be forms of play that celebrate life and wholeness. And the individual differences that arise between boys, and between boys and girls, will not need to be interpreted as a cause for domination, for one to rule over the other, but will become occasions for exploration, for the sharing of knowledge and the invention of new ways of being. Loving parents already see that if rigid gender roles are not imposed on boys, they will make their decisions about selfhood in relation to their passions, their longings, their gifts. We cannot honor boys rightly, protecting their emotional lives, without ending patriarchy. To pretend otherwise is to collude with the ongoing soul murder that is enacted in the name of turning boys into men.

Without a doubt there will always be boys who will choose activities that are rambunctious, that call for physical strength and require an element of risk, but there will also be boys who will seek quieter pleasures, who will turn away from risk. There will be boys whose personalities will be somewhere in between these two paradigms. If boys are raised to be empathic and strong; autonomous and connected; responsible to self, to family and friends, and to society; able to make community rooted in a recognition of interbeing, then the solid foundation is present and they will be able to love.

To make this solid foundation, men must set the example by daring to heal, by daring to do the work of relational recovery. Irrespective of their sexual preferences, men in the process of self-recovery usually begin by returning to boyhood and evaluating what they learned about masculinity and how they learned it. Many males find it useful to pinpoint the moments when they realized who they were, what they felt, then suppressed that knowledge because it was displeasing to others. Understanding the roots of male dis-ease helps many men begin the work of repairing the damage. Progressive individual gay men in our nation, particularly those who have resisted patriarchal thinking (who are often labeled “feminine” for being emotionally aware), have been at the forefront of relational recovery. Straight men and patriarchal gay men can learn from them.

Men are on the path to love when they choose to become emotionally aware. Zukav and Francis see this as a process: “Emotional awareness is more than applying techniques to this circumstance or that circumstance. It is a natural expression of an orientation that turns your attention toward the most noble, fulfilling, joyful, and empowering part of yourselves that you can reach for. That is your soul.” Women want men to be more emotionally aware. This is especially so for women who want to be in loving partnerships with men. Yet just as there is a crisis for men, women are experiencing a crisis of faith where men are concerned. The form that crisis takes is despair about the capacity of men to make constructive change, to achieve emotional maturity, to grow up.

The notion that lesbian women are antimale always proves false when groups of women gather and talk about men. The most vicious man-hating comments are always made by women who are with men and who plan to be with them for the rest of their lives. After forty-nine years of marriage, my mother is angry with our dad. The perfect subordinated wife, now when they are both over seventy years in age, is upset that he is not more emotionally giving. Since she is not a feminist, she does not see that it is a contradiction to expect this old-time patriarch to suddenly give her love. Her anger surprises and enrages him. Mama’s anger masks her fear that any day now she could die without ever feeling loved by the man she has devoted her entire life to pleasing. Like the men who feel that patriarchy’s promise has not been fulfilled, Mama feels that she is left with broken promises, without the reward for performing the subordinate role she was told a good woman should perform.

Women who are not feminist, women who support patriarchy, who do not have problems with sexism, share with their feminist, antisexist counterparts the wish that men would be more loving. Shere Hite documented this longing in her massive study Women and Love: A Cultural Revolution In Progress. Her chapter “Loving Men at This Time in History” begins with the observation that “strangely, hauntingly, most women in this study—whether married, single, or divorced, of all ages—say they have not yet found the love they are looking for.” The love women are looking for in relationships with men is one based on mutuality in partnership. Mutuality is different from equality.

Women once believed that men would give us more respect if we showed we were their equals. In a world where gender inequality is for most people an accepted norm, men withhold from women their respect. The root of the word “respect” means “to look at.” Women want to be recognized, seen, and cared about by the men in our lives. We desire respect whether gender equality exists in all areas or not. When a woman and man have promised to give each other love, to be mutually supportive, to bring together care, commitment, knowledge, respect, responsibility, and trust, even if there are circumstances of inequality, no one uses that difference to enforce domination. Love cannot coexist with domination. Love can exist in circumstances where equality is not the order of the day. Inequality, in and of itself, does not breed domination. It can heighten awareness of the need to be more loving.

Many women despair of men because they believe that ultimately men care more about being dominators than they do about being loving partners. They believe this because so many men refuse to make the changes that would make mutual love possible. Women have not proven that they care enough about the hearts of men, about their emotional well-being, to challenge patriarchy on behalf of those men with whom they want to know love. We read self-help books that tell us all the time that we cannot change anyone, and this is a useful truism. It is however equally true that when we give love, real love—not the emotional exchange of I will give you what you want if you give me what I want, but genuine care, commitment, knowledge, responsibility, respect, and trust—it can serve as the seductive catalyst for change. Any woman who supports patriarchy who then claims to either love the men in her life or be frustrated that they do not love her is in a state of denial.

Women who want men to love know that that cannot really happen without a revolution of consciousness where men stop patriarchal thinking and action. Because sexist roles have always given women support for emotional development, it has been easier for women to find our way to love. We do not love better or more than men, but we do find it easier to get in touch with feelings because even patriarchal society supports this trait in us. Men will never receive support from patriarchal culture for their emotional development. But if as enlightened witnesses we offer the men we love (our fathers, brothers, lovers, friends, comrades) affirmation that they can change as well as assurance that we will accept them when they are changed, transformation will not seem as risky.

As individual men have become more aware of the lovelessness in their lives, they have also recognized their longing for love. This recognition does not mean that men know what to do. Importantly, when men love, it changes the nature of their sexuality, both how they think about sex and how they perform sexually. Many men fear learning to love because they cannot imagine a sexuality beyond the patriarchal model. In a world where men love, a focus on eros and eroticism will naturally replace male obsession with sex. All men could have the opportunity to enjoy sexual pleasure, and that includes sexual fantasy, for its own sake and not as a substitute for fantasies of domination or as a way to assert manhood in place of selfhood, were they taught a healthy eroticism.

Often men use perverse sexual fantasy (particularly the consumption of patriarchal pornography) as a hiding place for depression and grief. Patriarchal pornography is the place where men can pretend that the promise of patriarchal power can always be fulfilled. Michael Kimmel explores this aspect of male lust in his essay “Fuel for Fantasy”: “The pornographic utopia is a world of abundance, abandon, and autonomy—a world, in short, utterly unlike the one we inhabit…. Most men don’t feel especially good about themselves, living lives of ‘quiet desperation.’…Pornographic fantasy is a revenge against the real world of men’s lives. To transform those fantasies requires that we also transform that reality.” Transforming the real world men inhabit requires our collective will to dream anew the male body and being as a site of beauty, pleasure, desire, and human possibility. In The Soul of Sex James Hillman declares:





One of the first achievements to be made in the reconciliation of body and spirit, which is a prerequisite for a deepened, soul-filled sexuality, is a rediscovery of the virtue and value of the body’s eroticism…. To find the soul of sex we have to wrench it out of the materialistic and mechanistic body that we have created by means of our modern philosophies and reunite it with the subtle, fantasy-filled, mythologized body of the imagination.





Damaged in that openhearted place where they could imagine freely, men must undergo a healing restoration of the will to imagine before they can break with a model of sexuality that breeds addiction while denying them access to a sexuality that satisfies.

Steve Bearman explains male compulsion for sex as interrupted eros in his essay “Why Men Are So Obsessed with Sex”:





Directly and indirectly, we are handed sexuality as the one vehicle through which it might still be possible to express and experience essential aspects of our humanness that have been slowly and systematically conditioned out of us. Sex was, and is, presented as the road to real intimacy, complete closeness, as the arena in which it is okay to openly love, to be tender and vulnerable and yet remain safe, to not feel so deeply alone. Sex is the one place sensuality seems to be permissible, where we can be gentle with our own bodies and allow ourselves our overflowing passion. Pleasure and desire, vitality and excitement seemingly left behind somewhere we can’t even remember, again become imaginable.





Poignant and powerfully evocative, this is the promise of sexuality within patriarchy, but it is a promise that ultimately can never be fulfilled. Men and boys who embrace it are doomed to be forever yearning, forever in a state of lack.

Bearman makes the point that after being taught to be obsessed with sex via patriarchal conditioning, males are “then subjected to continuous conditioning to repress sensuality, numb feelings, ignore our bodies, and separate from our natural closeness with human beings.” He continues, “All of these human needs are then promised to us by way of sex and sexuality…. But in no way can sex completely fulfill these needs. Such needs can only be fulfilled by healing from the effects of male conditioning and suffusing every area of our lives with relatedness and aliveness.” Suggesting that men resist repression and choose passion as they reclaim their feeling lives, Bearman identifies passion as the “greatest ally” men can choose in their efforts to liberate their complete humanity. The root meaning of the Latin word patior is “to suffer.” To claim passion, men must embrace the pain, feel the suffering, moving through it to the world of pleasure that awaits. This is the heroic journey for men in our times. It is not a journey leading to conquest and domination, to disconnecting and cutting off life; it is a journey of reclamation where the bits and pieces of the self are found and put together again, made whole.

As men work to be whole, sex assumes its rightful place as one pleasure among many pleasures. Unlike addictive patriarchal sex, passion rooted in a life-affirming erotic ethos deepens emotional connection. According to Zukav and Francis:





Loving sexual intimacy…expresses care and appreciation. It is mutual giving, not mutual taking. It is an arena in which individuals nurture each other rather than exploit each other. In loving sexual intimacy, sexual partners are not interchangeable. They are unique in their histories, aptitudes, struggles, and joys. They know each other and care for each other. They empathize. They are interested in each other. They use physical intimacy to deepen their emotional intimacy…. They are committed to growing together.





Individual men who have found their way back to a restored sense of the erotic, to eros as a life force, need to share their bliss with men in general. Bearman tells us:





My vision for myself and for all men is that we reclaim every piece of our humanity that has been denied us by our conditioning. Obsession with sex can be healed when we reclaim all the essential aspects of the human experience that we have learned to manage without: our affinity for one another, caring connections with people of all ages and backgrounds and genders, sensual enjoyment of our bodies, passionate self-expression, exhilarating desire, tender love for ourselves and for another, vulnerability, help with our difficulties, gentle rest, getting and staying close with many people in many kinds of relationships.





Women who love men share this vision.

We yearn for boys and men to find their way to self-love. We yearn for boys and men to move from self-love to healing fellowship with one another. No man who reclaims passion for his life fears the passion in another man. He is not homophobic, for to be so would be a rejection of the self-acceptance and acceptance of others that is essential to the formation and maintenance of self-esteem. If all men were in touch with primal positive passion, the categories of gay and straight would lose their charged significance.

In A Queer Geography Frank Browning makes the useful distinction between gay identity politics, which often closes down connection, and a commitment to eros and eroticism that widens connections:





By erotic, I mean all the powerful attractions we might have: for mentoring and being mentored, for unrealizable flirtation, for intellectual tripping, for sweaty mateship at play or at work, for spiritual ecstasy, for being held in silent grief, for explosive rage at a common enemy, for the sublime love of friendship. All or none of these ways of loving might be connected to the fact that I usually have sex with men because all of these loves can and do happen with both men and women in my life.





Patriarchy has sought to repress and tame erotic passion precisely because of its power to draw us into greater and greater communion with ourselves, with those we know most intimately, and with the stranger.

Feminism changed the intimate lives of women and men by offering to everyone a vision of relationships rooted in mutuality, a vision of partnerships without domination. This seductive promise can be fulfilled only as patriarchal thinking ceases to dominate the consciousness of women and men, girls and boys. Seeking to heal the wounds inflicted by patriarchy, we have to go to the source. We have to look at males directly, eye to eye, and speak the truth that the time has come for males to have a revolution of values. We cannot turn our hearts away from boys and men, then ponder why the politics of war continues to shape our national policy and our intimate romantic lives.

There is a war between the sexes in this nation, between those who believe they are destined to be predators and those they deem prey. Resistance to gender domination has intensified that war. As feminist thinking and practice loses visibility, many females look to patriarchy for their salvation. More than ever before in our nation’s history, females are encouraged to assume the patriarchal mask and bury their emotional selves as deeply as their male counterparts do. Females embrace this paradigm because they feel it is better to be a dominator than to be dominated. However, this is a perverse vision of gender equality that offers women equal access to the house of the dead. In that house there will be no love.

Most women have yet to collectively embrace the alternative theories and practices visionary thinkers—female and male but especially feminists—have offered to heal our wounded hearts and our suffering planet. Unlike most men, most women are taught relational skills. It is clear though that more often than not women have used those skills in the service of domination, of patriarchy, and not in the quest for freedom or love. Acknowledging this fact, we see that most women are not any more advanced than men as a group. In both groups individuals are seeking salvation, seeking wholeness, daring to be radical and revolutionary, but for the most part the great majority of folk are still uncertain about taking the path that will end gender warfare and make love possible. While it is evident that many men are not as willing to explore and follow the path that leads to self-recovery as are women, we cannot journey far if men are left behind. They wield too much power to be simply ignored or forgotten. Those of us who love men do not want to continue our journey without them. We need them beside us because we love them.

I share with Terrence Real the vision of relational recovery, which invites men who have been outside the circle of love to return. The male journey to love will never be easy or simple in patriarchal culture. Like women who have navigated difficult terrain to open our hearts, to find love, men need consciousness raising, support groups, therapy, education. Emotionally starved and shut down, males, sick with the pain of lovelessness, need loved ones to do positive interventions like those we are encouraged to make when addiction to substances is the issue. As Real states, “It is a tough antirelational world out there. The old terms have been with us for a very long time. We should expect to get caught up in them sometimes, losing our way. That’s when help from those who know and love us is essential.” Men seeking help often find it difficult to find support. We ask them to change without creating a culture of change to affirm and assist them.

Time and time again when I struggled to do the work of love with a male partner who was not changing, I was told to give up on him, to kick him to the curb. I was told I was wasting my time. All this negative feedback made me ponder whether healing places exist where wounded males can go where they will not be turned away, especially when positive change is not happening fast or fast enough. Women who have been victimized by men, women who have suffered ongoing hurt at the hands of men, naturally are wisely cautious about the energy that they can expend in the service of helping men heal. Yet there are many women who have been both helped and hurt by men. Kay Leigh Hagan testifies that the good men in her life have ruined her for man hating:





For both men and women, Good Men can be somewhat disturbing to be around because they usually do not act in ways associated with typical men; they listen more than they talk; they self-reflect on their behavior and motives, they actively educate themselves about women’s reality by seeking out women’s culture and listening to women…. They avoid using women for vicarious emotional expression…. When they err—and they do err—they look to women for guidance, and receive criticism with gratitude. They practice enduring uncertainty while waiting for a new way of being to reveal previously unconsidered alternatives to controlling and abusive behavior. They intervene in other men’s misogynist behavior, even when women are not present, and they work hard to recognize and challenge their own. Perhaps most amazingly, Good Men perceive the value of a feminist practice for themselves, and they advocate it not because it’s politically correct, or because they want women to like them, or even because they want women to have equality, but because they understand that male privilege prevents them not only from becoming whole, authentic human beings but also from knowing the truth about the world…. They offer proof that men can change.





Men like this are our true comrades in struggle. Their presence in my life sustains my hope.

Men in pain, in crisis, are calling out. If they were not calling out, we would not know that they were suffering. As we listen to their stories, we hear that they want to be well and that they do not know what to do. Based on a true story, the film Antwone Fisher chronicles one man’s search for a path to healing. Fisher’s poem “Who Will Cry for the Little Boy?” gives voice to the suffering that wounded man can no longer hide. We show our love for maleness, for men, by working to heal the wounds of men who suffer and those of us who bear witness with them. Many of us have lived the truth that recognizing the ways we are wounded is often a simpler process than finding and sustaining a practice of healing. We live in a culture where it has been accepted and even encouraged that women wholeheartedly stand by men when they are doing the work of destruction. Yet we have yet to create a world that asks us to stand by a man when he is seeking healing, when he is seeking recovery, when he is working to be a creator.

The work of male relational recovery, of reconnection, of forming intimacy and making community can never be done alone. In a world where boys and men are daily losing their way we must create guides, signposts, new paths. A culture of healing that empowers males to change is in the making. Healing does not take place in isolation. Men who love and men who long to love know this. We need to stand by them, with open hearts and open arms. We need to stand ready to hold them, offering a love that can shelter their wounded spirits as they seek to find their way home, as they exercise the will to change.






NOTE TO THE READER


The word “earth” appears often in the pages that follow. Today many writers choose to capitalize this term whenever it appears. Such a gesture feels overly facile to me, since it leads us to imagine we are respecting this wild planet, and according it appropriate honor, simply by capitalizing its name. In this work I have generally chosen to keep the term in lower case, in order to remember that the earth is not just the round sphere in its entirety but also—first and foremost—the humble ground beneath our feet, the winds gusting around us, and the local waters flowing through us.

Nonetheless, in a few instances I have found it necessary to capitalize Earth. Such capitalization indicates less a shift in meaning than in tone, occurring only at those moments when a certain emphasis is called for, or when a sort of astonishment breaks through the calm surface of the text. At one point in this volume, even the spelling of the name alters, becoming Eairth. If you find yourself perplexed by such variation, unable to discern any clear logic behind it, my apologies: rest assured that it follows a rhyme and reason perfectly evident to the author.





INTRODUCTION

Between the Body and the Breathing Earth


Owning up to being an animal, a creature of earth. Tuning our animal senses to the sensible terrain: blending our skin with the rain-rippled surface of rivers, mingling our ears with the thunder and the thrumming of frogs, and our eyes with the molten sky. Feeling the polyrhythmic pulse of this place—this huge windswept body of water and stone. This vexed being in whose flesh we’re entangled.

Becoming earth. Becoming animal. Becoming, in this manner, fully human.



This is a book about becoming a two-legged animal, entirely a part of the animate world whose life swells within and unfolds all around us. It seeks a new way of speaking, one that enacts our interbeing with the earth rather than blinding us to it. A language that stirs a new humility in relation to other earthborn beings, whether spiders or obsidian outcrops or spruce limbs bent low by the clumped snow. A style of speech that opens our senses to the sensuous in all its multiform strangeness.

The chapters that follow strive to discern and perhaps to practice a curious kind of thought, a way of careful reflection that no longer tears us out of the world of direct experience in order to represent it, but that binds us ever more deeply into the thick of that world. A way of thinking enacted as much by the body as by the mind, informed by the humid air and the soil and the quality of our breathing, by the intensity of our contact with the other bodies that surround.

Yet words are human artifacts, are they not? Surely to speak, or to think in words, is necessarily to step back from the world’s presence into a purely human sphere of reflection? Such, precisely, has been our civilized assumption. But what if meaningful speech is not an exclusively human possession? What if the very language we now speak arose first in response to an animate, expressive world—as a stuttering reply not just to others of our species but to an enigmatic cosmos that already spoke to us in a myriad of tongues?

What if thought is not born within the human skull, but is a creativity proper to the body as a whole, arising spontaneously from the slippage between an organism and the folding terrain that it wanders? What if the curious curve of thought is engendered by the difficult eros and tension between our flesh and the flesh of the earth?



Is it possible to grow a worthy cosmology by attending closely to our encounters with other creatures, and with the elemental textures and contours of our locale? We are by now so accustomed to the cult of expertise that the very notion of honoring and paying heed to our directly felt experience of things—of insects and wooden floors, of broken-down cars and bird-pecked apples and the scents rising from the soil—seems odd and somewhat misguided as a way to find out what’s worth knowing. According to assumptions long held by the civilization in which I’ve been raised, the deepest truth of things is concealed behind the appearances, in dimensions inaccessible to our senses. A thousand years ago these dimensions were viewed in spiritual terms: the sensuous world was a fallen, derivative reality that could be understood only by reference to heavenly realms hidden beyond the stars. Since the powers residing in such realms were concealed from common perception, they had to be mediated for the general populace by priests, who might intercede with those celestial agencies on our behalf.

In recent centuries, an abundance of discoveries and remarkable inventions have transformed this culture’s general conception of things—and yet the basic disparagement of sensuous reality remains. Like an old, collective habit very difficult to kick, the directly sensed world is still explained by reference to realms hidden beyond our immediate experience. Such a realm, for example, is the microscopic domain of axons and dendrites, and neurotransmitters washing across neuronal synapses—a dimension entirely concealed from direct apprehension, yet which presumably precipitates, or gives rise to, every aspect of our experience. Another such dimension is the recondite realm hidden within the nuclei of our cells, wherein reside the intricately folding strands of DNA and RNA that ostensibly code and perhaps even “cause” the behavior of living things. Alternatively, the deepest source and truth of the apparent world is sometimes held to exist in the subatomic realm of quarks, mesons, and gluons (or the still more theoretical world of vibrating ten-dimensional strings); or perhaps in the initial breaking of symmetries in the cosmological “big bang,” an event almost inconceivably distant in time and space.

Every one of these arcane dimensions radically transcends the reach of our unaided senses. Since we have no ordinary experience of these realms, the essential truths to be found there must be mediated for us by experts, by those who have access to the high-powered instruments and the inordinately expensive technologies (the electron microscopes, functional MRI scanners, radio telescopes, and supercolliders) that might offer a momentary glimpse into these dimensions. Here, as before, the sensuous world—the creaturely world directly encountered by our animal senses—is commonly assumed to be a secondary, derivative reality understood only by reference to more primary domains that exist elsewhere, behind the scenes.

I do not deny the importance of those other scales or dimensions, nor the value of the various truths that may be found there. I deny only that this shadowed, earthly world of deer tracks and moss is somehow less worthy, less REAL, than those abstract dimensions. It is more palpable to my skin, more substantial to my flaring nostrils, more precious—infinitely more precious—to the heart drumming within my chest.

This directly experienced terrain, rippling with cricket rhythms and scoured by the tides, is the very realm now most ravaged by the spreading consequences of our disregard. Many long-standing and lousy habits have enabled our callous treatment of surrounding nature, empowering us to clear-cut, dam up, mine, develop, poison, or simply destroy so much of what quietly sustains us. Yet few are as deep-rooted and damaging as the habitual tendency to view the sensuous earth as a subordinate space—whether as a sinful plane, riddled with temptation, needing to be transcended and left behind; or a menacing region needing to be beaten and bent to our will; or simply a vaguely disturbing dimension to be avoided, superseded, and explained away.

Corporeal life is indeed difficult. To identify with the sheer physicality of one’s flesh may well seem lunatic. The body is an imperfect and breakable entity vulnerable to a thousand and one insults—to scars and the scorn of others, to disease, decay, and death. And the material world that our body inhabits is hardly a gentle place. The shuddering beauty of this biosphere is bristling with thorns: generosity and abundance often seem scant ingredients compared with the prevalence of predation, sudden pain, and racking loss. Carnally embedded in the depths of this cacophonous profusion of forms, we commonly can’t even predict just what’s lurking behind the near boulder, let alone get enough distance to fathom and figure out all the workings of this world. We simply can’t get it under our control. We’ve lost hearing in one ear; the other rings like a fallen spoon. Our spouse falls in love with someone else, while our young child comes down with a bone-rattling fever that no doctor seems able to diagnose. There are things out and about that can eat us, and ultimately will. Small wonder, then, that we prefer to abstract ourselves whenever we can, imagining ourselves into theoretical spaces less fraught with insecurity, conjuring dimensions more amenable to calculation and control. We slip blissfully into machine-mediated scapes, offering ourselves up to any technology that promises to enhance the humdrum capacities of our given flesh. And sure, now and then we’ll engage this earthen world as well, as long we know that it’s not ultimate, as long as we’re convinced that we’re not stuck here.

Even among ecologists and environmental activists, there’s a tacit sense that we’d better not let our awareness come too close to our creaturely sensations, that we’d best keep our arguments girded with statistics and our thoughts buttressed with abstractions, lest we succumb to an overwhelming grief—a heartache born of our organism’s instinctive empathy with the living land and its cascading losses. Lest we be bowled over and broken by our dismay at the relentless devastation of the biosphere.

Thus do we shelter ourselves from the harrowing vulnerability of bodied existence. But by the same gesture we also insulate ourselves from the deepest wellsprings of joy. We cut our lives off from the necessary nourishment of contact and interchange with other shapes of life, from antlered and loop-tailed and amber-eyed beings whose resplendent weirdness loosens our imaginations, from the droning of bees and the gurgling night chorus of the frogs and the morning mist rising like a crowd of ghosts off the weedlot. We seal ourselves off from the erotic warmth of a cello’s voice, or from the tilting dance of construction cranes against a downtown sky overbursting with blue. From the errant hummingbird pulsing in our cupped hands as we ferry it back out the door, and the crimson flash as it zooms from our fingers.

For too long we’ve closed ourselves to the participatory life of our senses, inured ourselves to the felt intelligence of our muscled flesh and its manifold solidarities. We’ve taken our primary truths from technologies that hold the world at a distance. Such tools can be mighty useful, and beneficial as well, as long as the insights that they yield are carried carefully back to the lived world, and placed in service to the more-than-human matrix of corporeal encounter and experience. But technology can also, and easily, be used as a way to avoid direct encounter, as a shield—etched with lines of code or cryptic jargon—to ward off whatever frightens, as a synthetic heaven or haven in which to hide out from the distressing ambiguity of the real.

Only by welcoming uncertainty from the get-go can we acclimate ourselves to the shattering wonder that enfolds us. This animal body, for all its susceptibility and vertigo, remains the primary instrument of all our knowing, as the capricious earth remains our primary cosmos.



I have no intention with this work to offer a definitive statement, much less a comprehensive one. The complicated and often terrifying problems arising at this moment of the earth’s unfolding entail the widest possible range of responses, to which every one of us must lend our specific gifts. I’ve written this book, a spiraling series of experimental and improvisational forays, in hopes that others will try my findings against their own experience, correcting or contesting my discoveries with their own.

This venture will start slowly, gathering energy as it moves. Simple encounters from my own life—encounters unexpected and serendipitous—will provide a loose, structuring frame for each investigation that follows. The early chapters take up several ordinary, taken-for-granted aspects of the perceived world—shadows, houses, gravity, stones, visual depth—drawing near to each phenomenon in order to notice the way it engages not our intellect but our sensing and sentient body. Later chapters delve into more complex powers—like mind, mood, and language—that variously influence and organize our experience of the perceptual field. The final chapters step directly into the natural magic of perception itself, exploring the willed alteration of our senses and the wild transformation of the sensuous, addressing magic and shapeshifting and the metamorphosis of culture.

Many of our inherited concepts (our ready definitions and explanations) serve to isolate our intelligence from the intimacy of our creaturely encounter with the strangeness of things. In these pages we’ll listen close to the things themselves, allowing weather patterns and moose and precipitous cliffs their own otherness. We’ll pay attention to their unique manner of showing themselves, attuning ourselves to those facets that have been eclipsed by accepted styles of thinking. Can we find fresh ways to elucidate these earthly phenomena, forms of articulation that free the things from their conceptual straitjackets, enabling them to stretch their limbs and begin to breathe?

The early explorations in this book will soon lead us up against some basic cultural assumptions, forcing us to ruminate a range of reflective questions regarding bodies, materiality, and the language of the sciences, as well as the manner in which our words affect the ongoing life of our animal senses. Such discussions will leave us freer to dance in the later chapters, able to follow our investigations wherever they lead.



Some might claim that this is a book of solitudes. For I’ve chosen to concentrate upon those moments in a day or a life when one slips provisionally beneath the societal surge of forces, those occasions (often unverbalized and hence overlooked) when one comes more directly into felt relation with the wider, more-than-human community of beings that surrounds and sustains the human hubbub. Awakening to citizenship in this broader commonwealth, however, has real ramifications for how we humans get along with one another. It carries substantial consequences for the way a genuine democracy shapes itself—for the way that our body politic breathes.

Why, then, is so little attention paid to the social or political spheres within these pages? Because there’s a necessary work of recuperation to be accomplished (or at least opened and gotten well under way) before those spheres can be disclosed afresh, and this book is engaged in that work of recuperation. A replenished participation in the human collective, forging new forms of place-based community and planetary solidarity, along with a commitment to justice and the often exasperating work of politics—these, too, are necessary elements in the process, and they compose a vital part of my own practice. But they are not the primary focus of this volume.Ω



Writing is a curious endeavor, swerving from moments of splendid delirium into others of stunned puzzlement, and from there into stretches of calm, focused craft. The writing down of words is a relatively recent practice for the human animal. We two-leggeds have long been creatures of language, of course, but verbal language lived first in the shaped breath of utterance, it laughed and stuttered on the tongue long before it lay down on the page, and longer still before it arrayed itself in rows across the glowing screen.

While persons brought up within literate culture often speak about the natural world, indigenous, oral peoples sometimes speak directly to that world, acknowledging certain animals, plants, and even landforms as expressive subjects with whom they might find themselves in conversation. Obviously these other beings do not speak with a human tongue; they do not speak in words. They may speak in song, like many birds, or in rhythm, like the crickets and the ocean waves. They may speak a language of movements and gestures, or articulate themselves in shifting shadows. Among many native peoples, such forms of expressive speech are assumed to be as communicative, in their own way, as the more verbal discourse of our species (which after all can also be thought of as a kind of vocal gesticulation, or even as a sort of singing). Language, for traditionally oral peoples, is not a specifically human possession, but is a property of the animate earth, in which we humans participate.

Oral language gusts through us—our sounded phrases borne by the same air that nourishes the cedars and swells the cumulus clouds. Laid out and immobilized on the flat surface, our words tend to forget that they are sustained by this windswept earth; they begin to imagine that their primary task is to provide a representation of the world (as though they were outside of, and not really a part of, this world). Nonetheless, the power of language remains, first and foremost, a way of singing oneself into contact with others and with the cosmos—a way of bridging the silence between oneself and another person, or a startled black bear, or the crescent moon soaring like a billowed sail above the roof. Whether sounded on the tongue, printed on the page, or shimmering on the screen, language’s primary gift is not to re-present the world around us, but to call ourselves into the vital presence of that world—and into deep and attentive presence with one another.

This ancestral capacity of speech necessarily underlies and supports all the other roles that language has come to have. Whether we wield our words to describe a landscape, to analyze a problem, or to explain how some gadget works, none of these roles would be possible without the primordial power of utterance to make our bodies resonate with one another and with the other rhythms that surround us. The autumn bugling of the elk does this, too, and the echoed honks of geese vee-ing south for the winter. This tonal layer of meaning—the stratum of spontaneous, bodily expression that oral cultures steadily deploy, and that literate culture all too easily forgets—is the very dimension of language that we two-leggeds share in common with other animals. We share it, as well, with the mutter and moan of the wind through the winter branches outside my studio. In the spring the buds on those branches will unfurl new leaves, and by summer the wind will speak with a thousand green tongues as it rushes through those same trees, releasing a chorus of rustles and whispers and loudly swelling rattles very different from the low, plaintive sighs of winter. And all those chattering leaves will feed my thoughts as I sit by the open door, next summer, scribbling and pondering.

These pages, too, are nothing other than talking leaves—their insights stirred by the winds, their vitality reliant on periodic sunlight and on cool, dark water seeping up from within the ground. Step into their shade. Listen close. Something other than the human mind is at play here.


Ω The phrase that titles this book, “becoming animal,” carries a range of possible meanings. In this work the phrase speaks first and foremost to the matter of becoming more deeply human by acknowledging, affirming, and growing into our animality. Other meanings will gradually make themselves evident to different readers. The phrase is sometimes associated with the late-twentieth-century writings of the French philosopher Gilles Deleuze (1925–1995) and his collaborator, the psychoanalyst Félix Guattari (1930–1992). Like many other philosophers, I have drawn much pleasure from Deleuze’s endlessly fecund writings, which are fairly brimming with fresh trajectories for thought to follow. We share several aims, including a wish to undermine an array of unnoticed, other-worldly assumptions that structure a great deal of contemporary thought, and a consequent commitment to a kind of radical immanence—even to materialism (or what I might call “matter-realism”) in a dramatically reconceived sense of the term. My work also shares with his a keen resistance to whatever unnecessarily impedes the erotic creativity of matter.

Despite the commonality of some aims, however, our strategies are drastically different. (One of my meanders through the backcountry will sometimes cross one of Deleuze’s lines of flight at an oblique angle, but our improvised trajectories are rarely, if ever, parallel.) As a phenomenologist, I am far too taken with lived experience—with the felt encounter between our sensate body and the animate earth—to suit his philosophical taste. As a metaphysician, Deleuze is far too given to the production of abstract concepts to suit mine. By choosing for my title a phrase sometimes associated with Deleuze’s writing, I nonetheless find myself paying homage to the burgeoning creativity of his work, even as I hope to open the phrase to new meanings and associations.





SHADOW

(Depth Ecology I)


Brushing past spruce boughs and ducking the low, brittle limbs of firs, you are walking south along a faint deer trail when it enters a grove of whispering aspens—tall, sun-dappled trunks like elegant giraffe necks leaning this way and that, their heads hidden among the leaves. Your legs carry you upslope through darker, needled limbs and then down as the trail opens abruptly onto the eastern shore of a mountain lake. Keep walking. To your right, the skin of the tarn ripples with a dazzle of sunlight, suffusing the air with reflected rays like an army of swords flourished aloft, their gleams passing through one another, cleaving the depth between you and the rock-ridged slopes rising from the opposite shore. So it’s hard to see clearly the grand mountain toward which those ridges ascend, or the trees clustered on those slopes; your eyes feel only a vague intimation of green behind the exultation of light.

The cry of a red-tail hawk echoes off the rock faces—then just the gleaming silence. The silence is not perfect; now and then the faint, papery rattle of a dragonfly sounds near the lake’s surface. There’s also a suspicion of leaves scattered and rocking on the water, though your eyes can hardly focus on them among all the shifting rays.

To the left, however, your gaze easily marshals itself; here the spruce trunks are etched by the sun streaming through the needles, the bark illumined so crisply that you can feel the texture of the scabbed and shingled surfaces, and so your eyes move among the trunks, translating the patterned light into tactile sensations that ride along your skin.

The afternoon light, like the aspen leaves, is slowly deepening into gold, and soon there’s a gilt edge to the grasses and the stones underfoot. Mosquitoes dance above the water, and bees swerve past, drawn to the color of your shirt or the scent of your sweat as you make your way past broad rocks that’ve been drinking the sun all afternoon. Keep hiking. This air thick with light is an enveloping spell, a trance into which the whole place has now fallen, a viscous state of mind shared by you and the spruces and the bees in this honeyed moment.

And then something shifts: a chill breeze against your face draws you to a different awareness. A swift glance around reveals that the sun is now perched, like a kingfisher, upon the high ridge of the mountain. Stillness everywhere, as though the world itself teeters on the edge; a great transformation is afoot. The breeze stirs … and falls silent. Everyone—the dragonflies, the dangling needles, the stones and boulders scattered along the shore—every entity seems to hold its breath. The radiant eye of the kingfisher still watches, but its stare is steadily growing less intense. Everything waits upon the quiet metamorphosis now spreading toward you from across the lake. The sun’s gaze grows fainter still; soon it’s possible to stare back at it without wincing, as it slowly slips behind the ridge. A final glare, a flaring gleam between two trees silhouetted on that ridge—and then the sun is gone.

Cooler now, to be sure. But not just cooler—there’s a new texture to the air, a moistness: water suspended in the medium, unseen, though you can feel its presence as the air washes against your face in waves. And riding those waves, vaguely enticing at first, then too pleasureful to resist: smells! Dark, stygian smells gliding over the rippled glass of the lake to mingle with the aromatic dank of the soil underfoot and the high-pitched scent of the green needles, and a faintly fermented fragrance prying open your nostrils (the recent scat of some creature still steaming in the near woods). There’s also the musty decay of a collapsed trunk, and the darkly laughing scent of cool water lapping up against the shore (infused with the chemistry of tadpoles and trout and the tannin of drowned leaves), and a host of other whiffs sometimes merged and sometimes distinct, all sparkling like wine in some part of your brain that had earlier been rocked to sleep by the soporific dazzle of sunbeams, but has now been startled into attentive life by this more full-blooded magic, as though your mammalian intelligence has abruptly dropped anchor and suddenly found itself really here, bodily afoot in these damp woods.

That celestial daze you’d been drifting in has receded to the far periphery of your awareness, the last trace of those ethereal phantasms fading before the robust breath of these deeper colors and obscene odors—chthonic powers whose pungency echoes the sweat and strength of your legs as they push, one after the other, against the ground. In company with the clumped grasses and the frogs, you have crossed a threshold whose influence, although unacknowledged in the current era, remains as potent as ever. And so you have slipped into a different realm, a different mindscape.

You have entered the country of shadow. And a vast and brooding presence that had been hiding, moments earlier, behind the gauze of light is now slowly walking toward you through the clarified air. It is the breathing body of the mountain itself.



One of the marks of our obliviousness, one of the countless signs that our thinking minds have grown estranged from the intelligence of our sensing bodies, is that today a great many people seem to believe that shadows are flat. If I am strolling along a street on a cloudless afternoon and I notice a shapeshifting patch of darkness accompanying me as I walk, splayed out on the road perpendicular to my upright self, its appendages stretching and shrinking with the swinging of my limbs, I instantly identify this horizontal swath as my shadow. As though a shadow was merely this flatness, this kinetic pancake, this creature of two dimensions whom one might peel off the street and drape over the nearest telephone wire.

We identify our shadow, in other words, with that visible shape we see projected on the pavement or the whitewashed wall. Since what we glimpse there is a being without depth, we naturally assume that shadows themselves are basically flat—and if we are asked, by a curious child, about the life of shadows we are apt to reply that their lives exist only in two dimensions.

Suppose, however, that on that same afternoon a bumblebee is making its way from a clutch of clover blossoms on one side of the road to another cluster of blooms in an overgrown weedlot across the street, and that as it does so the bee happens to pass between me and the flat shape that my body casts upon the pavement. The sunlit bee buzzes toward me, streaking like an erratic, drunken comet against the asphalt sky, and then it crosses an unseen boundary in the air: instantly its glow dims, the sun is no longer upon it—it has moved into a precisely bounded zone of darkness that floats between my opaque flesh and that vaguely humanoid silhouette laid out upon the pavement—until a moment later the bee buzzes out the opposite side of that zone and emerges back into the day’s radiance.

Although it was zipping along several feet above the street, the bumblebee had passed into and out of my real shadow. Its visible trajectory—gleaming, then muted, then gleaming again—shows that my actual shadow is an enigma more substantial than that flat shape on the paved ground. That silhouette is only my shadow’s outermost surface. The actual shadow does not reside primarily on the ground; it is a voluminous being of thickness and depth, a mostly unseen presence that dwells in the air between my body and that ground. The dusky shape on the asphalt touches me only at my feet, and hence seems largely separate from me, even independent of me—a kind of doppelganger. The apparent gap between myself and that flat swath of darkness is what prompts me, now and then, to accept its invitation to dance, the two of us then strutting and ducking in an improvised pas de deux wherein it’s never very clear which one of us is leading and which is following. It is now obvious, however, that that shape slinking along on the pavement is merely the outermost edge of a thick volume of shade, an umbral depth that extends from the pavement right on up to my knees, torso, and head—a shadow touching me not just at my feet, but at every point of my person.

This living shadow is born afresh every dawn, or rather, the shadow is what remains of the night as the night’s gloom flees the advance of the rising sun. Visiting a friend’s home in the outer suburbs of a large city, I stand at dawn in his yard, patient and still like the trees across the road. Facing away from the sunrise, I see that as the night slips away it leaves behind a slender part of itself, a splinter of dusk reaching from my body to the western horizon—a piece of night that slowly detaches from the mother darkness, gradually gathering itself toward the spot where I stand. This shard of residual night draws in closer to me throughout the morning—its visible edge on the ground slowly congealing, its limbs widening—until I can see by its proportions that it is a clear echo of myself. We mimic one another’s movements across the umbral realm that stretches between us. All around me I glimpse other leftover slivers of the night gathering themselves toward other standing bodies—toward trees and telephone poles, toward houses and hydrants and a momentarily pensive squirrel. I continue standing as cars pass and children play. A flock of starlings alight on a telephone wire, whistling and rattling, then move on. Toward noon, I notice that my shadow seems to be seeping into my flesh; by midday it has been almost entirely absorbed through the pores of my skin, and—apart from a smidgen of shade on my northern flank—is nowhere to be seen. The winged insects in the bright air lose nothing of their sunlit radiance as they hum or flutter past. The shadow, my personal night, has been enfolded within me, become indistinguishable from me.

Do we notice this? Do we feel somehow different at high noon, when the darkness has seeped into us? Do we feel the weight of our own shadow, the press of its difficult knowledge against the inside of our torso and skull? Is it the shadow itself that looks out through our eyes at midday? Small wonder that so many traditional peoples give themselves over to siesta, and sleep, for an hour or two at this time, letting their tissues and organs respond to this interior visitation by the night, allowing the many cells or souls within them to be tutored by the darkness that has taken temporary refuge within their flesh. But I will not let myself succumb—not now, for I am waiting to glimpse the night-fragments as they begin to leak out from the trees and from the neighbor’s half-repaired motorcycle poised upside down on the ground. I am waiting to feel the quiet release as my shadow slips the confines of my skin and slides its fingers, ever so gently, into the afternoon air.

Ahhh, there. One cheek seems cooler. I look down. On that same side, my body now offers shade to eight or ten blades of grass, and to a beetle swaying near the top of one of those blades, its antennae sweeping the breeze, tasting the microclimate. Within a few moments, four further blades have stepped within the shadow. Then several more.

No longer am I so thoroughly under the scrutiny of the sun. Released from the insistent gaze pouring down from the sky, my left hand flexes and scratches the skin above my knee. The dark reflection on the ground—which I will call my shadowflection—does not register this exchange, which takes place entirely within the bounded volume of my fuller shadow. Slowly, almost imperceptibly, the shadowflection is extending along the ground, as the triangular zone of shelter emanating from my body deepens, lengthens, never violating its Pythagorean proportions, expanding imperceptibly toward the eastern horizon.

I step inside the house to prepare some food—slicing a ripe tomato, interlacing the slices with fresh mozzarella cheese, dribbling olive oil on top to hold the ground pepper that finally falls like darkened snow. The flavors intersect, burst, and blend into one another. Afterward I record the results of my morning’s experiment. Several hours later, I walk outside to ponder my shadowflection: a slender giant of a man, honed like a sword, lies prone in the golden light. As the sun sinks behind me, he elongates still further, his shoulders narrowing, his head climbing the wall of a far-off house. And then it has become birdlight—all the wingeds calling and chattering as the giant’s contours become blurred, indistinct, granting his penumbral powers to the dusk and the oncoming night.

Has my shadow now dissolved and dissipated? Or is it still present but hidden, swallowed within the wider shade of evening? Or is the evening itself nothing other than a garment woven from all our disparate shadows, from those separate darknesses that walk on their own during the day, yet gather themselves into a common thickness as the sun slides behind the hills? So that our individual shadow, as we have said, is our own private patch of night, torn from the black cloak every morning as we stumble out to greet the day?

For the moment, let’s venture simply this: the shadow, this elegant enigma, is always with us. Whether at high noon or at midnight, whether it stands quiet within our skin or envelops us as our milieu, the shadow is an inescapable consequence of our physicality—a disruption of the sun’s dominion, a disturbing power that we hold in common with boulders and storm clouds and the corpses of crashed airplanes. There do exist a few members of the bodily community that thrive without the dark companionship of shadows—the various winds, for example, or the pane of glass newly set within the window frame. But for most of us material beings, the shadow is a part of our makeup. Our clearest thoughts are those that know this—those that remember their real parentage in both light and shadow, fire and sleep.



Gloop! The mouth of a trout breaks the near surface of the pond, snatching a fly and sinking back into the green depths. Ripples radiate out from that intersection of worlds, jostling the water striders and a few floating leaves. Stepping close to the edge, you peer through the murk to glimpse any fish that might be visible. A twig snaps under your foot, followed by a faint thump-thump, thump-thump of hooves bounding off into the needled distance. It’s a vibration more felt in your torso than heard by your ears. You walk more carefully now, glancing down to avoid the exposed roots and the angled, haphazard rocks with pointillist black and crinkly orange lichens spreading across their mottled facets. Cool air laced with amphibious exhalations slides down the back of your throat; the scent of beaver-gnawed saplings seeps up into your brain. Another trout breaks the surface. The water striders rock back and forth on the undulations.

Earlier the sun was gazing down upon this world, its warmth meeting the inner flame of the grasses, its beams ricocheting off the cliffs and the shifting mirror of the lake. Everything here stood in relation to that white fire as you walked in the dazzle of the gleams, your thoughts lured aloft by the royal request pouring down from the sky. But now that celestial imperative has withdrawn behind the mountain, and each thing’s attention seems wholly taken by the life that surrounds it: a spider sussing the breeze that’s billowing her web, waiting for a more abrupt tug; the stones hunkering close to the soil; the wind licking the water as it glides over the lake, sliding under roots and through striated furrows in the bark of these trunks, while needles comb the invisible rush. Eyes inhale colors, and your body responds to the pigments of lichen and fungi and cliff with your own ruddy colors, with the hue of your skin and your sweat-stained shirt, the dark undertones in your matted hair. For there is an intimacy here that includes you. It is a commonality that you really notice only when you turn your eyes skyward; high overhead, two ducks flapping southward, their feathers agleam in the golden light, are clearly of another world. They fly in the full gaze of the sun. You realize then that the convivial intimacy of this shadowed world does not extend infinitely upward. It is a bounded realm, a zone that breaks off at some distance overhead, where the sunlight spills over the mountain ridge and illuminates the upper air.

Down here, however, we dwell in a different medium: the coolness and clarity of shadow. A shared influence is apparent among the many beings of this bounded realm. The manner in which colors, sounds, and tastes all step forward into your presence, the way these robust qualities confer and converse with your body—informing your limbs, for instance, about the waterlogged branches that now dream at the bottom of the lake—all this is a gift afforded by the sheltering shade of the mountain. It is that hulking presence, the many-folded mountain rising in wooded slopes and cliffed ridges from the far shore of the lake, scraped by glaciers and worn down by the winds, laden with ice in its high concavities and layered with stories along every rock slide and precipice—it is the mountain that lends its gregarious power to the multiple elements of this place. Whether or not you notice its active influence, it is the mountain that defines the mood of this moment where you stand.

To step into the shadow of this mountain is to step directly under the mountain’s influence, letting it untangle your senses as the rhythm of your breath adjusts to its breathing, to the style of its weather. To step into its shadow is to become a part, if only for this moment, of the mountain’s life. Just as shadows are not flat shapes projected upon the ground (but rather dense and voluminous spaces), neither are they measurable quantities, mere consequences of sunlight and its interruption. Shadows are qualitative attributes of the bodies that secrete them. They are time-dependent realms that change their contours with the hour and the season, momentary life zones where the shadow-casting mountain or boulder or body quietly envelops and gathers a range of other bodies under its sway. The shadow is a bounded space and time wherein the mountain is free to spread out of itself, making itself felt in all its unadorned frankness, drawing a cluster of other entities and elements into a common neighborhood—a zone of alliances and reciprocities enabled by the quiet shelter of the mountain’s shade. The power of the shadow is like the action of a benevolent monarch who sets aside the gilt robe that he displays every day to the eyes of the world, donning some drab clothes and slipping out the back door of the palace to wander in the surrounding neighborhood as his own honest, simple self. Despite his humble garb the commoners sense his charisma, fall under the orbit of his royal bearing, and hence a new camaraderie, if only for a few hours, emerges among them. To find oneself in the shadow of a mountain is to abruptly find oneself exposed to the private life of the mountain, to feel its huge and manifold influence on the local world that lies beneath it, to enter the gravitational power of its intelligence, a sagacity no longer dissolved in the dazzling radiance of the sun.

Yet the shadows of late afternoon are very different from those of early morning; the mood, the mode of awareness, the qualities imparted are richly different. Now, for instance, the breeze is dying down, and an ephemeral mist is gathering just above the lake’s surface: wisps of vapor hover and drift like spirits. The silence is deeper, fuller; a tiny splash sounds now and then, yet no longer the rattle of dragonfly wings, or the chittering calls of squirrels. The trunks and the cliffs are darkening, the needles losing their distinctness. The shadow of the mountain, this vibrant life zone, is giving way to a power still vaster, darker, more profound. The myriad flows between insects and grass, between soil and stone, hawk and water and cliff, seem to be dissipating—the reciprocities and negotiations between neighbors all gradually subsiding. Sure, there are still encounters and exchanges, yet they no longer compose a tightly woven web. The encounters seem more desultory, more random, the inhabitants of this place by the mountain no longer so intimately engaged with one another. For the mountain’s shadow is opening outward, losing its boundaries. As the long-hidden sun withdraws even its residual and scattered light from the sky, the mountain is taken up within the oncoming night, its shadow swallowed now by the darker shadow of the earth.

Night is the name we give to the shadow of the earth. This shadow that eats all other shadows. Slowly the wide planet rolls between our animal bodies and the sun; outlines blur, shapes and colors become uncertain, the proximate world loses its stark reality, while a new depth, gentle and beckoning at first, begins to disclose itself above the trees. A few specks of light appear in the thickening blue, like woodfires in a far-below valley. The bottomland of that valley soon gives way to a deeper canyon, then a chasm, then a fathomless abyss—its immeasurable distances lit by a thousand or ten thousand glimmering stars.

And just as the shadow cast by a mountain, when we step within its bounds, opens us to the brooding intelligence of the mountain, so the mammoth shadow of the earth, as it overtakes us, carries us out of ourselves into Earth’s own awareness. It opens us to those beings, daily obscured by the sun-drenched atmosphere, who nevertheless populate the broad expanse that our Earth inhabits: the sibling planets with whom it shares the sun’s house; and the countless other homes, some relatively near and most hopelessly far-off, that nevertheless compose, with us, the local neighborhood of the infinite. Or maybe we should speak of those sparkling lights as bodies, solitary yet exuberant lives who communicate via electromagnetic pulses across the inexhaustible deep, bending the fabric of space-time around themselves.

Or have our own bodies now shrunk to the scale of dust grains, and are those stars fresh dewdrops on a cluster of webs being spun by a nest of spiders?

The limitless immensity to which our eyes are exposed makes us dizzy, drunk with the pleasure of having our minds confounded and our ready logics exploded into an array of sparks scattered across the ocean of night. Such ecstasies are not easy for us to stand for very long; our habits of thought call us back to more familiar harbors. Perhaps if we were birds, and space were our medium, then this immensity would not throw us. Or if we were a different mammal—a fox, for instance, our nose tuned to smells that drift in ribbons along the ground—we’d hardly notice that alluring openness overhead, and night would be boon for us. But since we balance on just two legs, our heads are held already in the sky, and so we can’t avoid the stunning puzzle posed by the stars. Beyond a certain degree of astonished gawking, our necks begin to hurt, and our legs to buckle; our bodies long to lie down horizontal on the earth. We lend ourselves to gravity, becoming adjuncts of the ground itself. Only by thus renouncing the vertical stance—dropping away our upright individuality and leaning back upon the earth, letting our gaze become the gaze of Earth itself—do we make some sense of the endless depths in which Earth dwells.

For those depths are not our habitat; they are Earth’s. And so it’s only by unfurling our limbs and settling back into the body of Earth that the night sky becomes, for us, a steady comfort and a womb. Such, then, is the spell that the shadow of this planet casts upon our flesh. Sooner or later, we lie down. Eventually, our eyes close. We feed our individual lives back into the wider life of the ground itself. And we sleep.

We sleep, allowing gravity to hold us, allowing Earth—our larger Body—to recalibrate our neurons, composting the keen encounters of our waking hours (the tensions and terrors of our individual days), stirring them back, as dreams, into the sleeping substance of our muscles. We give ourselves over to the influence of the breathing earth. Sleep, we might say, is a habit born in our bodies as the earth comes between our bodies and the sun. Sleep is the shadow of the earth as it falls across our awareness. Yes. To the human animal, sleep is the shadow of the earth as it seeps into our skin and spreads throughout our limbs, dissolving our individual will into the thousand and one selves that compose it—cells, tissues, and organs taking their prime directives now from gravity and the wind—as residual bits of sunlight, caught in the long tangle of nerves, wander the drifting landscape of our earth-borne bodies like deer moving across the forested valleys.





HOUSE

(Materiality I)


My right hand is reaching for a book. Fingers are opening, stretching toward the binding, and suddenly the tome is climbing into my hand. It slips along my fingers and settles back against my wrist and the base of my thumb. My other hand is now prying back the front cover. The book falls open between two pages in the middle. At this point in the story, apparently, things are crawling with snails. The pages are filling up with snails—large ones, with fine spiral shells, tan and pink and spotted brown spirals; they’re slowly oozing onto my wrist, some falling onto the pale maple wood of the desk. The whole book is now thick with these slow creatures, and my desk itself is now teeming with them …

I awaken, and sit up, the pungent smell of ooze slowly giving way to the light streaming in the windows and the sunstruck sheets tangled around my legs. Grinning dizzily at the fast-fading image of all those translucent, calcite spirals, I swivel my legs out and onto the floor. Yesterday’s T-shirt is slung over the corner chair; I pull it over my head, stumble into some stiff new jeans, splash tap water on my face, and wander down to the kitchen, trying to decide between cereal and scrambled eggs. Then I lose track of my thoughts—distracted by a black cricket walking across the tiles—but my arms decide for me, drawing the oats out of the cabinet and goat milk from the fridge. Soon I’m walking carefully back through the house to my little studio, my forefinger crooked in the handle of a porcelain cup, trying to keep the steeping tea from sloshing onto the floor. In the room that I call my studio, I set the tea on the desk, then turn and shut the door.

This room at the end of the house is dug into the hillside, and so three of its four walls have solid earth behind them, imparting a cavelike feel to the place. Two skylights, and a single window in the outer wall, invite the sunlight into this chamber. On cloudless days, long, rectilinear patches of light creep slowly across the interior walls.

With my partner Grietje and our little daughter, I have been ensconced in this house only a few months—yet already my fingers are well acquainted with these whitewashed walls, smudged here and there where a calendar might’ve hung, or where someone taped up a drawing and peeled it off when they left. To the right of my desk chair, the wall is mottled and discolored where some moisture seeped through from the packed earth in a previous season. These last months have been void of moisture for far too long; the brief snows of winter melted away all too swiftly, leaving the red earth parched and cracked, the sandstone cliffs thirsty, waiting.

In this earthen room the temperature never rises too high; I run my hands along the cool walls, adding my own smudges to the rest. My chair creaks: it is wanting a change of position, a stretch of its metallic bones. I tilt back on its hind legs until its upper back touches the wall, and it cradles me there. I assembled this chair from metal limbs, struts, and screws, a plywood slat across the seat and a square of padding held in place by the stitched fabric cover I pulled over the torso of the thing. It stretches and shifts as my body shifts within it; it even breathes, subtly, as the day swells with warmth and then relaxes into the night—a companionable friend for my back and my bony ass, and so I try to answer its creaking pleas as best I can, flexing its limbs by leaning from side to side, easing its joints and screws so that it will do the same for me as I sit and ponder within it.

This sitting on chairs is a strange new thing for the primate body—holding our hindquarters away from the ground, our flexible spine suspended in air. Civilized, to be sure. Yet how much more nourishment our spines once drew from their oft-renewed friendship with the ground—planting themselves there, like trees, as we prepared our foods and whittled our implements, squatting on our haunches as we wove patterns into bright cloth and chatted with kin. But now we scorn the ground. Gravity, we think, is a drag upon our aspirations; it pulls us down, holds us back, makes life a weight and a burden.

Yet this gravitational draw that holds us to the ground was once known as Eros—as Desire!—the lovelorn yearning of our body for the larger Body of Earth, and of the earth for us. The old affinity between gravity and desire remains evident, perhaps, when we say that we have fallen in love—as though we were off-balance and tumbling through air, as though it was the steady pull of the planet that somehow lay behind the eros we feel toward another person. In this sense, gravity—the mutual attraction between our body and the earth—is the deep source of that more conscious delirium that draws us toward the presence of another person. Like the felt magnetism between two lovers, or between a mother and her child, the powerful attraction between the body and the earth offers sustenance and physical replenishment when it is consummated in contact. Although we’ve lately come to associate gravity with heaviness, and so to think of it as having a strictly downward vector, nonetheless something rises up into us from the solid earth whenever we’re in contact with it.

We give ourselves precious little chance to taste this nourishment that springs up into us whenever we touch ground, and so it’s hardly surprising that we’ve forgotten the erotic nature of gravity, and the enlivening pleasure of earthly contact. We spend our days walking not on the earth but on fabricated slabs suspended above office floors and basements; at our desks we ride aloft on our chairs; at night we drift to sleep on the backs of beds neatly raised so we needn’t be too close to the ground. If we venture out of doors, it’s commonly not to wander on foot; instead, we entrust ourselves to the fiery alchemy of the automobile, whose fevered cylinders and whirling tires loft us speedily to our destination without our needing to touch down on the intervening terrain.

But if our artifacts hold us aloft and aloof from the solid earth, they themselves partake of that solidity and that earthiness; something of the ground passes into the struts and beams of our buildings, spreading into the reclining two-by-fours and the prone slats of maple and pine that lie upon them, spreading up through the clay tiles of the floor, stymied and stifled, somewhat, if the tiles are made of plastic, yet even in that subdued condition leaking up through the legs of our desks and radiating out across the surface to kiss our fingertips where they graze the grain, fortifying our bony elbows when we rest our head upon our open hands. It is a kind of pulse, a dark resonance that sustains and feeds things. We can taste of it in the thickness of our mattress or the fluffed happiness of the pillows as we settle back for the night. The rubber tires of our bicycles may seem impervious to such nourishment, yet even as they roll along the tarmac they’re massaging the song forth from its stuck and paved-over stupor, wherein the vitality of stones and the vigor of soil and stem lie stunned and struggling to rise through the black and bituminous carapace.

Certain built structures may invite and enhance the erotic pulse of the ground (like many earthen adobes, and thatch-roofed huts, and even a few unusually eloquent skyscrapers); others may muffle and mute that pulse, but they cannot, I think, immobilize the pulse entirely. Every solid thing, whether a toothpick or a trumpet, a porcelain plate or a helicopter, is fashioned from materials once birthed by the earth. Regardless of how profoundly they have been alchemized in the laboratory, the matter that gleams or sleeps in our creations—the stuff that lends its dull density or its porous whimsy to our tools and our machines, to our chairs and our computer screens—retains some trace of its old ancestry in the wombish earth, some memory of an age when it was not fashioned by an exterior will but bodied forth out of strain and exuberance.

Here in this room, a window-shaped swath of sunlight has by now crept all the way across the floor and, bending itself, is beginning to climb the east wall. Around the window in the opposite wall, a rough-hewn frame of pine stained a deep amber hue looks on, each oval knot in the grain like a wide-open eye—a vortex or whirlpool among the lines that flow in waves and ripples along each cross-sectioned plank until one of these dark, corneal knots forces the fluid grain to bend around it, like space-time around a star.

The undulating grain and the irregularities in the wood beckon gently to my animal flesh, echoing the wavelike lines around my knuckles and the knots in my muscled shoulders, evoking the imperfect and improvisational character of all earthborn beings. It is a character also present in stone, and in the unseen currents rippling the clouds outside that window, and the cracks slowly spreading in the painted plaster of these walls (as gravity quietly invites the house to settle more intimately into the ground). There’s an affinity between my body and the sensible presences that surround me, an old solidarity that pays scant heed to our overeducated distinction between animate and inanimate matter. Its steady influence upon my life lies far below my conscious awareness, deeper than the animal sensations that stride along my neurons, beneath even the vegetal sensitivities that rise like sap in my veins. It unfolds in an utterly silent dimension, in that mute layer of bare existence that this material body shares with the hunkered mountains and the forests and the severed stump of an old pine, with gushing streams and dry riverbeds and even the small stone—pink schist laced with mica—that catches my eye in one such riverbed, inducing me to clasp it between my fingers. The friendship between my hand and this stone enacts an ancient and irrefutable eros, the kindredness of matter with itself.



Before we moved ourselves to this house among the cottonwoods in the high desert of northern New Mexico, we lived for a time in the mountains far north of here, in a broad valley. The forests were thicker there, the snows more insistent in the winter, the rains more constant in the summer. The house we belonged to then had straw bales inside the thick walls for insulation, a brick floor, and many square-cut, rough-hewn beams of fir running this way and that, rising perpendicular from the middle of the floor and up along the inside walls to support the horizontal crossbeams that sliced through the space above, these in turn supporting several beams that slanted at a 45-degree angle toward the peak of the roof, lofting the high, vaulted ceiling.

That remarkable house appeared quite small from the outside, yet since it was composed primarily of one large room (with assorted nooks and crannies), it had an air of great spaciousness within. A separate loft hid the high ceiling at one end of the house; it was there that we slept, and there that Grietje, assisted by me and a worthy midwife from the Idaho backcountry, gave birth to our little child, Hannah, a week before the winter solstice. On solstice night we bundled Hannah out of doors for the first time, introducing her to the stars and the snow-clad mountains.

Within two weeks, Hannah was accompanying us on our daily skis across the farm fields and into the tree-thick canyons, usually tucked under her mom’s fleece jacket with just her tiny blue eyes peeking out from under Grietje’s scarf as we glided beneath the conifers and the cottonwoods. Slowly, over the course of several moons, Hannah learned to focus her eyes on shapes closer and farther away; back in the house she loved rolling on the floor with us, and delighted in caressing the walls, the cabinets, and the beams as we carried her near them. The building was transformed by her arrival in its midst, and by the steady curiosity that she lavished upon even its plainest facets—a single brick in the floor, a patch of painted wall. The big room became accustomed to her squeals of pleasure and dismay, and to the effervescent giggles bubbling forth whenever we danced with her in our arms, whirling and bouncing to the rhythms of Baba Maal or Salif Keita pulsing out of our cheap speakers.

One day, sixteen weeks after Hannah’s arrival, I drove her and her mother along the back roads and highways to the airport in Idaho Falls, from which they would fly to Belgium to visit Grietje’s parents for ten days. After several hugs of goodbye, waving to them as they boarded the plane, I grabbed lunch at a downtown diner and headed back toward our quiet valley, past huge potato farms and the weird mobile irrigation structures that look like dinosaur skeletons decaying in the snowy fields. I was glad for the open prospect of a few days on my own—a chance to catch my breath, and write, without the steady demands and befuddlements of family life. I pulled the car alongside the mailbox at the bottom of our driveway and peered in—a few letters, and several colorful, useless ads from the village supermarket. We’d already protested receiving these ads, at the store and at the post office, but to no avail. I drove up the icy driveway and stepped out onto the snow. I remember well my exhilaration as I stretched open my muscles, the happy anticipation of some solo time. I strode toward the house, trying to walk in the same snowprints that my boots had made that morning, then stepped through the door into our home, grateful for the warmth of its walls and the familiarity of the place.

But as I pried off my boots and slung my pack onto the counter, I noticed that something was amiss. Something about the house was distressed, disturbed. I swung open the door again, wondering if I’d left something outside, but nothing was there. I closed the door, grabbed the new mail, and started toward the couch. And then stopped. The walls, the ceiling, the low tables, and even the windows were all glaring at me. The couch, with its thickly upholstered cushions, was keeping me at arm’s length. “The little one’s gone,” I mumbled quietly.

My words seemed to induce a subtle shift in the comportment of the stairs, and the walls started to sag. The whole interior felt heavy, oppressive—accusation had turned to dejection. “But the baby will be back,” I said, to no one in particular, and then louder: “Listen! Hannah will be back. In ten days, she’ll be home!”

Straightaway the room lightened up. The furniture relaxed, the ceiling stopped glowering. The structure of the house eased and loosened, the walls and the wooden beams settling back, it seemed, into a resolute and patient waiting. The space no longer felt accusatory; indeed, the space no longer appeared to pay me any attention whatsoever. I sank down into the couch with the day’s mail.

It was a fruitful ten days, and when Hannah and her mom returned home, life churned on as before—new discoveries unfolded, new intimacies were forged between Hannah’s limbs and the repeating rhythm of the staircase, between the interior of certain cabinets and her questioning gaze.

But it was that weird confrontation with the house upon returning home alone from the airport, that day, that alerted me to the way ostensibly inert things in a home are drawn into new life by an infant’s curiosity and pleasure—the way their shapes are received and welcomed by a small child, and enjoyed in their peculiarity and wonder long before those objects are named—before their boundaries become definite, their strict utility and purpose defined. The few friends to whom I related that odd encounter naturally assumed that my experience of the accusatory and dejected house was the result of an imaginative distortion, a projection of my own interior mood upon the plastered walls and the wooden frame of the building. Yet this interpretation seemed far too facile, too easy. The encounter, after all, took me entirely by surprise; my own mood, before I entered the house, was one of confident exhilaration—a halcyon mood that was interrupted by the dismay of the walls. And even supposing there was some depth in myself that had already, somehow, been feeling despondent, why was it only the house that took on that mood, and not the automobile as I drove home, or the snowy fields? The notion of “projection” fails to account for what it is about certain objects that calls forth our imagination. It implies that the objects we perceive are purely passive phenomena, utterly neutral and inert, and so enables us to overlook the way in which such objects actively affect the space around them—the manner in which material things are also bodies, influencing the other bodies within their ambit, and being influenced in turn.

One’s relation to one’s house, in other words, is hardly a relation between a pure subject and a pure object—between an active intelligence, or mind, and a purely passive chunk of matter. Previously I myself might have thought of the relationship in such terms, and perhaps I even reverted to such arrogance as I slipped back into the cluttered life of a first-time father. But a half year after that event, another encounter with the building startled me out of my aloof stance once and for all.

Hannah, almost a year old, had been crawling for many months, and was just then learning to walk, balancing herself by holding on to the edge of a low table as she stepped alongside it, then launching herself from there into the open expanse of the big room, veering from one side to the other. During one of these voyages, the telephone rang. It was the house’s owner, the landlord, informing us that he had decided to return to the valley and move back into that house, and so we would have to move out in a matter of weeks.

Crestfallen, Grietje and I slowly began packing up all our clothes, all our pots and our pans, taking over a week to gather and order various stray papers and oodles of unsorted bills, the boxes piling up on the floor. I dusted and swept and disassembled various appliances, then swept again after Hannah upended another container of sundry stuff. All the while I wondered how our departure from the house would disrupt our small daughter’s cosmos.

I did not ponder what effect our departure might have upon the house itself (I had long since forgotten my experience six months earlier, when I’d come back from the airport). Yet despite all my concerns about Hannah, as the day of our departure drew closer—the day we’d load up the U-Haul with boxes and tables and lamps—it was not my daughter but I who became anxious. This house was a good home for us; it didn’t seem right to leave. Never mind that we planned to resettle in the Rio Grande valley of northern New Mexico, where we had a clutch of old friends: this house where we’d lived for only a year and a half felt more familiar than those friends. It felt like family. It was the place where Grietje and I had multiplied and become a family. The prospect of departing the place vexed me; it seemed all wrong.

A few nights before our projected departure, I awoke in the thick of the dark, startled. Someone was in the house.

I stepped out of our loft and listened from the top of the stairs. Silence. I tiptoed down the steps into a room aglow with pale light: the full moon was staring through the windows and bouncing its radiance off the walls. The counter surfaces were all luminous and drunk with moonlight. But it was something else: all those wooden beams rising, rough-hewn and sinew-strong, from the floor to the rafters, or else plunging from the rafters to the ground, and those others stretched horizontal across the open space overhead, reaching through the walls to support the eaves outside, and the short, angled struts that bridged the transverse beams to those that bore the vaulted ceiling on their slanting backs—it was all these square-cut beams diving this way and that through the unseen air that shone most vividly in the moonlit room, their cracked and splintered surfaces radiant with a somber fire.

Stalwart individuals, muscular, each with its own unique vector and style—its particular grain undulating like jazz among a cluster of knots, or orbiting a single huge knot where a large limb once grew from the trunk, or else gliding smooth and sleek from one end to the other—each wooden post was suffused with its own singular character. And I realized, somewhat surprised, that I already knew these powers, that the fluid lines along each beam, the parallel swerves and ripples in the grain of each post, had become familiar to my senses, somehow, although I’d never paid these sinuous patterns any conscious attention. The beams of this house had been quietly conversing with my creaturely body over the course of the year, coaxing my eyes and my wandering fingers in countless moments of distraction, and I now noticed that I already knew them as individuals—knew them without knowing them, that is, until tonight, when they suddenly broke through the cool callus of my assumptions, forcing me to acknowledge the silent exchange, this language older than words in which my muscled limbs were utterly fluent. That discovery, while standing amid all those wooden beams and the moonshadows they cast upon the floor and the walls, quietly gave me back to myself, rooted my mind back in the loamy soil of my breathing body, and so I could suddenly taste the cool bricks with my feet, and the air currents lambent upon my face, could sense even the wind outside whirling under the eaves and gliding over the roof.

No wonder, then, that I’d become more and more anxious as our departure day approached. It was as though we’d been living for a year and a half in a dense grove of old trees, a cluster of firs, each with its own rhythm and character, from whom our bodies had drawn not just shelter but perhaps even a kind of guidance as we grew into a family. My animal senses had grown accustomed to these beams—to these rectilinear lives whose subtly different dispositions had lent a communal warmth to this structure, instilling the uncanny kinship I’d been feeling with this place. I walked over to each now, in turn, leaning against it or tracing its grain with my fingers, and finally knocking upon it with my knuckles—a clumsy gesture, sure, but an instinctive enough way to make grateful contact with the interior of a piece of wood.

And then I climbed the stairs and went back to sleep.

The next morning I awoke more refreshed than I had in weeks. My limbs were eager to pack the last boxes and load up the U-Haul. We hit the road the next day, although the truck got stuck in the snow before reaching the highway. Two neighbors, on their way to work, stopped and helped dig out the tires. We grabbed some crummy coffee at the town café and rolled out of the valley, arguing about the best route to take, calling and waving to the mountains.





WOOD AND STONE

(Materiality II)


One night, while I was rinsing the dishes, the coyotes started howling nearby—a few of them yip-yipping at first, then a couple soprano howls chiming in, then a whole demented chorus of whooping voices crowding out one another. I turned off the tap and glanced over at Hannah; she was wide-eyed, looking toward the big window from the corner where she’d been ripping the pages out of a new picture book. I took her up in my arms and we stepped out the front door into the darkness, Hannah’s legs squeezing my torso in trepidation. The crazed chorus was already subsiding. By the time our eyes adjusted to the dark, the howling had stopped, but we could sense several spirits slipping off between the piñons and the low cedars. The next morning, when we went to investigate, we found several mounds of coyote scat just outside the large kitchen window. The coyotes must’ve been watching us through the glass.

To a small child, awareness is a ubiquitous quality of the world. We are mistaken when we assume that consciousness is an interior human trait that first unfurls inside the young child, who then learns to attribute that same quality to other persons, and perhaps “projects” that quality onto the surrounding world of things and beings. Rather, the newborn emerges into consciousness as into a new medium. What we later objectify as “awareness” is at first like an anonymous element that defines the very substance of existence, glimmering with strange pleasures and yearnings and pains. Only gradually does a kind of locus begin to appear within this floating field of feeling, an inchoate sense of “here-ness” emerging from the anonymous and omnidimensional plenitude. This crystallizing sense of one’s body as a general locus of awareness does not arise on its own, but is accompanied by a dawning sense of the rudimentary otherness of the rest of the field of feelings. The earliest experience of selfhood, in other words, co-arises with the earliest experience of otherness. One’s own awareness is born of a rift within a more primordial anonymity, as one begins to locate one’s sensations in relation to sensations and feelings that are somehow elsewhere, and hence in relation to an awareness that is not one’s own, but is rather the rest of the world’s.

For a long while, the soft body of our mother, with her pliant breasts and warm belly, her deep eyes and gentle voice, is coextensive with the rest of the world. Slowly, however, this nourishing presence differentiates into a plurality of interpenetrating dimensions, into mothertouch and groundtouch and skyglow and night (into ticklegrass and bath and fathersong), all echoed by a deepening differentiation within oneself, as the body learns to coordinate the actions of its various limbs and to move within the cosmos.

The self begins as an extension of the breathing flesh of the world, and the things around us, in turn, originate as reverberations echoing the pains and pleasures of our body.

So the clustered trees, the bricks in the floor, and the sunlight are not first encountered as inert or insentient presences into which, later, the child projects her own consciousness. Rather, the inwardly felt sentience of the child is a correlate of the outwardly felt wakefulness of the sky and the steadfast support of the ground, and the willfulness of the caressing wind; it is a concomitant of the animate surroundings.

Only much later, as the child is drawn deeply into the whirling vortex of verbal language—that flood of phrases that earlier surrounded her simply as a beckoning play of melodic sounds continuous with the cries of ravens and the rumble of thunder—only then is the contemporary child liable to learn that neither the bird nor the storm are really aware, that the wind is no more willful than the sky is awake, and indeed that human persons alone are the carriers of consciousness in this world.

Such a lesson amounts to a denial of much of the child’s felt experience, and commonly precipitates a rupture between her speaking self and the rest of her sensitive and sentient body. Yet the pain of this rupture is quickly forgotten by the speaking self. There are more than enough discoveries and distractions to offset the trauma of this self-estrangement, since accepting and abiding by this odd lesson unlocks the gate to the curious universe that all the grown-ups appear to inhabit.

But the breathing body, this ferociously attentive animal, still remembers.



The foot, as it feels the ground pressing up against it, remembers. The skin of the face remembers, turning to meet the myriad facets, or faces, of the world. The tips of the fingers remember well that each sensible surface is also, in its own way, sensitive. The ears, listening, know that all things speak; they wander and browse in the intimate conversation of the world, and sometimes they prompt the tongue to reply.

Even the eyes know this, that everything lives—that the dull or gleaming surfaces they gaze at are also gazing back at them, that the colors they drink or dive into have been longing to swallow them and to taste of their hazel, their bright hints of green.

Our chest, rising and falling, knows that the strange verb “to be” means more simply “to breathe”; it knows that the maples and the birches are breathing, that the beaver pond inhales and exhales in its own way, as do the stones and the mountains and the pipes coursing water through the ground under the city. The lungs know this secret as well as any can know it: that the inward and the outward depths partake of the same mystery, that as the unseen wind swirls within us, so it also whirls all around us, bending the grasses and lofting the clouds even as it lights our own sensations. The vocal cords, stirred by that breath, vibrate like spiderwebs or telephone wires in the breeze, and the voice itself, laughing and murmuring, joins its song to the water gurgling under the grate.

Only our words seem to forget, sometimes—or is it the one who speaks and writes them who forgets? The contemporary person sits enveloped in a cloud of winged words fluttering out of his mouth, delighting in their colored patterns and the way they flock and follow one another, becoming convinced that he alone is in blossom—that his skull alone bears the pollen that will fertilize the barren field, that the things stand mute and inert until he chooses to speak of them.

Yet the things have other plans. Bereft of our attentions, their migratory routes severed by the spreading clear-cuts and the dams, their tissues clogged by synthetic toxins leaking into the soils and the waters, they nevertheless carry on. The rising temperatures seem to scorch their surfaces ever more frequently now, yet the things of the world continue to beckon to us from behind the cloud of words, speaking instead with gestures and subtle rhythms, calling out to our animal bodies, tempting our skin with their varied textures and coaxing our muscles with their grace, inviting our thoughts to remember and rejoin the wider community of intelligence.



The child’s spontaneous affinity with the objects and entities that surround her is a pleasure to behold, but it remains only an amorphous and tentative solidarity. If it were allowed to unfold throughout the course of childhood, intensifying and complexifying as she herself unfolds through adolescence, this early collusion with things would quietly deepen and mature into a nuanced respect for the manifold life of the world, a steady pleasure in the profusion of bodily forms and the innumerable styles of sentience that compose the earthly cosmos.

For little Hannah, stumbling giddily across the ground, each stone that catches her eye, each bird that swoops or tree that rises up before her is a ready counterpart of herself. If she chooses that tree as a friend for an afternoon, the tree will seem to express various feelings that she feels within herself, to display the sort of awareness with which she is most familiar. Particular plants, specific landforms, and especially other animals seem to incarnate and make visible, for the child, particular impulses that she also senses within herself, empowering the small human to begin to notice and differentiate among various elemental forms of feeling, enabling her to begin to navigate a sea of ambiguous moods, emotions, and impulses whose unruly power could easily overwhelm the child. Hence the centrality of other animals in childhood play across all cultures (including, in my culture, an outrageous array of stuffed rabbits and teddy bears and talking mice), and all the animal protagonists central to the stories and rhymed songs that we first hear and tell in childhood.Ω

If Hannah’s fascination and friendship with an apple tree quietly growing in the old orchard is encouraged, and allowed to develop, then the spontaneous reciprocity of her early years, which at first assumes that the tree’s experience is akin to her own, will gradually deepen into a discovery that the apple tree’s rooted-ness—its inability to move upon the ground—must grant it a range of sensations very different from those that she experiences. Later, an awareness of the way its roots draw water from the soil, and the way its leaves metabolize sunlight, will lead her to acknowledge the tree’s still deeper difference from herself—inducing her to stretch her sensorial imagination in order to fathom the odd sensation of drinking sunlight from the air. Perhaps she’ll suspect that the pleasure of the sun’s warmth on the skin of her shoulders provides a distant entry into the sensations felt by those leaves, or that the lusciousness of sinking naked toes into mud approximates something of what those hidden roots must feel after a summer rain drenches the parched valley. At each step of her inward unfolding she’ll discover wider differences between herself and the apple tree, yet she’ll measure each difference as a difference in feeling, as a strangely different way of experiencing the same sky, the same ground, the same rain that she herself experiences. And so finally in adulthood any tree, for all its strange and unbridgeable otherness, will remain for her an animate and experiencing presence, another being, another shape of sensitivity and radiant life.

Such, at any rate, is the mature fruit of the human child’s spontaneous affinity with trees, spiders, stones, and storm clouds, when that seed is allowed to grow and to blossom. Only after such an unimpeded childhood does a grown woman know in her bones that she inhabits a breathing cosmos, that her life is embedded in a wild community of dynamically intertwined and yet weirdly different lives. It is a cosmos no less puzzling, no less fraught with uncertainty and confusion, than the rather complicated world of inert objects and mechanical processes in which so many of us seem to dwell, and yet it is alive—a vibrant play of relationships in which our own lives are participant.

But in a civilization that has long since fallen under the spell of its own signs, the conviviality between the child and the animate earth is soon severed, interrupted by the adult insistence (expressed in countless forms of grown-up speech and behavior) that real sentience, or subjectivity, is the exclusive possession of humankind. This collective insistence could not displace the compelling evidence of the child’s direct experience were it not for all the technologies that rapidly come to interpose themselves between the child’s developing senses and the earthly sensuous, enclosing her ever more tightly within a purely human realm. The broken bond between the child and the living land will later be certified, and rendered permanent, by her active entrance into an economy that engages the land primarily as a stock of resources to be appropriated for our own, exclusively human, purposes.

Cut off in its earliest stage, dammed up close to its source, our instinctive empathy with the earthly surroundings remains stunted in most contemporary persons. Hence, whenever we moderns hear of traditional peoples for whom all things are potentially alive—of indigenous cultures that assume some degree of spontaneity and sentience in every aspect of the perceivable terrain—such notions seem to us the result of an absurdly wishful and immature style of thinking, at best a kind of childish naïveté. No matter how intriguing it might be to experience the land as animate and alive, we know that such fantasies are illusory, and must ultimately come up against the cold stone of reality. We cannot help but interpret whatever we hear of such participatory beliefs according to our own stunted capacity for empathic engagement with the sensed surroundings—a capability that was stifled in us before it could blossom, and which therefore remains immobilized in us, frozen in its most immature form. Confronted with animistic styles of discourse, most of us moderns can only imagine it as a sort of childlike ignorance, a credulous projection of humanlike feelings onto mountains and rivers, which surely amounts to madness for any adult soul. Rocks alive? Yeah, right!

We fail to realize that such a participatory mode of perception, when developed and honed through the harsh discoveries of adolescence and on into adulthood, will inevitably yield a complexly nuanced and many-layered approach to the world. We fail to recognize that over the course of hundreds of generations, such participation with the enfolding earth will by now have been tuned so thoroughly by both the serendipities and adversities of this world, by its blessings and its poisons, its enlivening allies and its predatory powers, as to be wholly beyond the ken of any merely naïve or sentimental approach to things. Our indigenous ancestors, after all, had to survive and flourish without any of the technologies upon which we moderns have come to depend. It seems unlikely that our ancestral lineages could have survived if the animistic sensibility were purely an illusion, if this experience of the sensible surroundings as sensitive and even sentient were a callow fantasy utterly at odds with the actual character of those surroundings. The long survival of our species suggests that the instinctive expectation of animateness, of an interior spontaneity proper to all things, was a very practical way to encounter our environment—indeed, perhaps the most effective way to align our human organism with the shifting vicissitudes of a difficult, dangerous, and capricious cosmos.

For one cannot enter into a felt rapport with another entity if one assumes that that other is entirely inanimate. It is difficult, if not impossible, to empathize with an inert object. One cannot feel or suss out the intention of another creature if one denies that that creature has intentions; one cannot anticipate the shifting mood of a winter sky if one denies that the sky has moods, if one begrudges things their their own inherent spontaneity and openness.

When we bring mindful awareness to the simple activity of perception, we may notice that what draws our attention to things—what enables our senses to really engage and participate with them—is precisely the open and uncertain character of those things. An entity that captures my gaze is never revealed to me in its totality; it presents some facet of itself to my eyes while always withholding other aspects from my direct apprehension. I never see a ponderosa pine in its entirety—I see one side of this wide trunk with its fissured bark, while the other side remains concealed. When I walk around to view the other side, that first side is obscured. Nonetheless, I now have a fuller sense of this trunk—although its interior structure remains hidden. The corrugated furrows in its bark seem to recede into that interior; they beckon me closer to touch their various layers and to peer within the deep crevasses. Mmmm—there is a faint scent of vanilla emanating from this particular furrow. As my nose follows the scent closer in, a spiderweb snags on my face and is wrecked as I pull away; now the spider herself is racing up the bark just in front of me, climbing toward the heights. I tilt my head back, tracking the spider with my eyes. I can see only sporadic glimmerings of the upper branches; they’re mostly hidden by the spray of needles, as the spreading roots of this pine are concealed beneath the ground. If, seized by an uncontrollable urge to know the whole of this being, I brought over a shovel and began to dig up those roots, I’d be endangering the vitality and beauty of this pine, interrupting the very mystery that draws me back to this huge tree day after day.

Although some aspect of any perceived presence is exposed to my eyes or my flaring nostrils, or to the touch of my fingers, there is always some further dimension that remains hidden. This tension between the apparent and the hidden dimensions of each being beckons steadily to my perceiving body, provoking the exploratory curiosity of my senses. Perception is nothing other than this open-ended relationship—the active allurement of my body by a sapling or a stretch of river, or by the crumbling wall of an old riverside mill—and the consequent reply by my limbs and my listening senses, to which the other responds in turn, disclosing some further aspect of itself to my gaze or my attentive ears. If and when I turn my attention elsewhere, I turn away not from an inert object but from a unique and unfinished way of being, an expressive, enigmatic presence with whom I’ve been flirting, however briefly.

No matter how long I linger with any being, I cannot exhaust the dynamic enigma of its presence. It is this reticence, the inexhaustible otherness of things, that enables them to hold my gaze, to sustain themselves in my awareness. I can never plumb all the secrets of even a single blade of grass—cannot fathom every aspect of its interior composition, or the totality of the relations that it sustains with the soil and the air. I cannot experience it from every angle all at once. And why not? Because I am not a pure spirit that could penetrate instantaneously every nook and cranny of the thing—because I am not a disembodied mind, for whom the world presents no obstacles and no obscurities—because, that is, I myself am a body, a material being of weight and density like this tree or that stone, and so have my own visible facets and my obscurities (my smooth skin, for example, and my calciferous bones hidden beneath a matrix of muscles), and so can explore the world only from where I stand, can encounter things only from my own thingly position in the midst of them. Because, finally, I am a thing myself, and hence have only a finite access to the things around me.

In fact it is difficult to imagine how a pure, immaterial mind could know even the simplest truth about a chestnut oak or a chunk of marble, since without any body—without any dense or fluid presence, without any eyes or skin or subtle surface—it could never come into contact with that rock. Lacking corporeal sensations, it could neither taste the leaves of the oak nor hear the wind pouring through them, could not feel the tension in the bouncing branches nor indeed “feel” anything at all. We can feel the trees and the rocks underfoot, because we are not so unlike them, because we have our own forking limbs and our own mineral composition, because—contrary to our inherited conceptions—we are not pure mind-stuff, but are tangible bodies of thickness and weight, and so have a great deal in common with the palpable things that we encounter.



It follows, of course, that the things of the world have a great deal more in common with us than we tend to allow. The affinity is obvious in our relation to other mammals, whose legs, ears, eyes, and overall bilateral symmetry make evident, from the start, our substantial kinship. With trees and shrubs the relation seems far more distant, yet the fact that we acknowledge such beings as alive already mitigates that distance. But really now: what of stones—of boulders and mountain cliffs? Clearly, a slab of granite is not alive in any obvious sense, and it is hard to see how anyone could attribute such openness or indeterminacy to it, or why they would want to.

Yet the apparent fixity and inertness of rocks is held in place more by a set of inherited concepts than by any direct, sensory experience of the mineral world. One such concept (as familiar in the modern era as it was in the Middle Ages) is that which opposes the inertness of sheer matter to the vibrance of pure spirit, and holds that sensible matter is vacant and lifeless without the influx of spirit—without this bright fire that descends from a divine realm beyond the physical cosmos to inspire and enliven the drab stuff of the world. This old notion, deeply layered into our Western language, neatly orders the things of the experienced world into a graded hierarchy—“the great chain of being”—wherein those phenomena composed entirely of matter are farthest from the divine, while those that possess greater degrees of spirit are closer to the absolute freedom of God. According to the dispensation of spirit, stones have no agency or experience whatsoever; lichens have only a minimal degree of life; plants have a bit more life, with a rudimentary degree of sensitivity; “lower” animals are more sentient, yet still stuck in their instincts; “higher” animals more truly aware—while humans, alone in this material world, are really intelligent and awake.

This way of ordering existence, which depends upon an absolute distinction between matter and spirit, has done much to certify our human dominion over the rest of nature. Although it originates in the ancient Mediterranean and reaches its height in medieval Christianity, this old notion was never really displaced by the scientific revolution. Instead it was translated into a new, up-to-date form by a science still tacitly reliant on the assumption of a limitless human mind (or spirit) investigating a basically determinate natural world (or matter).

Yet as soon as we question the assumed distinction between spirit and matter, then this neatly ordered hierarchy begins to tremble and disintegrate. If we allow that matter is not inert, but is rather animate (or self-organizing) from the get-go, then the hierarchy collapses, and we are left with a diversely differentiated field of animate beings, each of which has its gifts relative to the others. And we find ourselves not above, but in the very midst of this living field, our own sentience part and parcel of the sensuous landscape.



Consider a largish rock, about three feet in diameter, its irregular bulk reposing upon the ground. Whether or not such a rock sits on the earth anywhere near where you find yourself reading these words, there is such a rock resting just outside the studio where I sit writing them. I am not very sure of its composition. Although it has a similar color to the sandstone rocks that sprawl around it, I know, from close inspection, that it does not have their granular texture, but has a more dense and continuous solidity, riven by jagged edges along its surface. Patches of quartz, dully translucent, are visible here and there, embedded in the pink matrix. I glance at it now through the window, offering its shade to the clumped grasses, implacable in its solidity—a familiar and stable presence amid all my whirling thoughts.

Do you know any such rock? No matter its composition or color, is there not some similar stone with whom you are acquainted, a rock whose stable persistence offers a kind of anchor when worries or dreams threaten to carry you away—a dependable presence that provides, at the very least, a place to lean against and rest your limbs?

After I’ve been adrift in these words and sentences for a long stretch, I look up and find that rock, once again, poised in the same stance, holding its familiar shape against the trees and the blue sky, although the shadow it casts upon the ground has now shifted. I return to my work. After an hour or so, it calls my gaze once again; the sky behind the rock is now dense with cloud, and so its shadow has been subsumed within the common shade—yet the stone still maintains its earlier stance. I’m suddenly struck by the immense exertion it would take to hold myself in such a stable posture, moment after moment, without flinching. To sustain itself in that position, steadily, so that even now it is still bearing that very shape, and still again, and yet again, hour after hour, and day after day—that must take a lot of effort! Not, of course, that the rock has to deal with the kind of mad restlessness that besets a muscled being like myself. Yet simply to hold itself together in a cosmos that is steadily flying apart, to prevail, year after year, against the suck of entropy, seems already to entail a kind of stubbornness, an obdurate persistence that we miss when we think of “being,” or bare existence, as a purely passive state. And so I find myself staring at this rock with a new astonishment—a new appreciation for its compacted energy, the wild activity that it displays by its simple presence.

The age-old bifurcation between spirit and matter prompts us to take bare existence for granted, to assume that a simple material presence—like a stone or a mountain—is utterly passive and inert. We say that the rock “is” here, that the mountains “are” over there; we use this little verb “to be” countless times every day, and yet we forget that it is a verb, that it names an act—that simply to exist is a very active thing to be doing. By suppressing this activity, by taking “being” entirely for granted, as a purely passive state, we flatten the wild contingency of existence, the uncertainty and risk of the present moment. We lock in the closet our vague puzzlement at finding ourselves here, in this very place, at this very moment of the world’s unfolding.

“Why is there something rather than nothing?” is the question that philosophers have used to unsettle our complacency regarding the weirdness of existence, to stir us from our forgetfulness, to reawaken our sense of wonder. Yet it is enough to notice the inherent dynamism of the present moment—to notice that mere “existence” is already an upsurge, and not a blank and passive floating—in order to retrieve the sensuous world from the oblivion to which our concepts too often consign it. A solitary rock or a clear-cut stump is utterly inanimate only as long as “being” itself is taken to be static and inert. Our animal senses, however, know no such passive reality; we’ve already seen how they perceive things only by interacting with them, by entering into relation with their rhythms of disclosure and concealment, their allurement and their reticence. To my animal body, the rock is first and foremost another body engaged in the world: as I turn my gaze toward it, I encounter not a defined and inanimate chunk of matter but an upturned surface basking in the sun’s warmth, or a pink and sharp-edged structure protruding from the ground like the shattered bone of the hillside, or an old and watchful guardian of this land—a resolute and sheltering presence inviting me now to crouch and lean my spine against it.

Each thing organizes the space around it, rebuffing or sidling up against other things; each thing calls, gestures, beckons to other beings or battles them for our attentions; things expose themselves to the sun or retreat among the shadows, shouting with their loud colors or whispering with their seeds; rocks snag lichen spores from the air and shelter spiders under their flanks; clouds converse with the fathomless blue and metamorphose into one another; they spill rain upon the land, which gathers in rivulets and carves out canyons; skyscrapers slice the winds and argue with one another over the tops of townhouses; backhoes and songbirds are coaxed into duets by the percussive rhythm of the subway beneath the street. Things “catch our eye” and sometimes refuse to let go; they “grab our focus” and “capture our attention,” and finally release us from their grasp only to dissolve back into the overabundant world. Whether ecstatic or morose, exuberant or exhausted, everything swerves and trembles; anguish, equanimity, and pleasure are not first internal moods but passions granted to us by the capricious terrain.



Such is the terrain sketched and painted by an intense and lonely young Dutchman born to a long line of pastors in 1853. Although his first career was that of a preacher, Vincent’s passion could not contain itself in that stance, denying his body while straining toward a beauty beyond the visible; it fell back into the world. And at that moment, as his intellectual faith in a truth behind the sensuous fell away, he found himself abruptly caught up and carried by a faith more implacable than any mere belief: the human body’s ancient and inexhaustible faith in the breathing earth, in the whispering leaves, in the meandering river and the night and the goodness of the sun. His senses burst open like sunflowers scattering their seeds; he began to paint the surging world.

In Vincent van Gogh’s canvases there is nothing that is not alive. There is no point in the light-filled plenum of sky that does not have its own temporal dynamism, its own rhythm, its pulse. The landscape breathes. And each presence, each clump of soil, each stone and stalk of wheat is in vibrant dialogue with the beings around it.

Emerald-black cypresses dance with the darkening sky, their leaves sending ripples into the night air.

A billiard table holds itself aloof from the other tables and the scattered chairs, each of them on convivial terms with the wooden slats of the floor and with the lamps stuttering their radiance into the room.

Pebbles loll with one another and confer with the thousand blades of grass; rumors rush through those grasses and are passed along, in turn, to the blue mountains and the swaying poplars. A white cloud leans down over those mountains, listening.

A river pours through a ravine, imparting its swirling flux to the roiling cliffs and the flamelike bushes, and to the travelers bearing their backpacks alongside it. Each thing, each being, is in steady intercourse with the entities and elements around it, negotiating its passage and exerting its participation in the ongoing emergence of what is.

Stars spin and stagger the night around them, calling out to one another and to the crescent moon; Vincent’s stars are not situated in space but actively deploy or secrete the space between them. For there is no prior space, no inert world or backdrop against which the things begin to exist; the cosmos is nothing other than this open and unfolding interchange between the powers that compose it. There is no stone or cloud that is absolved of this passionate activity, no brick or brushstroke that is not participant in the co-creation of the present moment.

Even in his so-called still-lifes there is nothing inert or inanimate. The artist’s pipe, a plate, two onions, and a box of matches—each being radiates into the world around it, and each is affected (even infected) by the others, as an empty bottle, transparent as an eye, gathers the room into itself.

In another painting a worn pair of shoes, empty of their owner’s feet, speak persuasively—by their soft folds and green scrapes, and by the darkness they contain—of that other life that quietly possesses them, and of the undulant land that they walk together. And thus this unobtrusive canvas imparts a sense of simple friendships—the respectful reciprocity between a community and the soil that supports it, the conviviality between two neighbors, even the friendship between two shoes resting upon the tiled floor.

Fiercely intelligent, yet bearing a sensibility far more porous than most, Van Gogh was unable, or unwilling, to abstract his intellect from his body’s reality, unwilling to abandon the myriad things, to tame his senses and so to stifle the steady eros between his flesh and the flesh of the earth.

Again and again he slides out of himself, through his eyes, to feel the hunkered silence of the olive groves, and to taste the spreading ecstasy of the leaves as they’re slowly lit by the climbing sun. And again and again he is invaded, in turn, by the visible—penetrated by the midday languor of the rolling wheat fields, or by the sullen mood of a neighbor’s face. Although he writes often to his brother and a few friends (letters of luminous candor and kindness), it is only in the act of drawing or painting that he is able to give expression to this ongoing intercourse, by offering back to the visible a trace of what the visible steadily pours into his chest.

His paintings, then, are windows through which we look onto an earth no less alive and intelligent than ourselves.

A clutch of Van Gogh’s canvases are carefully assembled, now and then, and arranged on the walls of some eminent museum. Crowds of people from diverse backgrounds then journey to that location, month after month, to gaze through these many windows into a cosmos that often frightens them with its intensity, yet where they nevertheless feel oddly, uncannily, at home. Many return to the exhibit over and again. The sheer number of people, young and old, wealthy and poor, waiting to shuffle through the exhibition halls and look upon these ferocious canvases are routinely larger than those drawn to the galleries for any other painter; this has already been the case for many decades.

Yet in his own lifetime Vincent’s paintings held little interest for those who viewed them; even at the cheapest prices, his brother Theo was unable to sell them. How, then, do we account for this dramatic metamorphosis in the collective aesthetic of an entire culture? How could it be that a host of vivid canvases painted over the course of a scant eight years (from 1883 until his death in 1890)—canvases that appeared bizarre or unpleasant to most persons who encountered them at that time—became, within sixty years, some of the most beloved paintings of any artist in the long history of the West? What event, what magic, could have so rapidly transformed our seeing, so thoroughly altered the way we looked at the world?

It is a genuine puzzle, and one impossible to answer definitively. Yet we can hazard at least a partial answer. While acknowledging a host of contributory factors (from economic and demographic shifts to the spreading influence of new technologies), it is likely that a decisive factor prompting this drastic change in our collective seeing was our increasing exposure to these very paintings …

Vincent’s canvases could not have had such a catalytic effect if certain religious assumptions, regarding the distance of humankind from earthly nature, had not begun to break down, and if the more modern separation between “subjects” and “objects” had not started to spring various leaks, allowing a more primordial possibility to make itself felt, however faintly. But in the early decades of the twentieth century, human eyes were already being tutored and transformed by these curious canvases, thickly layered with vehement brushstrokes, as they traveled the world—jolting the vision of numerous artists, sparking new styles and inciting new reactions. Soon reproductions of them began to be disseminated in books, and increasingly as prints and posters hung on innumerable walls. And so, steadily, something opened in our seeing. Minute muscles in our eyes loosened themselves from their static and habitual stance in order to respond to the irresistible lure of these living landscapes, learning to welcome commonplace and taken-for-granted objects—chimneys, weeds, wind-blown branches—now in their own energetic spontaneity and willfulness.

This newly refreshed sense of sight, this way of welcoming the sensuous in all its mysterious and multiform wildness, is the greatest gift of Van Gogh’s work. His vision, by virtue of its fierce compassion for whatever was right in front of him, loosens the lock on our own senses. It is a rare person who does not emerge from an exhibit of Vincent’s paintings to find that the streetside row of maples flexing their branches and muscling their roots under the city sidewalk are far more earnest and vibrant and, well, visible than they were before, or that the previously placid apartment buildings across the avenue are now actively jostling and shoving against one another, vying for sky.



A crow launches from one of the near pines, startling us with the rhythmic thudding of wingfeathers as they paddle the blue air. If you follow its trajectory with your eyes, watching that black shape diminish into the distance, you will notice, way off there, a ribbon of vivid green embedded in the darker green of the needled trees. That ribbon is formed by the bright leaves of cottonwoods growing along the creek that winds through this valley. The current drought means that the streambed will be dry by midsummer, but today—in the middle of spring—there is likely a good flow between the rocks. Let’s wander down there: there’s a particular site, along that stream, that I’ve been waiting to show you.

Owch! Damn cactus!!! Take care not to stumble into these low prickly pears—their needles easily penetrate the leather of my old boots. But notice: we’re meeting fewer and fewer cacti as we descend to the lowest part of the valley.

Lizards skitter at the periphery of our vision, and a cricket pulse rises from the clumped grasses. The ground is thirsty. Meltwater from the last snows and runoff from the scant rains have carried away layer after layer of topsoil from these slopes, leaving pedestals of earth here and there wherever a bit of grass kept the dirt from washing downhill. In the level spots the dry ground has cracked into a rich, red mosaic of pentagonal and hexagonal tiles. A row of tracks with tight toe-prints lopes across this mosaic—a coyote trotting toward the creek. We follow the tracks through a thicket of piñon pines.

Soon there’s a change in the soundscape: the cadence of crickets now interlaced with the fluid trills of tree frogs. And do you catch that new sweetness haunting the air? That’s the scent of the cottonwood leaves.

And here at last: the quiet gurgling of water.

We walk upstream along the bank as best we can, dodging branches, skirting clumps of willows and soggy spots, lulled by the liquid voice rolling over the stones. The dense tangle snags and grabs at our clothes, tripping up our feet. Over and again the frog trills fall silent at our approach—though if we wait, hushed for a few moments, the chorus starts up again louder than ever. The vibration of a hummingbird thrums the air near my ears, then rises above the branches and fades into the near distance. I plunge on, leading clumsily through another thicket of willows. Pricked and scratched, I round a bend in the stream, and am brought to a halt.

Here is the emphatic presence I’ve been longing to visit since the snows melted. I bow for a moment in greeting, then turn to wait for you. As you step into view, I watch you suddenly stop, and stagger backward a few steps, and hear the sharp, startled exhalation of breath that escapes your lips. I turn to gaze with you.

Rising from the other side of the creek is a huge sandstone cliff, carved into long, lateral striations by centuries of flowing water. The cliff leans far over the stream, eclipsing most of the sky. As your eyes travel up its face, I watch your mouth drop open, and see your knees bend as you drop to a crouch. “Wow,” I hear you say.

“Uh-huh.” We peer into the sculpted face of this rock, letting its convolutions draw our awareness in curves and swoops across its ruddy expanse. Then we wade across the creek to press our hands against it.

After a while, I break the silence, “It’s weird, you know, the way so many people accept the notion that stone is inanimate, that rock doesn’t move. I mean, really, this here cliff moves me every time that I see it.”

You sigh, audibly: “Aw, come off it, Abram, now you’re stretching things too far. The so-called movement that you speak of, when you say that ‘this rock moves you,’ is just a metaphor. It’s not a real physical movement in, ya’ know, the material world, but only an internal feeling, a mental experience that has nothing to do with this actual cliff.”

“You must be kidding,” I blurt, exasperated. “I mean, how can you say that? I just saw you yourself stagger backward when you first caught sight of this rock face! It was quite obviously a physical movement in the actual, material world, and any bird watching from its perch in those cottonwoods would have to agree with me. You were quite palpably moved. Or do you mean to pretend that you were not?”

“Hmmm … Well I guess, in this case, that there was some real, material movement.”

“Well, then! D’you still want me to pretend that the rock moves you only mentally, or can we both admit that it is a physical, bodily action effected by the potent presence of this other being? Can we admit that your breathing body was palpably moved by this other body? And hence that you and the rock are not related as a mental ‘subject’ to a material ‘object,’ but rather as one kind of dynamism to another kind of dynamism—as two different ways of being animate, two very different ways of being earth?”

You are silent, puzzling. I see you gaze back at the rock face now, questioning it, feeling the looming sweep of its bulk within your torso, listening with your muscles and the quiet composition of your bones for what this old, sculpted presence might wish to add to the conversation. I watch you lie back upon the stony soil, giving yourself to the shelter of the overhanging sandstone, inviting the cool embrace of its shadow. Water drips near your face. The stillness, the quietude of this rock is its very activity, the steady gesture by which it enters and alters your life.


Ω I am informed here by the lucid research and insights of social ecologist Paul Shepard (1926–1996).





RECIPROCITY

(Knowledge I: Science and Experience)


Consider one of your hands for a moment. Allow your gaze to wander across the open field of the palm, following the creases as they cross one another or converge; let your eyes climb the limber trunks of your fingers. Each of these trunks has a single fold at its base, and two forward folds in its stance—apart from the thumb, whose single hinge makes it a more lumbering being than the others. Allow the thumb to reach across and touch the other fingers, investigating their textures with its tip, as the palm’s pliant expanse folds in the middle. Now try exploring that hand with the fingers of your other hand, letting them slide into the steep valleys that separate the first hand’s fingers. Taste the pleasure of this contact, the easy resonance between these two exceedingly tactile creatures.

The very organ with which we touch and explore the palpable textures and surfaces of the world, the hand is itself a thoroughly palpable, or touchable, entity. It has its own textured surface like the rippled sand of a beach, or the porous skin of a piece of fruit. This hand that touches things, then, is entirely a part of the tactile field that it explores. It is one of the textured inhabitants of that field, like the velvet moss, the splintered surface of a telephone pole, or the scabrous bark of a white oak near your home.

Wander over to that oak, or to a maple, or a sycamore; reach out your hand to feel the surface of a single, many-pointed leaf between your thumb and fingers. Note the coolness of that leaf against your skin, the veined texture your fingertips discover as they roam across it. But notice, too, another slightly different sensation: that you are also being touched by the tree. That the leaf itself is gently exploring your fingers, its pores sampling the chemistry of your skin, feeling the smooth and bulging texture of your thumb even as the thumb moves upon it.

As soon as we acknowledge that our hands are included within the tactile world, we are forced to notice this reciprocity: whenever we touch any entity, we are also ourselves being touched by that entity.

And it’s not just the tactile sense that exhibits this curious reciprocity. The eyes, for example, these luminous organs with which we hunt the shapes and colors of the visible world, are also a part of the visual field onto which they open. Our eyes have their glistening surface, like the gleaming skin of a pond, and they have their colors, like the auburn flank of a horse or a patch of pewter-gray sky. When we stumble outside in the morning, rubbing our eyes free of sleep and gazing toward the wooded hillside across the valley, our eyes cannot help but feel their own visibility and vulnerability; hence our animal body feels itself exposed to that hillside, feels itself seen by those forested slopes.

Such reciprocity is the very structure of perception. We experience the sensuous world only by rendering ourselves vulnerable to that world. Sensory perception is this ongoing interweavement: the terrain enters into us only to the extent that we allow ourselves to be taken up within that terrain.



On some mornings I step outside before pulling on any socks or sliding my feet into their shoes. The soil presses up against my bare feet and shapes itself to them; the clumped grasses massage and wake up my soles. Sharp pebbles stab the thick skin. Drier, more resistant grasses prick and sometimes break under my weight—ow!—sending my feet back onto the smoother stones. Pale stones are cool to the toes, dark rocks warmer. My feet receive directives from the ground, turning away from the brown, brittle grasses, seeking the press of those green blades that tickle and play against the callused skin and then spring up again, slowly, after I pass. It feels good to bring my life into felt contact with these other lives, even if only for a moment.

But how does my weight feel to those grasses; how do my steps feel to the terrain itself as I walk upon it? As this question rises, I begin to sense the carelessness with which I’m commonly clomping around, greedily amassing sensations. My legs inadvertently slow their pace as the sensitive presence of the land seems to gather beneath my feet, the ground no longer a passive support but now the surface of a living depth; and so my feet abruptly feel themselves being touched, being felt, by the ground. My steps slow down further. Flat rocks and rough rocks, needles cast off by the pines, grit that clings between the toes as they flex against the land: each patch of ground requests a different kind of step, which my legs discover only in the doing. My feet are like ears listening downward, and a dark rhythm rises up into me from this contact—a pulse that slows down and deepens the private beat within my chest.

Try this when the mood strikes you: step out upon the solid earth without the intermediary of a rubber or leather sole—without another creature’s tanned hide coming between your flesh and that of the earth. Notice the way your feet pressing against the coarse ground are also met by that ground, as your skin is probed by the soil and the pliant, bristling blades. How easy it is to sense that the terrain underfoot is the palpable surface of a living presence, and to allow that depth to feel your steps as you walk upon it! Watch how spontaneously your feet relax their pace in order to respect this odd otherness—in order to reply appropriately to the caress and the steady support of that depth, to avoid insulting the living land with your carelessness. An old, ancestral affinity between the human foot and the solid ground is replenished by the simple act of stepping outside without shoes.

Shoes, of course, are necessary accoutrements of civilization, eloquent in their simplicity; a number of Vincent’s canvases pay honor to their humble practicality. But we overuse them, and so forget that our feet—those downturned hands at the end of our hind legs—are sense organs as well as tools for transport. We release our nether appendages from these constraints only at night, when we unlace our artificial hooves and leave them by the bedside, swinging our legs up under the covers. Only then are our feet really free to wander and delve, our toes exulting in the rippling sheets, our soles caressing the cool skin of a lover’s thigh. Still, as crucial as it may be for the sustenance of our hearts and for the perpetuation of our species, the gravitational attraction between one naked body and another is but a small reflection of the more ongoing and insistent eros between our body and the earth.

The most intimate contact between the body and the earth unfolds not just at the bottom of our feet, but along the whole porous surface of our skin. For earth is not merely that dense presence underfoot—it is also the transparent air that enfolds us. The space between oneself and a nearby bush is hardly a void. It is thick with swirling currents, adrift with pollens and the silken threads of spiders, a medium instilled with whiffs and subtle pheromones and other messages riding the unseen flows that compose the atmosphere of this breathing world. And we are not just immersed in this invisible medium, we’re participant with it, inhaling this mystery through our nostrils and drawing it into our lungs, metamorphosing it there, exchanging certain vital elements for others before we breathe it back into the world. The carbon-rich air we exhale provides ready nourishment for the many plants growing around us. They, in turn, transform the air in the course of alchemizing sunlight into matter, quickening it with the oxygen upon which we animals depend. The atmosphere is a subtle ocean steadily generated and rejuvenated by the diverse entities that dwell within it, a fluid medium of exchange between the plants and the animals and the weathered rocks.

If the air is invisible, it is nonetheless quite palpable; we can feel the wind moving against our face and riding the curve of our ears. We can feel it tugging the hair on our heads, can feel the air part around our wrists as our arms slice their way through its unseen thickness. And just as we can sense the relative speed of its motion, the dryness or dampness of its touch, so we can also sense the breeze sampling our qualities as it brushes against us, tasting the intensity of our sweat, the mottled texture of our skin. We can feel it lambent on our shoulders, can feel the breeze’s caress on our ankles and its tickling play on our spine as it slides under our billowing shirttails. We can feel the air envelop and settle around us as it takes a mold of our shifting shape. If we assent to its inquiries, responding to its varied expeditions along our surface, then our actions take on a new elegance: the grace that flows from an ongoing and improvised dance with the sensuous medium that enfolds us.

As breathing involves a continual oscillation between exhaling and inhaling, offering ourselves to the world at one moment and drawing the world into ourselves at the next, so sensory perception entails a like reciprocity, exploring the moss with our fingers while feeling the moss touching us back, at one moment gazing the mountains and at the next feeling ourselves seen, or sensed, from that distance …



Spring’s intensity is finally bursting out of the branches. The scent of apricot blossoms makes my nostrils flare, triggering a faint memory of some giddy childhood transport; I stand still, eyes closed, sipping the sweet air with my nose.

But just then another, darker smell floods in and jumps my undefended neurons, making me wince. I recently began a new compost pile behind a near juniper. Orange rinds, leftovers kept too long in the back of the fridge, lettuce leaves turned brown and oozing, scrapes of this and that all merge into a pungent, slightly acrid rumor that drifts with the breeze. I head uphill and that whispering stench fades into the spice of green needles. A mosquito glides by and then circles erratically back, following a ribbon of scent to where it alights on my sleeve. I brush it free, and it drifts off a short distance, then commences to bounce up and down as if on a string. After a few vertical circuits, it swerves back down and settles on the same forearm, just beyond my rolled-up sleeve. I swivel my arm up to eye level in order to look closely at this creature. The mosquito seems oblivious to my gaze: she’s already bracing herself against my arm and piercing my skin with her long proboscis. I restrain an impulse to quash this annoying visitor, aware—for once—that here, too, is reciprocity.

If I’m able to smell the zinging scent of the piñons and the strong fermentation of the compost, it is only because I, too, am a part of the olfactory field—because I have my own musk and effluvium, my own chemical emanations that any mosquito can pick up and follow back to my skin. And since I also take pleasure in sampling the world’s tastes—since I can chew and swallow the leaves of coriander and parsley in our haphazard garden, and savor the sour tang of the crusty olive bread cooling on its rack in the kitchen—I know well that I, too, must have my own tastes, my delectable flavors, my tartness and bitterness, my dark aftertastes.

As an omnivore, an eater of the flesh of plants and sundry animals, willing to taste almost anything—and thus kindred, in my gustatory and cognitive curiosity, to most other omnivores: to bear and raven and raccoon—I find myself entwined in a great gift economy, wherein each life partakes of other lives and gives of itself in return. No matter how earnestly we humans strive to exempt ourselves from this economy (whether by dissociating from our animal bodies, or trying to eradicate every disease to which we’re susceptible, or sealing our remains within lead-lined caskets), we cannot escape our participation in the cycles of exchange. If we ingest the land’s nourishment not only through our eyes and ears but also through our hungry mouths—chomping leaves, seeds, and muscles with our teeth, moistening them with our saliva, and swallowing them down into our depths, incorporating the world’s flesh into our own—it can only be so because we, too, are edible. Because we, too, are food.

I watch the mosquito’s abdomen fill up with my blood. Countless times I have annihilated mosquitoes with a slap against my arm, or else brushed them angrily away. Yet today I just watch, humbled, ashamed to be offering only this tiny sip of my blood in return for the abundant sustenance I draw from the biosphere, yet still glad to confirm my membership in the big web of interdependence, as both eater and eaten.



We can sense the world around us only because we are entirely a part of this world, because—by virtue of our own carnal density and dynamism—we are wholly embedded in the depths of the earthly sensuous. We can feel the tangible textures, sounds, and shapes of the biosphere because we are tangible, resonant, audible shapes in our own right. We are born of these very waters, this very air, this loamy soil, this sunlight. Nourished and sustained by the substance of the breathing earth, we are flesh of its flesh. We are neither pure spirits nor pure minds, but are sensitive and sentient bodies able to be seen, heard, tasted, and touched by the beings around us.

There are ways of speaking that honor this consanguinity, and so encourage and enhance the reciprocity between the human animal and the more-than-human land. Yet there are also ways of speaking that implicitly deny this conviviality, styles of speech that stifle the spontaneous participation and exchange between our senses and the sensuous topography.

The familiar discourse of “objects” and objective processes, for example, resolutely holds us aloof from the sustaining earth. It forces us to disengage from our bodily senses and to view this wild-flourishing world as though we were spectators coolly observing it from outside. When we uncritically allude to material nature as a set of inert objects, or even as a clutch of determinate, mechanical processes, we block the perceptual interplay between ourselves and our surroundings. We deny the encounter with brooks, fogbanks, and boulders that hold our attention only by concealing various aspects of themselves from our immediate apprehension, beckoning our bodies into an ongoing interchange. When I talk of the aspen or the granite outcrop as a determinate object, I push into unconsciousness my direct experience of trees and rock ledges, contradicting my carnal awareness of them as ambiguous beings with their own enigmatic ways of influencing the space around them, and of influencing me. I contradict my felt sense of the rising moon as a living power.

And so to speak of enveloping nature in determinate, mechanical terms, or even to write of the environment in a purely functional manner, as “our human life-support system,” contravenes and cuts short the conviviality between our animal body and the animate earth. It stifles the spontaneous life of the senses. Our eyes begin to glaze over, our ears become deaf to the speech of tree frogs and the articulations of rain. What we say has such a profound effect upon what we see, and hear, and even taste of the world!

As a high school student in the nineteen seventies, I was much impressed by our laid-back physics teacher. Sitting on his desk at the front of the classroom, he told us—wide-eyed—that the apparent solidity and palpability of that desk was merely an illusion, for the desk, in truth, was constituted almost entirely of empty space—vast yawning expanses of emptiness shot through with various infinitesimally small and feverishly whirling particles. I couldn’t help but wonder why, then, that piece of furniture still held him aloft, suspended three feet above the classroom floor. I stuck my hand in the air, swooshing it back and forth to catch his attention. “How come, then, you don’t fall to the floor?”

“Because my body, too,” he announced, “is just a bunch of empty space whizzing with particles!” But this explained nothing whatsoever about why his apparent bulk still seemed to be supported by the wooden tabletop—why, for instance, his ostensibly empty and illusory flesh did not just sink into and merge with the voidness of that table, or why he and the table did not merge with the emptiness of the floor. It explained only why I should no longer trust my senses, and should accept that the abstract dimension of subatomic particles—the esoteric world of electrons and gluons and quarks—was in fact a truer, realer world than the one disclosed by my corporeal senses. For several days, I wandered about in a state of intellectual bedazzlement, aware for the first time that everything I saw with my eyes was only illusion, excited that I, alone among the citizens surging past on the sidewalk, knew the hidden truth. Or at least that I knew someone who did.

Or who said that he did. Gradually, over the course of several weeks, I discovered that a certain kind of provisional trust in the evidence of the senses was entirely necessary to accomplish the simplest tasks—like walking to school, or navigating the overgrown banks of the streambed behind the baseball field. Yet my exploration of that stream no longer held as much fascination for me as it had a few weeks earlier. If the visible world was in truth an illusory effect of realer events unfolding in the subatomic world, then I could no longer really learn anything of significance by gazing at the water striders, or by listening to the syncopated thrumming of the frogs. If I wished to know anything of what was really real, I would have to apprentice myself to those scientists who were conversant with that hidden dimension—those whose access to high-powered instruments enabled them to peer behind the perceivable world and glimpse its source.

I began to read feverishly in the arcane world of quantum physics, trying to glean whatever I could. Fascinating at first—yet I soon grew despondent. I was spending all my extra time hunched over articles I’d copied from journals on the squeaking Xerox machine on the back wall of the library, and my muscles were not happy about this. The prescription for my eyeglasses got stronger, while my skin wondered what’d become of the wind that used to explode past my face as I cycled the alleys and narrow woodlands of suburban Long Island. No doubt the wind was still there, but I wasn’t—I was nose-deep in my books, trying to decipher a language that had nothing to do, as far as I could tell, with the remembered brook gurgling over the rocks, or the glistening eye of a half-submerged bullfrog. I really missed those frogs. So what if I couldn’t yet gain access to the subatomic world with its ultimate truths? It soon dawned upon me that it was biology I should be studying.

The following year, I gave myself to biology with a vengeance. This was the science for someone like me—a shy and dreamy kid most at ease when balanced on a high branch in the backyard, listening to the whistling and liquid speech of the local birds, trying to fathom what they were talking about … It was good to be back in the same world as the jays and squirrels. It puzzled me at first that biology was taught entirely indoors, in a laboratory-style classroom—but I secured a desk close to the window, and when during lectures my attention drifted out beyond the glass, I felt less guilty about it than I did in my other courses. This being biology, I felt more justified gazing at the underbelly of a beetle climbing the other side of the pane, or a couple of barn swallows swerving and dipping behind the teacher’s reflection.

But then, a month and a half into term, Mr. Warasila announced that we’d be dissecting frogs the next week.

“Um, where’re these frogs gonna come from?” I demanded of him after class. He told me they were being shipped over for the express purpose of being dissected.

“Are you sure they’re not from around here?” I asked.

“Positive.”

All right. I ran across the field as soon as school was out, ducked under a few trees, and sat down by the dwindling stream. I wanted to consult the local frogs about this new situation. I sat there, I remember, for a long time, but none of the big-eyed critters turned up. Until much later, at dusk, I heard first one frog, and then another, but there wasn’t enough light to locate them with my eyes. So I just sat there and started talking to them, asking if they thought it was okay to dissect some other frogs in class. Whenever I started talking they quieted down, and then after I stopped there’d be a long pause, as though they were maybe thinking about what to say, and then they’d start croaking again. I knew full well that they were not replying to what I’d said, yet it had the rhythm of a conversation, and so I listened close to their resonant calls, and then cut in and tried to justify what I’d be doing in the laboratory next week, and they’d fall silent, once again, at the sound of my voice, and so we went back and forth for a while. I guess I came away feeling that, well, maybe it was okay to dissect some of their distant relatives, since it was necessary in order to learn the Truth about the world.

The following semester, however, our biology class began to focus upon the molecular basis of inheritance. It was then and there I learned a key part of that Truth: that not only the anatomical structure but even the behavior of all these animals was “programmed in their genes.”

Programmed! This piece of knowledge, as it sank in, reverberated through my own organism, transforming my experience of the organic world. After the last of the snows had melted away that spring, far fewer songbirds came to alight in the backyard branches. Earlier springs had brought an abundance of bird-speech bubbling back and forth between the trees and the hedges; now there seemed little of such chatter. Until one weekend, while sitting on the stoop gazing around, I abruptly realized that there were plenty of birds out and about, but I was no longer noticing them, was having a hard time hearing, or focusing in on, their vocalizations. The songs of the thrushes, the loopy cries of cardinals and blackbirds and other wingeds that previously held me rapt with fascination, had begun to fade from my awareness … It was as though my ears were becoming impervious to all these non-human voices. My auditory attention was no longer engaged by these various sounds, my listening no longer compelled by whatever was being said by those birds—precisely because, according to my new and improved understanding, they were no longer really saying anything at all. Their utterances were just automatic sounds—“programmed,” as it were. Sure, some of these repeated sounds were pleasant enough to attend to for a moment (like background music playing on a radio). But because I had defined away all the creativity and meaning in those voices, because there was no longer anything actively being said by those birds, my ears found little purchase in those sounds, no enigmatic openness, or otherness, to compel my listening. And so those avian calls readily faded into the background of a life increasingly focused on purely human concerns.

No longer enveloped by a many-voiced world at least as alive and mysterious as my own sentient self, my animal senses began to shut down. My eyes were no longer dazzled by the turquoise beetles climbing the weeds by the train tracks, or by the high-stepping poise of the heron at the local marsh. As I reflect upon it now, it seems that my skin itself became less porous, less permeable to the abundant life that surrounds, as my conscious self steadily withdrew its participation from sensuous nature and began to live, more and more, in a clutch of heady abstractions.

This retreat from directly experienced reality accelerated in college. The human senses, as we were taught in our college science classes, were deceptive; they were not to be trusted. For the genuine reality of things was inaccessible to our unaided senses. The real truth was always hidden behind the scenes—whether tucked inside our skulls (in that dimension of firing neurons and neurotransmitters that ostensibly determines all our experience), or hidden within the nucleus of our cells (in the molecular realm of the nucleotide sequences, or genes, that presumably cause all our curious behaviors), whether in the supersmall world of electrons, neutrons, and quarks, or in that dimension—inconceivably distant in space and time—wherein the cosmos emerged from the primordial “big bang.” The world accessible to our senses, the visible world of hillsides and rain and flocking birds, came to seem a secondary dimension, a largely illusory field of appearances waiting to be penetrated, and dissipated, by the human mind. The animate nature that our senses revealed was no longer fundamental; hence few people seemed very upset about the rapid destruction of forests and wetlands, or the accelerating extinctions of diverse creatures. Observable nature was a derivative reality—a realm useful for its extractable resources, or as a dump site for the toxic by-products of human progress, but not worth worrying about, really, since we could replicate whatever we wish of this domain with our virtual technologies, and would soon engineer the rest of nature, using gene splicing and nanotechnology, to suit our desires.

Such was the heady atmosphere in which my fellow pre-medical students and I were immersed. Few of us understood, back then, that all these technological dreams—like all those abstract dimensions hidden behind, beyond, or underneath the apparent surroundings—were still, secretly, rooted in the immediate world of direct experience, and hence were dependent upon our everyday encounters with the local earth. We did not suspect that our instinctive awareness of the winds, the waters, and the soil underfoot provided the necessary ground for all those abstractions, the sole guarantee of their coherence. It is only now, as we find both our lives and our high-tech laboratories threatened by severe fluctuations in the weather, as we watch coastlines disappear and foodwebs collapse and realize that our own children will not be exempt from the violence that our onrushing “progress” has inflicted upon the earth, only now do we notice that all our technological utopias and dreams of machine-mediated immortality may fire our minds but they cannot feed our bodies. Indeed, most of this era’s transcendent technological visions remain motivated by a fright of the body and its myriad susceptibilities, by a fear of our carnal embedment in a world ultimately beyond our control—by our terror of the very wildness that nourishes and sustains us. To recognize this nourishment, to awaken to the steady gift of this wild sustenance, entails that we offer ourselves in return. It entails that we accept the difficult mystery of our own carnal mortality, allowing that we are bodily creatures that must die in order for others to flourish. But it is this that we cannot bear. We are too frightened of shadows. We cannot abide our vulnerability, our utter dependence upon a world that can eat us. Vast in its analytic and inventive power, modern humanity is crippled by a fear of its own animality, and of the animate earth that sustains us.



So those ways of speaking that refer to nature only as a set of determinate objects, and random or mechanical processes, steadily isolate us from our senses and from the sensuous surroundings. They deepen the distance and opposition between ourselves and the grasses, between our conscious reflections and the gusting winds that bend and sometimes break those grasses.

Yet there are other styles of discourse that stir the senses from their slumber, other ways of speaking that can resuscitate the forgotten solidarity between the human animal and the animate earth. Words and phrases that respect the ultimate unknowable-ness of things—not only of other people, but of turtles, and juniper pollen, and the shifting progress of a rainstorm; ways of speaking that accord a certain enigmatic otherness, and uncertainty, even to shed antlers, and rocking chairs, and switched-on lightbulbs that startle us with their sputtering—to the moon, of course, but also to dwindling rivers, and well-made bicycles, and even to words themselves—such are the kinds of speaking that wake up our skin, calling us back inside the body’s world.

There are innumerable distinctions to be drawn between the palpable phenomena of this world, yet each particular presence partakes of a common mystery: the unfathomable upsurge of existence itself. Each thing expresses this mystery in its own manner and style, yet each is equivalently outrageous, a clump of dirt no less than a roaring, marauding brown bear—each enacting its own tenuous and improvised way in the world, each gifting its own rhythms to the riot of life that surrounds it. Every gust of wind, every note ringing forth from the bell tower, each staccato step of a water strider along the stream’s surface, has its own subtle influence upon the beings around it. Simply to exist, or continue existing, is already active—already a doing—and hence no phenomenon is utterly passive, without efficacy or influence. To allow this influence into our speaking, to affirm the unique dynamism of the various entities we meet in the course of a day, to acknowledge that whatever snags our attention has its own agency, or life: such a way of speaking inevitably begins to open our stifled senses.

Why is this so? Why should such an animistic style of speaking—one that assumes some modicum of creativity in even the most obstinate of phenomena, and which therefore speaks of things not merely as objects but as animate subjects, as living powers in their own right—why should such a way of talking renew and rejuvenate our bodily senses?

First, because it opens the possibility of interaction and exchange, allowing reciprocity to begin to circulate between our bodies and the breathing earth. If we speak of things as inert or inanimate objects, we deny their ability to actively engage and interact with us—we foreclose their capacity to reciprocate our attentions, to draw us into silent dialogue, to inform and instruct us. As soon as we allow things their own enigmatic openness and otherness, then our sensing bodies find themselves accosted, affronted, massaged, and ensnared by a host of charismatic powers vying with one another for our attentions. We’re suddenly surrounded by a crowd of alluring beings, some of them shy and some of them shameless, each of which provokes the imagination of our eyes or the curiosity of our ears, coaxing our senses into a new conviviality with the local earth.

Second, such a language makes evident the consanguinity between ourselves and the enfolding terrain, invoking an explicit continuity between our lives and the vitality of the land itself. It implies that the creativity we find in ourselves has its correlation in the surrounding cosmos, and, too, that the relative stubbornness and solidity we associate with the things around us have their correlate in the weight and inertia of our own lives, in the density of our flesh and the intransigence of our habits. By implying that each mountain, each cloud, each wolf or oak or hive of bees, is a distant variant of our own texture and pulse, and, conversely, that our own sentient organism is itself a variant of these things—an intensification or fluctuation within the sensitive flesh of the world—such a way of speaking situates the human intellect back within the sensuous cosmos. It subverts the long isolation of the thinking self from the perceptual world that it ponders, suggesting that we and the sensorial surroundings are woven of the same fabric, indeed that we are palpably entwined with all that we see, and hear, and touch—entirely a part of the living biosphere.

Third, by describing the myriad things as unfolding, animate beings, we bring our language back into alignment with the ambiguous and provisional nature of sensory experience itself—with the fact that we never perceive any entity in its entirety, but only encounter partial aspects according to the angle or mood of our approach. We may conceptualize the eroding cliffs and the bracket fungi as determinate phenomena, as fixed and finished presences resting complete in themselves, but we can never really perceive them as such. We cannot experience any entity in its totality, because we are not pure, disembodied minds, but are palpable bodies with our own opacities and limits. We are in and of the world, materially embedded in the same rain-drenched field that the rocks and the ravens inhabit, and so can come to knowledge only laterally, by crossing paths with other entities and sometimes lingering, responding to a thing’s sparkle or its calloused coolness, slowly becoming acquainted with its characteristic tenor and style, the unique manner in which it resists our assumptions. All our knowledge, in this sense, is carnal knowledge, born of the encounter between our flesh and the cacophonous landscape we inhabit. We know the things of our world not, in truth, as determinate objects, but as acquaintances and strangers, as trusted familiars and as troublesome neighbors, as allies and misfits and moody, dangerous comrades. Some, like the night sky, command my stunned silence and awe. Others, like my house, I tend to take for granted, although it steadily shelters me, and holds my toothbrushes. Still others, like the pages of a manuscript I’m slowly writing, are both alluring and inscrutable; I know not whether their apparent aloofness is because they disdain me or because they are shy, whether I should approach them or keep my distance. All of these beings are participant, with me, in the ongoing emergence of the real. Not one of them, in my direct experience, is utterly inert or inanimate.



Or is it? What of the plastic spatula in the sink, or the tax return we have yet to fill out this year, or the computer dozing, unplugged, by the wall? I mean, really, let’s face it: that computer is not, in actuality, really sleeping—it’s just turned off, and hence not computing—not really functioning at all, at the moment, except as a fancy paperweight, with all its complex and compacted circuitry immobilized and, well, inert. It is just there, an ingeniously fashioned mass of plastic and silicon that could never have been built were it not for the cool detachment of the analytic mind with its propensity to step back from the world, to hunt for underlying mechanisms, to objectify and tinker with things. An understanding of the world in analytic and objectlike terms is part and parcel of our reality; it is by now built into many of the artifacts we use, and many of the institutions we rely upon. It seems unlikely, therefore, that the detached, objectifying stance toward the things and processes of this planet will dissipate anytime soon.

And for heaven’s sake, why should it dissipate? Think of the astonishing insights and capabilities that this stance has brought us: the chemical table of the elements, the power of rapid transport and even flight, instantaneous communication links to almost anywhere on the planet! Not only technologies that might deaden the mind or deplete the earth, but many sustaining ones as well: the conquest of debilitating diseases, bioremediation of toxins, sophisticated solar and wind-driven engines, my eighteen-speed bicycle … Isn’t there something worthy and right, then, about our objective understanding of nature, and about the manifold insights that have been garnered from that perspective, the many useful facts and explanations harvested from the careful practice of our sciences?

Certainly there is! Nothing I write in these pages is meant to disparage the elegant disclosures revealed by our sciences, or even the detached states of mind necessary to derive those insights. I mean only to point out that the detached stance proper to science is itself dependent upon a more visceral reciprocity between the human organism and its world. It is this primordial and ongoing participation that has gradually shaped the glistening eyes with which we now view the lights and shadows of this sphere, as it has shaped our listening ears, able to detect a wide range of sounds vital to human life while oblivious to many others. This ageless intercourse between the body and the earth—this coevolution—has shaped the organs and tissues of every earthly organism, deepening the color of our feathers and the power of our claws, intensifying the bitterness of our leaves, outfitting our seeds with cotton sails so they’ll blow far on the summer winds.

The practice of science may enable us humans to provisionally step aside, now and then, from our immediate involvement in the coevolutionary exchange, yet our participation with the rest of the animate landscape has formed the very eyes that now peer through our microscopes, the very intelligence that now interprets the data.

The intrepid investigations of our sciences have yielded a range of insights that could, rightly construed, be of benefit not just to humankind but to the whole of the biosphere. In order to attain these insights, however, our scientists often had to feign a God’s-eye view of the world, assuming a detached and disaffected perspective—pretending, for the duration of their investigation, that they were not themselves entangled in the very nature that they were studying. During the course of each experiment, the scientist necessarily accepts this useful fiction, pretending that his or her observing intellect can somehow break itself free from its coevolved, carnal embedment in the thick of earthly life. She assumes that her intellect can somehow liberate itself from the physical biases and unconscious proclivities of her particular species, in order to observe whatever unfolds as a wholly uninvolved spectator—as an utterly objective rationality, a pure mind.

As a temporary and provisional stance, the assumption of a sheer objectivity has been immensely fruitful; it has resulted in a remarkable range of useful evidences. But while the individual practitioners of science must ultimately revert to their everyday lives as participants in the terrestrial world that they study, the lingo in which their findings are couched remains in the detached and disembodied mode. Their experimentally derived insights, that is, are preserved in the highly abstract discourse necessary to communicate those insights to other researchers feigning the same detached, or severed, state of mind. There is rarely any clear translation back from the pose of a pure, bodiless rationality to a language appropriate to our lived engagement and rapport with the life around us.

Any such translation would need to render those insights in a manner accessible to felt, bodily experience. Still more important, it would need to correct for the distortions induced in the interpretation of the raw data by the provisional pretense of a disincarnate perspective, of a view from nowhere.

Since no such translation is available (since each scientific investigation builds on previous investigations without translating the results of those prior studies into the language of direct experience), a host of abstract, provisional worlds is gradually built up by our diverse sciences, a multiplicity of arcane dimensions hidden beyond, behind, or beneath the experienced world. Such are the quantum dimensions explored by high-energy physics, or the realm of gene sequences pinpointed along the complexly folded strands of DNA tucked within the nuclei of our cells, as well as the tangled forests of axons and dendrites located behind our brows, and even the supervast precincts of black holes and galactic clusters. These recondite realms are largely hidden from our direct experience, and so we must rely on various experts to mediate and interpret the deep matters that are found there. Increasingly, those transcendent dimensions are purported to hold the fundamental truths that ostensibly cause, “code for,” or otherwise explain the ambiguous, uncertain world of our direct experience. The quest for ultimate truth stays focused on those theoretical dimensions inaccessible to our unaided senses; as a result, more and more of us come to assume that those theoretical realms are more true, more fundamental, more real than this palpable world that we experience with our breathing bodies.

But this assumption—this tendency to explain the lived world by reference to dimensions hidden beneath or beyond that world—actually inverts the demonstrable state of affairs. Not even our most brilliant researchers have continuous experience of those other dimensions; indeed, the empirical evidence regarding those realms is necessarily fragmentary and piecemeal. Science encounters those alien scales of existence only by means of exceedingly specialized instruments, and often only for brief moments—usually during highly structured experiments—when particular reactions are registered by such instruments, or specific measurements are recorded by means of them. Our scientists, then, must fill in the yawning gaps between those fragmentary glimpses in order to glean some sense of how those hidden worlds really function—how “quarks” are held within a proton or neutron; how particular stretches of DNA influence other stretches of the same chromosome; how the neural lattice of branching axons and dendrites continually interacts with itself; how black holes twist the fabric of space-time. Our experts construct a hypothetical image of what’s unfolding at those other scales only by extrapolating from their fragmentary findings, and creatively filling in the holes between them. Yet the manner in which they fill those vast gaps in the empirical data is inevitably shaped by intuitions, expectations, proclivities, and perceptual habits borrowed from their ongoing (and taken-for-granted) engagement with the one realm that they inhabit with the whole of their animal bodies—from this enigmatic, earthly cosmos of ground, wind, and rain that commonly meets their senses as they daily go about their lives.

Every coherent image we can have of those other, ostensibly more objective dimensions of reality is secretly rooted, then, in the ambiguous, ever-shifting terrain of our ordinary experience. Everything we have come to believe about those presumably more fundamental scales of reality is tacitly dependent upon our everyday engagement with the world at this scale—the very scale of existence to which our animal senses are tuned. In the open expanse of our full-bodied experience, the entities that meet our senses are not quarks and protons, but rather brambles and mushrooms and slowly eroding hillsides; not DNA base pairs or neuronal synapses but rather children, and woodpeckers, and the distant sound of thunder. Although we regularly try to explain this ambiguous world by appealing to those more mathematically precise realms hidden behind the perceivable surroundings, it is ultimately our ongoing relation to the capricious earth that holds the key to all those abstract and provisional worlds.



Let’s reprise this reflection from another angle, leaning for a moment upon the work of one of the most lucid observers of the world that meets our unaided senses, a scientist who rarely let his ponderings swerve too far from the earth of his direct experience. For more than two millennia, alphabetic civilization had claimed a special origin for humankind, asserting that humans were divinely fashioned to serve as God’s representatives on earth. This presumption was challenged and largely overturned by Charles Darwin, whose painstaking observations provided convincing evidence that humankind, on the contrary, had taken shape like other species over the long course of evolution. The theory of evolution by natural selection made evident that we, too, are animals, created not by an external divinity but evolved from a group of primate ancestors, and more anciently from a lineage of small mammals, themselves derived, much earlier, from an ancestral line of fish long immersed in the ocean depths.

Darwin had rediscovered the deep truth of totemism—the animistic assumption, common to countless indigenous cultures but long banished from polite society, that human beings are closely kindred to other creatures, and indeed have various other animals as our direct ancestors. Here was a form of totemism transposed into the modern world—the totemic insight now translated into the language of “descent by natural selection from a common ancestor.” This modern version no longer saw different persons as descendants of different totemic animals, but recognized all humankind as derived from a common lineage of creatures. In the wake of Darwin’s bold insights, we have learned to consider all humans as members of a common family. But the wild, animistic implication of Darwin’s insight has taken much longer to surface in our collective awareness, no doubt because it greatly threatens our cherished belief in human transcendence. Nonetheless, it is an inescapable implication of the evolutionary insight: we humans are corporeally related, by direct and indirect webs of evolutionary affiliation, to every other organism that we encounter.

Moreover, it is not only other animals, plants, and simpler organisms that have contributed, during the course of evolution, to the unique character of the human creature, but also the fluid ocean, and the many rocks that compose the soils, and the way the mountains gather clouds above the high ridges. These planetary structures are not extrinsic to human life—they are not arbitrary or random aspects of a world we just happen to inhabit. Rather they are the constitutive powers that summoned us into existence, and hence are the secret allies, the totemic guides, of all our actions. They are as much within us as they are around us; they compose the wider, deeper life of which our bodies are a part.

If we accept Darwin’s insights, and concede that the human species has been shaped by the creative flux of evolution, then we must acknowledge that the enfolding biosphere is the very matrix within which our organism came to acquire its current form. Our senses have coevolved with the chemistry of these waters and this air, shaping themselves to the particular patterns of the animate earth. Our human eyes have evolved in subtle interaction with other, non-human eyes—as our ears are now tuned, by their very structure, to the howling of wolves and the thrumming of frogs. While gliding in huge, undulant schools through the depths of the amniotic oceans, or later, while crawling upon our bellies from puddle to puddle (our scaly skins glinting in the sun)—while racing beneath the grasses as tiny, nocturnal mammals, or leaping from branch to branch as long-tailed primates—our brainy bodies have steadily formed themselves in dynamic interaction with the textures and rhythms of terrestrial nature.

Our nervous systems, then, are wholly informed by the particular gravity of this sphere, by the way the sun’s light filters down through Earth’s atmosphere, and by the cyclical tug of Earth’s moon. In a thoroughly palpable sense, we are born of this planet, our attentive bodies coevolved in rich and intimate rapport with the other bodily forms—animals, plants, mountains, rivers—that compose the shifting flesh of this breathing world.

So it is the elemental Earth that has lent us our particular proclivities and gifts, our specific styles of behavior. Our ways of moving, our modes of perception, our unique habits of thought and contemplation, have all been informed by the variegated nature of this wild-flowering world. Thus, the enfolding biosphere provides the inescapable template for our experience of any other realm we may discover or devise. Whether we are pondering the unfathomably vast galactic clusters revealed by a new generation of radio telescopes, or mathematically exploring the submicroscopic realm of vibrating, supersymmetric strings, we cannot help but interpret whatever we glimpse of those worlds according to predilections derived from the one realm in which we uninterruptedly live—predispositions necessarily instilled, over the marathon course of evolution, by the shapes, the patterns, and the other inhabitants of our terrestrial environment.

For example, our surmises regarding the subtle function of neural processes within the brain are profoundly constrained by the fact that the brain did not evolve in order to understand itself. The complex organization of the brain evolved as a consequence of our sensorial and muscled engagement with the complex, dangerous, and ever-shifting landscapes that surrounded us. The brain has thus a natural proclivity to help us orient and interact with those enigmatic surroundings. Whenever we attempt to focus the thinking brain back upon itself—upon its own neural structure and functioning, or upon other dimensions similarly hidden from our common experience, whether subatomic or cosmological—it cannot help but bring those predispositions to bear, anticipating gravity, ground, and sky where they are not necessarily to be found, interpreting data according to the elemental constraints common to our two-legged species, yielding an image of things profoundly informed by our animal body and its accustomed habitat.

There is much to be gleaned from our investigations into other scales and dimensions, yet we constantly err by assuming our studies provide an objective assessment of the way those other scales really are in themselves, independent of the very partial perspective that we curious primates have on those dimensions. The supersmall and ultravast spaces steadily explored by the sciences can never explain this lovely and problem-ridden world that we daily inhabit, since those abstract spaces are largely woven out of the perceptual fabric of this very world. Certainly our forays into those abstract dimensions can offer us clues, new approaches to the land around us, new ways of looking at a forest or feeling a volcanic tremor. They can spark new insights into the lives that surround us, new ways of understanding ourselves, or—if we choose—of altering ourselves. Ultimately, however, it is only the lived, felt relationships that we daily maintain with one another, with the other creatures that surround us and the terrain that sustains us, that can teach us the use and misuse of all our abstractions.

Despite all our giddy technological dreams, this vast and inscrutable land—drenched by the rains and parched by the summer sun—remains the ultimate ground, and the final horizon, of all our science. It is not primarily a set of mechanisms waiting to be figured out, this breathing land. It is not a stock of resources waiting to be utilized by us, or a storehouse of raw materials waiting to be developed. It is not an object.

It is, rather, the very body of wonder—a shuddering field of intelligence in whose round life we participate. And if, today, this dreaming land has been forgotten behind a clutch of glowing screens that intercept the fascination of our focused eyes—if it has been eclipsed by styles of speaking that deaden our senses, and by machinic modes of activity that stifle the eros between our body and the leafing forests—then it is time to listen, underneath all these words, for the animal stirrings that move within our limbs and our swelling torsos. It is time to unplug our gaze from the humming screen, walking out of the house to blink and piss under the river of stars. There are new stories waiting in the cool grasses, and new songs …





DEPTH

(Depth Ecology II)


I only went out for a walk, and finally concluded to stay out till sundown, for going out, I found, was really going in.

— JOHN MUIR





A certain blue of the sky is so damn blue that only blood could be more red. Actually, the French poet Paul Claudel was speaking of the blue of the sea when he made that curious observation, but up at this altitude, the sky itself is the sea I’m swimming in. Relentless blue fills every hollow, snuggling up against the outline of each boulder, drinking aspen sap straight from the bruised bark of these groves, pressing in on my eyes, rounding my nostrils and seeping in through my sweating pores as I walk down this slope. Maybe I’d better say that I’m loping rather than walking, since gravity’s granting a long, fluid stride to my legs that they never have on level ground. Spruces and firs and clustered aspens glide past me as I descend, all heading in the other direction. But I pay them scant mind; I’m watching the shifting dance of the hills just in front of me.

Only a short time before, I had gotten to my feet, shoved my journal into my pack, taken a last look around the summit, and began hiking down this grassy incline. I couldn’t see those dancing hills as yet, or rather I didn’t notice them; they seemed part of the flat and forested valley floor that stretches westward from the foot of the mountain.

I had no map with me. I hadn’t wanted to spend the requisite eighteen bucks for a decent topo map of these mountains, since I didn’t really know what stretch of this terrain I’d choose to ramble. Then my car broke down. Impatient to get off the dirt road and into the woods, I took the breakdown as a sign to head in from that spot and see where I wound up.

It was a stupid move, but the exhausted old Ford didn’t respond to my clumsy tinkering, and I didn’t want to burn up the whole day trying to find a more reputable mechanic. Besides, I generally enjoy being lost—it being the quickest way I know to rouse my creaturely senses from their slumber and coax an entry into that elixir-like state of mind called “wilderness.” Sure enough, that wild flavor had come on as soon as I’d wandered far enough to feel unsure just which ravine led back to my vehicle. By midafternoon I’d already hiked up and over several ridges; upon hauling my limbs to the top of the last modest peak, I could see that it was the westernmost summit in this part of the mountains. From that height, the western slope seemed to drop precipitously to the broad plain far below; I predicted that I’d soon be strolling six or seven level miles to a paved highway whose sinuous line I could just barely make out from the top.

But not five minutes after I began my loping descent, that valley floor extending so serene and flat toward the western horizon began undulating and folding. As though prompted by the intensity of my gaze as I scanned its forests for the best route to take, the valley began to lift various parts of itself skyward, like large swells rising from the green surface of a sea. The lower I got, the higher those waves ascended, the furrows between them deepening, until I realized that I was descending into a rolling maze of hills and ravines from which I was unlikely to emerge before dark. A mix of trepidation and elation had then spread into my muscles. I still had a fair amount of water, and although I’d brought no sleeping bag on this jaunt, I had a down jacket stuffed in my pack. The moon had been full two nights back, so if the sky stayed free of clouds I’d be able to hike through much of the night and catch a ride on that highway come morning.

I found myself grinning at the way I’d been fooled by the topography. My eyes seemed keener now, and the blue of the sky more penetrating; the apparent metamorphosis in the land had induced a new lucidity within my organism. And it was then, in midstride, that I noticed the hills slowly dancing.

Look: that steep slope across the way is even now splitting into two thickly wooded slopes, one gliding toward me and the other gliding backward, as a wide swale—invisible a moment ago—is opening between. From within that hollow, or rather through it, a distant ocher cliff is now beckoning. So this landscape is still metamorphosing; it didn’t halt its transformations after these foothills emerged from what had seemed a flat plane—now the hills are shifting among themselves as I walk. They alter their relation to one another, some stepping to the fore while others hide themselves (sometimes reappearing a minute later from a new angle, transfigured and tough to recognize). That ocher-gray cliff that called out to me a moment ago has been swallowed up once again by this protean terrain, while a wooded hillside is now extending a muscled shoulder in my direction, reaching its arm out to hold and merge with the steep slope that I’m descending. A few conifers leaning out from that ridge coax me toward it. It appears much too narrow to safely cross, but as I approach it the ridge thickens and widens out; there’s a faint path worn by hooves along the top edge. A horde of crows flaps overhead, their raucous cries filling my awareness until they blessedly dissolve back into the blue silence. Let’s follow this deer trail and see if it offers a way though these labyrinthine hills.

I step onto the ridge and make my way along it, aided by random tree limbs offering handholds, then walk into the thicker woods on the opposite slope.



Depth is the dimension of closeness and distance. It is the way the world spreads out from a few aspen leaves left dangling, golden and spent, on a branch in front of your face, to the rocky ridge across the glen, and beyond that to the further hills piled one upon the other against the last mountain range silhouetted zigzag against the sky, and on past, opening out across the unseen desert to a horizon still faintly visible between a few peaks in that range. Depth is the visceral stretch between the near and far of things—the continuum, or glide, between the known and the unknown. It is the manner in which the distances beyond the horizon—realms that you can dream but cannot see—somehow open onto those vague and far-off shapes that you can see but cannot possibly touch, the way the perceptual world bounded by those edges swerves toward you out of that purely visible distance, growing more and more palpable until, yes, you can also reach it with your fingers, feeling the smooth texture of the branch with your hands as well as your eyes, a dimension that keeps on coming right up to your face and includes it.

Depth implicates the whole of our animal body (this carnal density of muscles and skin and breath), situating us physically within the animate landscape. Whenever we notice that some aspects of the perceived world are closer and more accessible to us than others, whenever we acknowledge that some phenomena are crisply visible while others are concealed from view, we affirm our bodily location in the midst of those phenomena. Unlike the dimensions of height and of width, which seem entirely objective attributes of the things that we perceive, the dimension of depth varies with each change in our own position. The overall height of the aspen grove across the meadow is a fairly fixed property of those clustered trees—as even the width of that grove seems an objective property of that place. But the depth of that grove manifestly depends upon my bodily position in relation to those trees. From where I stand, the aspen grove has a somewhat shallow depth; my gaze can readily pass through it to the darker evergreens on the far side. Yet as I walk around the grove, the depth shifts: from here, that crowd of aspens has a more profound and many-layered depth, and my eyes cannot really penetrate it. And if I step among those aspens, into the heart of the grove, then its depth will open and envelop me, and I will need to describe it afresh.

Check this, reader, against your own experience: unlike the height of a mountain range, and the width or span of a valley, the depth of a terrain—the relation between the near and far aspects of that land—depends entirely upon where you are standing within that terrain. As you move, bodily, within that landscape, the depth of the scape alters around you.

Such alterations of perceived depth are provoked not only by our own changes of position; they can also be triggered by activity in the land itself. When I am exploring an unfamiliar locale and find myself pondering the contour of a nearby hill, it may happen that a flock of chattering birds passes overhead, flying in the direction of that hillside, and I think that at any moment they are about to alight upon it—yet they keep flying, seeming to rise above the crest of that hill and then passing beyond it, becoming smaller and smaller in the sky, their calls growing fainter and fainter. Until, now barely visible, they abruptly dip down and alight, to my startlement, upon that very hillside! My eyes blink and stare: those birds had not flown past that hill at all—rather, that slope is much farther away than I’d thought, and so it has taken the flock all this time to reach it. Which necessarily means that that hill is a great deal larger than I’d assumed! Yet these thoughts are not undertaken consciously; rather, my animal body, thrown out of equilibrium by the incongruous landing of that distant flock, rapidly recalibrates its sensations, allowing a new experience of that hill to settle into my eyes and muscles, allowing the depth of this landscape to dilate and expand around me.

At yet another time, when walking along a slender stream in the high desert backcountry, our legs will carry us beneath a tall bank. And so the broad plain on which we’d been walking, dotted with cacti and juniper bushes, vanishes entirely from view; we’re now stumbling within a claustrophobic realm, a world shrunken to the narrow confines of this creek’s shouldered passage. Yet as we follow the creek upstream, stepping across it when we need to, this narrow world slowly begins to divulge its myriad secrets—its hidden nooks piled with patterned stones, or strewn with translucent exoskeletons shed by some sort of insect: here a fox’s tracks pressed in the mud where she came to drink, there a bright lizard doing push-ups on a lichened rock—so that soon enough we are taken up within the strange interiority of this canyon cosmos, our senses tuning themselves to the manifold intricacies of a depth that keeps expanding. Hence we are taken aback when the canyon walls suddenly dwindle and our legs abruptly emerge into the wider landscape; we feel at first all exposed, visible, vulnerable on every side. Our eyes gradually stretch open their focus to meet this wider depth as our stride lengthens to walk within it. Meanwhile, the unique interiority of the canyon, its intricate and intimate immensity, begins to slip away from our awareness. In truth, we think now, it was less a canyon than a gully, and indeed when we glance back toward it as we hike away from the stream we now see only a linear interruption in the flat surface of the desert, like the top of a small, winding ditch, with no hint of the cosmos hidden within it.

Or at dusk in the thick of the city, walking through a different kind of canyon fashioned of gleaming marble and glass mirroring countless other pedestrians, reflecting yellow taxis and shiny limousines and tall buses loudly wheezing as they stop and start up again—vertical vaults of stone and glass reflecting, too, the screech of tires and the rustling of bags and the click of heels on the endless pavement and the intermittent honking of the cabs, echoing even your own voice as you yell “I love you, too!” into a cell phone held up to your ear and then snapped shut as you plunge forward, utterly focused on your destination off ahead in the rectilinear distance, when suddenly your ears clue you in to an eerie spaciousness to your right as the echoing wall you’ve been walking past is no longer there. You’ve reached the corner, and as you step down from the curb you swivel your head to glance up the cross street and there, smack-dab in the middle of that side canyon, is the full moon, swollen, rising above the tops of the cars, muffling the honking horns and turning a hundred panes of glass on both sides of the canyon into dazzling white facets, stealing your breath and crumpling your knees at the gorgeousness of a blaring city transformed into a silent, luminous crystal …



Many years ago I journeyed through Southeast Asia, making my way as an itinerant sleight-of-hand magician, performing on street corners and at small family inns. One afternoon, I found myself walking alone between two tiny hamlets high in the Nepali Himalayas, under a towering mountain called Ama Dablam by the Sherpa villagers. All day long I’d been gazing the resplendent southwest visage of this mountain, its features etched with snow and ice, watching its expressions shift with the angle of the sun as I hiked up the narrow trail. In midafternoon I took off my backpack to rest for a moment, gulping some water and glancing behind me. I saw then that the monsoon clouds were slowly ascending the southern valleys at my back. I hoisted my pack and quickened my pace, with the intent to reach my destination—the isolated home of a Sherpa jhankri, or shaman—while the visibility was still good. But one appendage of that cloud mass seemed to advance more rapidly than the rest, climbing the slopes at the base of Ama Dablam; soon it was caressing the sharp edge of the mountain wall. I stopped to watch, bowing low to the mountain, thanking it for the indulgence of its companionship and for its protection (Ama means “mother” in Sherpa, as it does in many other languages) as the cloud slowly came between Ama Dablam and my eyes. For a while I caught glimpses of the mountain’s ravishing face through various rents and rifts in the cloud, but then the white mass thickened, and I could no longer see it. Ama Dablam was gone. Trying to feel its implacable presence behind the gaseous miasma, I was astonished to discover that I could no longer sense the mountain at all. I was no more able to feel the presence of that looming peak, now, than I was able to see it. The mountain, whose majestic bulk had commanded my attention for most of the day, had simply vanished.

It was the purest disappearance I’d ever witnessed—no doubt because the entity who was suddenly not there was a being of such immutable power, a great wave of earth whose adamant eloquence had been conversing with my sweating body for so many strenuous hours. It occurred to me then, staring across the boulder-strewn pass into the swirling vapor, that here was the truest archetype for my craft as a sleight-of-hand magician. I must strive to make my silver coins and my billiard balls vanish as completely as this cloud had coaxed the entire mountain to vanish, transforming an immense colossus of rock and ice into a fleeting phantom, a mere memory. To this day, whenever I roll a silver dollar across my knuckles, preparing to make it disappear, I bow subtly toward the remembered mountain and the monsoon clouds—an apprentice honoring his masters.

Sleight-of-hand relies entirely on the dimension of depth, since this dimension alone empowers nearby surfaces to hide farther ones, enabling the back of a relaxed hand to conceal a ball gently gripped in its palm. The same depth that empowers clouds to dissolve cliffs also allows the dangling folds of a previously empty scarf to conceal a patient rabbit held behind them. Yet depth can also work its magic entirely out in the open. While strolling barefoot along a beach you might glimpse, in the near distance, a discarded tire half-buried in the sand, its worn-out treads exposed to the sun and salt spray. If you stroll closer, however, you may see that tire suddenly metamorphose into a dozing seal that rouses and barks, gruffly, at your approach, and then galumphs into the water.

Some months before my extended trek in the Himalayas, I was exploring a wild peninsula jutting into the Indian Ocean from the south coast of Java. It was a sweltering hot day, with no breeze to ease the thickness; I had peeled off my sweat-soaked shirt and tied it ’round my waist. Emerging from some woods into a wide field above the sea, I saw that a wind was jostling the leaves and swaying the branches of some trees on the far side of the clearing. Grateful, I made my way toward that grove in order to feel the moving air on my damp skin. As I got close to those trees, however, the apparent wind bending their branches abruptly transformed into a band of monkeys foraging for food among their leaves. There was no breeze at all, only a bunch of primates better adapted to the heat than I.

Such perceptual transformations are endemic to a reality that exists only in depth—a reality that discloses itself to us only by holding some part of itself in the uncertain distance, a world that we encounter only in the tension between the nearby and the yonder. The dimension of depth is ruled by Proteus, the shapeshifting god, whose dominion over sensory experience teaches us to stay loose, to invite magic, to expect metamorphosis. While lying belly-down on the grass one afternoon, my head propped on one hand as the other turned the page of a novel, I took vague note of an airplane soaring far above at the very periphery of my vision, then became alarmed when its engine grew louder and I sensed it beginning a nosedive. Only as I frantically twisted my torso to stare did the careening plane suddenly transform, resolving into a buzzing bottle fly walking down the right lens of my eyeglasses.

Of course, such perceptual shifts, slippages, and corrections are occurring all the time as we go about our days. If we rarely notice such transformations today—if we seem to have lost our sense of the earth’s audacious and metamorphic magic—it is likely because our depth perception has become impoverished. After all, our sensorial engagement with the ambiguous depth of our world has been largely overcome, in the last half century, by our steady involvement with flat representations of that world. So many children have been raised, day after day, on the flat screens of televisions, video monitors, and handheld computers—as indeed many adults spend their waking hours focused upon digital screens! This trading of the world’s visceral ambiguity for flat representations is a habit that began centuries ago, when cultural elites began to devalue the participatory wisdom drawn directly from physical engagement with the living land in favor of knowledge drawn, secondhand, from the flat pages of books. It matters little that the things written of on those pages may be filled with creative nuance, or that the glowing screen carries an image rich with perspectival programming and simulated depth—for it is first the flat surface that intercedes between us and that depth. Our animal senses are no longer in direct relation with the sensuous terrain; our muscled body sits immobilized before the smooth and scintillating surface upon which we gaze, enthralled.



My laptop computer has a built-in DVD player. And so, for once, I am watching a film on my laptop. At a crucial point in the story, a dilapidated truck appears and parks in the background, off behind the main character. Yet my eyes do not alter the depth at which they’re focused in order to clarify that distant truck. For the camera filming the scene has already done the focusing for me. As I glance toward that truck, my eyes remain focused at the very same distance as when they were watching the central character in the foreground—a distance that, in truth, is not fifteen feet away from me, where that fellow appears to be standing, but merely the thirty-inch distance of the computer screen from my face. If the artful cameraman had left that far-off truck out of focus, then my visual system would be unable to bring it into focus in any case—whether by tightening the tiny muscles around the retina of each eye, or by changing the angle at which my two eyes converge. Having watched many films, my eyes long ago gave up trying to focus the individual images; they simply surrender themselves to the screen.

As we spend more and more of our lives gazing at screens, tuning our senses to the fabricated distances that we see there, the instinctive participation of our eyes in the near and far of the world is suspended for longer and longer periods. The ability to actively engage the manifold and shifting depth of the land—altering one’s focus from a close clump of grass to the far-off cliffs, then abruptly back to fix on a woodpecker thwacking a dead snag in the intermediate distance—disarticulates and dissolves in the face of this new entrancement with a world displayed at an exact remove from one’s face.

If you are watching a nature-based program on television—observing a female lion, perhaps, as she lolls with her cubs under the shade of an acacia tree—and you happen to stand up and walk across the room, notice: your movement does not alter anything on the screen. The depth of the room, of course, shifts around you as you move—the bookcase looms up in front of you and then recedes as you step past it, the music stand momentarily comes between you and the television as you walk by—yet the spatial positions of those cubs do not shift in relation to one another, or to the acacia tree behind them. For you and those lions do not inhabit the same space. There is no depth between you and those creatures, since you stare at them from a position entirely outside of their world.

You may, of course, learn a great deal about lions by watching such a program. But the primary lesson your organism steadily learns from the program is that nature is something you look at, not something you are in and of.

Sometimes the screens that hold our gaze contain no images at all, only numerical equations, or lists, or carefully crafted sentences. Back at my laptop now, I sit gazing at the white expanse, tapping with my fingers as letters array themselves on its surface like ants. It is a compelling enough activity, watching the lines of ants assemble, although when I raise my eyes to glance out the window, I do not see the many-branched cottonwood in its inviting depth, nor sense its near branches pressing against the pane. I do not feel the distance between this cabin and the twin hills across the valley, although they, too, are visible through the glass. I don’t sense the heavy bulk of those hills, or the relative lightness of the clouds clumped above them. For my screen-dazzled eyes do not focus upon the swooping branches or those far hills; they see only these blurred and somewhat flattened shapes juxtaposed as on a single plane—forming, as it were, a kind of painted backdrop for my cogitations. What I experience, in other words, is neither that cottonwood nor those clouds, but simply “the scenery.” Only when I take a break from the writing and launch myself from the desk, walking to the door and yanking it open, the cold air shaking my brain loose from its verbal exertions—only then does that scenery begin to breathe, the barks of sundry dogs stretching open the visible landscape as their contrasting nearness or distance registers in my ears, and the hills stand up one in front of the other, and branches dangle near my head—and so my body finally remembers itself back inside the round life of the local earth.

The more we spend our days staring at screens, taking our dreams and directives from the signs and shapes that play across their smooth surfaces, the harder it becomes to make this transition, the easier to simply stay ensconced within a universe of images neatly honed to meet our needs. Even if we venture beyond the walls of our office or metropolis, we often find ourselves merely staring at the scenery. Accustomed to peering at flat representations, we’ve begun to take the palpable world itself as a kind of representation—no longer a limitless field in whose boisterous life we’re participant, but a set of determinate facts arrayed in front of us, upon which we gaze like detached and impartial spectators. We no longer peer into the enigmatic depths of a terrain that encompasses and exceeds us; the land has now become something that we look at.

For example, today many educated folks have ceased experiencing the earth as the rough ground that supports their steps and the wind pouring past their ears; for them the earth has become, first and foremost, that blue sphere flecked with clouds that they have seen in various NASA photos—images that were reproduced countless times and became the basis for a thousand corporate logos. For a great many persons the earth is now equated, in other words, with the earth seen from outside—with our planet as it might be seen by a transcendent god, or by a surveillance satellite. This “objective” view of the earth now conditions and supersedes our immediate experience of the rainswept land that enfolds us and drenches our shirt as we run to the mailbox. Such soaked and shivering experiences, we now realize, are secondary, mere “subjective” distortions of a factual reality that has already been mapped, measured, and monitored. It may indeed be raining, but we can best clarify this by turning on the Weather Channel.

To our animal awareness the land remains ambiguous, open-ended, and always prone (as we saw earlier) to unexpected metamorphoses. But such visceral experiences seem arbitrary and ephemeral next to the “hard” facts yielded by the impersonal instruments now surveying the real. Most of us moderns pay scant attention to our directly felt impressions of the world. We hardly notice such impressions anymore, or we straightaway translate those qualitative sensations into the quantitative world of facts, and information, that is the primary object of faith in our era.

It is a faith partly held in place, I’m suggesting, by our ever-growing participation with screens of all kinds, by our steady subjection to flat representations and spectacles. The belief in a thoroughly objective comprehension of nature, our aspiration to a clear and complete understanding of how the world works, is precisely the belief in an entirely flat world seen from above, a world without depth, a nature that we are not a part of but that we stare at from outside—like a disembodied mind, or like a person gazing at a computer model.

When we consider the things from a disincarnate position outside the world that they inhabit, the ambiguous effects of depth dissipate: we seem to encounter the things as they really are, naked and exposed to an all-seeing awareness that, freed from any limited perspective, is able to penetrate every opacity, able to register every aspect of the real. By renouncing our animal embodiment—by pretending to be disembodied minds looking at nature without being situated within it—we dispel the tricksterlike magic of the world. We dissipate its mysterious concealments and transfigurations, dissolving at last the confounding limitations that the dimension of depth had imposed upon all our knowledge.

And yet it remains a pretense. Whenever we view the natural world as a set of objects, whenever we perceive the terrain around us as a clear and determinable set of facts, then we are in truth not really perceiving the actual terrain at all, but only a representation—a projected concept—of that terrain. We may conceive of earthly reality as though we were not ourselves of it, but we can never really perceive it as such.

Although he lusted for the hard matter of reality, Henry Thoreau, exemplary animal that he was, knew well that the living, breathing body could never encounter a wholly determinate and defined object, and hence that we never really meet a naked fact:

If you stand right fronting and face-to-face to a fact, you will see the sun glimmer on both its surfaces, as if it were a scimitar, and feel its sweet edge dividing you through the heart and marrow, and so you will happily conclude your mortal career.Ω



Yet we’ve convinced ourselves that the land around us—generously abundant at some moments, ferocious and unforgiving at others—is really a set of sheer facts; we hold ourselves apart from the world in order to subdue its wildness.

The mechanical and mindless nature that we ponder under the cool guise of objectivity has proved outrageously useful, a model that has enabled the most audacious manipulations undertaken in the name of betterment and progress, from the diversion of rivers and their transformation into electricity, to the mining of genomes and their transformation into prestige and profit. Moreover, it’s now clear that the objective model of nature will be necessary for the careful mending of the many world-wounds brought about by all this progress. We will not get by without it. Yet it is a model nonetheless, a flattened representation of nature. It is not the wild world in its living actuality—not this mystery that we contact with our own breathing and bleeding bodies. It is not the cottonwood branch now tangled in my windblown hair, or the flock of cranes swirling far overhead in midmigration, their ratchetlike croaks filtering down through the tumult of sky. Strand by strand, I ease my hair free from the branch. Near the base of the tree, a small stone glints silver against the dark soil. It is not that stone, nor the sunlight on that stone.



The density of these woods must be muffling the soundscape—I’ve heard neither birds nor the wind for a long time, only the sound of my footfalls as they crunch along the deer trail. The sun is much lower than when I first noticed the hills dancing before me; I’m in the thick of those hills now, following this faint trail strewn with needles among the tall pines and firs. It’s led me over large outcroppings and into rock-strewn arroyos, where I commonly lose the path and have to wander back and forth on the other side of the ravine hoping to find it again. The late afternoon shadows are what throw me off, disclosing apparent passages through the undergrowth that dead-end as soon as I try them. Only by blundering up and down do I happen upon the right angle from which to glimpse the actual way through, and so my feet finally rejoin the crowd of hooves and paws that have passed along this route.

This animal road, slight as it is, is more inviting than the alternative—following one of the ravines down to where it would join a larger streambed. These steep gashes are too cluttered with jutting roots and tumbled rocks to allow ready passage. So I keep cutting across the ravines, wending my way laterally along these wooded slopes, trusting the trail. I know I’m walking vaguely westward since the sun glimmers and glints through the canopy in front of me, its long rays slanting though the trees. Thin trunks and thick—saplings and elders, and middle-aged trunks as well—all glide past me as I walk, though at different speeds. Those nearest to the trail rush past, their limbs brushing my shoulders or slapping my legs, while those a few yards off move with less haste. Farther still from the trail are trees whose gait is leisurely, even stately. And beyond even those are the grand but distant trees that seem to linger with me as I stride; now and then one of them catches and holds my eye—I glimpse it again and yet again through the rapid syncopation of nearby trunks.

Farther off to my left, darkly green behind all of these gliding verticals, are the needled trees that blanket the hillside across from this one. The forest on that facing slope appears to keep pace with me as I stroll, while all these nearer conifers slide past at their different rates. It’s as though all the trees on that hillside were gliding forward—or is it just the contrast with the nearby woods rushing backward that makes the distant slope seem to stride in the opposite direction?

But wait! What am I saying?! None of these trees is actually moving! I alone, among all these upright bodies, am actually locomoting along the ground. All their apparent movements, fast and slow, are merely a consequence of my own physical motion, the illusory effect of my own activity in the midst of what is, in fact, a fairly quiescent and passive topography. “Motion parallax” is the technical term for this dynamism that my own movement seems to induce in the landscape, this apparent roaming of things in relation to myself as I wander.

As soon as I reflect upon this, the land’s activity seems to subside. A certain vitality I had sensed in the forest has now dissolved. The dynamism has withdrawn from the surroundings and has concentrated itself within my skull, where all these thoughts are now churning (calculating the way that these hills and carved ravines must look to a detached eye situated above the landscape, pondering how that more objective view is distorted when the terrain is seen from a particular position within it, moving at this particular pace). I am lost in my figurations. My bodily senses blunted, the land around me has become a passive field of shapes, some of them neatly defined (“Douglas fir,” “blue spruce”), others obscure and unnoticed as my thinking self plunges past. I am now staring at my watch, worrying about my broken-down car. I am wondering when I might emerge from these wooded valleys and find my way to the highway …

A spiderweb collapses across my face, sticky and strange, like a Bazooka bubble-gum bubble that I once blew to bursting and had to peel, paper-thin, from my cheeks. I wipe the web from my nose and from the edge of my baseball cap; but before I can place the cap back on my head I notice the spider, so close I have to cross my eyes to see her brown body clearly, suspended by a single strand from the beak of my cap. Dangling upside down with her legs folded inward, the spider is falling away from the cap on the rapidly lengthening span. “Hello there,” I say hopefully, raising the baseball cap high so the spider dangles again at eye level, but she keeps riding the end of that thread down and away. I carry the cap over to a nearby scrub oak, and transfer the cap’s end of the thread to an upper leaf. The veins in those leaves are clear and crisply articulated to my gaze, as are the tiny nodules toward the end of the branch where next year’s buds are already preparing themselves. By holding my eyes for a few moments, the spider has drawn my senses into another scale of experience. Which opens up endlessly. On a neighboring bush the leaves are different, the lobes rounder; here several branches have had their tips broken, or rather—given the frayed ends—chewed off. Deer, I guess, passing by in the early summer when the shoots were still green. I look down on the ground, brushing aside the fallen needles to glimpse some dried-out pellets, but find none—only a line of black ants in momentary disarray as a result of my sweeping. Three of them are scrambling, their antennae taut and probing, to find again the scent. Which they do straightaway, two of them bumping into each other and brushing their antennae together, briefly, before rejoining the line.

I continue along my own path, following not a scent but a vague absence of obstacles, the path more a visual hunch at this point than a clear passage, although as I walk it becomes more obvious, senses tuning themselves to the trail. Soon my peripheral awareness takes over the task of keeping me on track, and my gaze opens outward to touch the needled shadows and the sky above the balconied branches and the slope glimmering through the trunks to my left. That neighboring hillside, steeper now, is again gliding forward, accompanying me as I tramp, while between here and there the trunks move backward in their respective gaits, the farther ones slower and the close ones swifter, the nearest grabbing at my jacket as they rush past, and I realize that all this motion is not at all an illusion: it is the way the world lives, the way the world shows itself to itself—for there is NO view from outside! The layered dynamism of all these gliding trajectories has overcome a threshold in my self; my thoughts dissolve into my breathing body and I awaken as this striding form, this sentient flesh utterly immersed in the sensuous.

Nostrils flaring, arms swooping, I feel my animal solidity and grace as I lope down the trail.

The way that all these other bodies—trees, bushes, hillsides—shift in relation to one another as I walk compels my thorough inclusion in the landscape; when I really notice and pay attention to their transformations, I’m forced to discover myself utterly inside the physical world. These shifting gradients and angles of alignment—the multiple tree-lined corridors that seem to open around me as I move—all converge and cross here, at this animate creature that is me, ambling through this forest. There really is this huge world going about its business independent of me, and yet I am in it, alive in its folds!

High above me, the upper branches jostle and bend in gusts that I can’t feel way down here, while the massive bulk of these hills shifts around me—I feel my own smallness among them. Yet no matter how minuscule, I also feel my own agency, my own autonomy within this massively real world. I’m embedded in this world, yes—but I am not bound, not imprisoned. There’s a new freedom I feel, a looseness, an improvisational openness between myself and the beings around me. As if only by dissolving the distance between my mind and my body is this other, richer distance able to make itself felt—the open stretch between me and a far-off boulder, or the tension between my hand and the black scar burnt by lightning into the bark of a passing ponderosa. There’s a dynamism to these distances, a palpable magnetism between my torso and that steep slope over there—an allurement made possible by the distance between things. Depth is not a determinate relation between inert objects arrayed within a static space, but a dynamic tension between bodies, between beings that beckon and repulse one another across an expanse that can never be precisely mapped—across a gap that waxes and wanes according to the mood playing through one’s limbs or the limbs of the forest itself, according to the whoosh of the wind pouring through the needles, or the way the sun spills its warmth upon the soil.

Or now: the way that sun is sliding behind the trees in front, casting these woods into a denser weave of shadow, its rays no longer filtering down like white gold through the needled roof. The mood of this place alters, gently. A red squirrel is chittering off to my right, distressed by something. Perhaps by me. Animals less at ease in the daytime are also stirring throughout the forest. I cannot see them, yet there’s a new wakefulness to the woods that sparks along the surface of my skin.

As the squirrel’s staccato dies down, there remains a faint, high-pitched chirping reaching my ears from the upper canopy. Nuthatches? I’m not sure—the sound is so ephemeral, rising and fading … A jewel-like gleam flashes through the trunks in front of me, then vanishes, and then the sun flashes through again, steadying itself: the forest is thinning. Or rather, I am coming to an edge. As the last trees part around me, I step into a meadow of clumped grasses and wide swaths of barren rock. The breeze is stronger here, pouring upslope from the southwest as the low sun beats on my face. But it’s the open sky above that halts my steps, that ocean of blue crashing down upon the rocks and the grasses, and upon my shoulders as well, scooping me up above the pinetops to soar and tumble in its deep expanse, then depositing me here where I stand, half floating, staring up.

The sky is not as clear as when I first stepped onto this deer trail two or three hours ago. A few clouds loaf overhead, their western edges gilded and glowing; others punctuate the blue toward the south. Watching their slow transformations in the silence of early evening, feeling the drift and loll of these porous, breathlike beings made of mist and yellow light, I realize the error of our common belief that we live on the earth. The rough-skinned rock beneath my feet is earth, yes, but what of those clouds, and the unseen sea in which those clouds are adrift? Are they not also part of earth? And if so, would it not be more true to say that we dwell in the earth, rather than on it?

The claim that we live “on earth’s surface” implies that those clouds overhead are not themselves earthly powers, that the invisible depth in which they swim is an emptiness, a void continuous with the space between planets. If we dwell “on the earth,” then those clouds are merely part of the flotsam and jetsam of space, with only a tenuous, neighborly link to the surface on which we stand. Yet this seems not quite right. We have heard that this planet is spinning like a dervish ’round its axis; here at this latitude the planet’s surface is hurtling through space at around eight hundred miles per hour. We know that this rotation explains the apparent course of the sun across the sky, and the nightly passage of the stars through the darkness. Of course, standing here on the whirling earth I do not seem to be passing the sun with such swiftness; neither the sun nor the stars at night seem to move at anything approaching such a reckless speed! As I walked through the forest this afternoon, however, I saw that the trees farther from me moved past much slower than those close to the trail, and so it makes ready sense to me that the sun and the stars, which dwell so very far from this earth, appear to move rather leisurely across the heavens. But those clouds are much, much closer to where I stand than the sun or the other stars, just overhead really, not much higher than the mountains of this range. Rather like the near bushes and trees that sped by me, slapping my legs as I strode past, I should see those clouds hurtling westward as the earth’s surface whips toward the east at breakneck speed. And that is the strangeness: those huge clouds are hardly moving at all! What’s more, their lazy drift at this moment is not at all toward the west, but rather toward the northeast. Which confounds every notion of parallax, and confuses everything I saw today regarding the way the world moves in relation to me as I walk. If the earth’s surface is really rushing eastward, then I should see those clouds racing rather recklessly toward the west!

Unless, of course, the clouds themselves are a part of the turning earth. In which case I am not really standing on the surface of this world, but am submerged within a transparent layer of this planet, an invisible stratum of the earth that extends far above those clouds. Unless, that is, the unseen substance that rides along these slopes, whispering the needles and rubbing the branches against one another—this tangible but utterly ungraspable element that swirls between my legs and pours in and out through my nostrils, the fluid medium through which those clouds are floating, and of whose lightness they partake, of which they are a kind of visible thickening or crystallization—is not at all continuous with the space that hosts the sun and stars, but is an element of this earth, an amniotic substance entirely proper to this place.

Which indeed it is. The air is not a random bunch of gases simply drawn to earth by the earth’s gravity, but an elixir generated by the soils, the oceans, and the numberless organisms that inhabit this world, each creature exchanging certain ingredients for others as it inhales and exhales, drinking the sunlight with our leaves or filtering the water with our gills, all of us contributing to the composition of this phantasmagoric brew, circulating it steadily between us and nourishing ourselves on its magic, generating ourselves from its substance. It is as endemic to the earth as the sandstone beneath my boots. Perhaps we should add the letter i to our planet’s name, and call it “Eairth,” in order to remind ourselves that the “air” is entirely a part of the eairth, and the i, the I or self, is wholly immersed in that fluid element.

The gilt-edged clouds overhead are not plunging westward as the planet rolls beneath them because they themselves are a part of the rolling Eairth. Creatures of the embracing air, of an invisible but nonetheless material layer of this planet, the clouds accompany the Eairth as it turns, their shapeshifting bodies drifting this way and that with the winds. And we, imbibing and strolling through that same air, do not then live on the eairth but in it. We are enfolded within it, permeated, carnally immersed in the depths of this breathing planet.


Ω Henry David Thoreau, Walden (New York: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1910), p. 82.





MIND

(Knowledge II: The Ecology of Consciousness)


In the seventeenth century, as is well known, a certain French philosopher conceptually divided the world into two disparate substances: matter (res extensa, or “extended substance”) and mind (res cogitans, or “thinking substance”). Matter, as René Descartes described it, was spatially extended, determinate, and mechanical; mind, on the contrary, had no spatial presence whatsoever—it was pure thought, free of all physical constraint and limitation. While animals, plants, and indeed nature as a whole were composed exclusively of mechanical matter, and while God consisted entirely of mind, humans alone—according to Descartes—were a mixture of the two substances. The human body, like other animal bodies, was a completely mechanical configuration; the immaterial mind somehow interacted with this physical body from a location within the human brain.

Descartes’ resolute philosophical dualism neatly formalized a split between the mental and material domains that had long been implicit in European thought. In the centuries since, many theorists have attempted to reconcile these apparently contrary realms. Over the last hundred years, in particular, various natural scientists and philosophers have tried to reconstrue consciousness in purely material terms, speculating that the mind might be a product of the physical brain, or even identical to the material brain itself. The more subtle of these theorists suggested that mind should perhaps be understood less as a substance than as a material process, as the dynamic activity of the physical brain. Indeed, as the organization of the nervous system was gradually revealed over the course of the twentieth century, many scientists began to wonder if their own thoughts were nothing other than the felt experience of neuronal and neurochemical activites unfolding within their heads.

Some of these researchers suspected that they had finally overcome centuries of unnecessary dualism simply by doing away with the notion of an immaterial intelligence, or soul. Yet their new identification of mind with the dynamics of the physical brain quickly prompted another, more surreptitious dualism to spread throughout the secular culture of the West. This was the dualism between the brain—now considered the very organ of awareness—and the rest of the human body. No longer an opposition between an immaterial consciousness and a material flesh, the new, more subtle opposition was that between the sentient brain, conceived as a kind of magical mass of living matter, and a physical body still conceived in thoroughly mechanical and deterministic terms.

The tacit dichotomy between the mechanical body and the sentient brain was ultimately no less problematic than that between spirit and flesh; it left us unable to account for the interpenetration of these two very different types of matter. Nor was such a dichotomy warranted by the evidence. The brain can hardly be considered an autonomous organ neatly separable from the body, for the central nervous system is utterly integral to the whole body’s functioning. It is difficult, if not impossible, to conceive of how a mindful brain could have arisen except as an attribute of a muscled and sensing organism—how a brain could evolve independent of a breathing body fending for itself in the biosphere.

Nor can the living body be understood in purely mechanical terms. Many of our unconcious bodily actions exhibit a creativity that cannot be accounted for on the basis of strictly mechanical physiology. The way our leg muscles, for example, dynamically adjust to the changing contour of a mountainside that we’re descending, without our heady thoughts being at all cognizant of the process. Or the way my hand, interrupting its typing for a moment, swiftly navigates the distance between the keyboard and a bag on the shelf behind me, lifing a crisp corn chip to my lips before my conscious self is even aware of the action … Such unreflective yet remarkably attuned engagements of our limbs with the space around them suggest that even the most “automatic” actions of the body sometimes involve an open and improvisational intelligence that defies any neat distinction between a sentient brain on the one hand and an insentient or mindless physiology on the other.

Prompted by a growing awareness of such contradictions, in the final decades of the twentieth century a diverse group of theorists began to call attention to the profound importance of the body itself in the constitution of the mind. A small but influential array of researchers from various disciplines began to amass evidence demonstrating that mental experience was dependent not only upon the functioning brain but upon the whole of the animate organism—that the mind is less an attribute of the brain than of the living body as a whole, of which the brain is simply a necessary constituent.

Within the humanities, some of the key theorists drew inspiration from the writings published at midcentury by the French philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty, who had analyzed, with stunning lucidity, the body’s influence upon even our most rarefied cogitiations. Others took their lead from the deepening feminist movement, with its incisive critique of patriarchal modes of thought; they questioned the privilege accorded to abstract, disembodied styles of reflection and began to disclose the hidden, overlooked intelligence of the human body itself, ascribing new value to corporeal forms of knowing. In the sciences, meanwhile, congruent research began to arise from diverse and divergent investigations. Biologist Francisco Varela and his colleagues employed their experiments to show that perceptual experience is thoroughly conditioned by the ongoing, active self-organization of the body as a whole. Cognitive scientists like George Lakoff and Mark Johnson traced the development of mental categories and concepts back to their origins in the most basic and taken-for-granted bodily experiences. In the field of medicine, neurophysiologist Antonio Damasio demonstrated the profound dependence of rational thought upon the human body’s more immediate emotions and feelings. According to Damasio, the mind, at its base, is nothing other than the body’s ongoing experience of perturbations unfolding at the contact surface between itself and the world.Ω



Numerous other theorists could be named. Certainly the assorted proponents of this recent turn toward embodiment have often seemed radical, even iconoclastic, to the more conventional researchers around them. Yet in many ways their claims have simply resuscitated a long-overlooked, centuries-old approach to the mind-body problem—an approach developed in the seventeenth century by a young lens-grinder and philosopher named Baruch de Spinoza.

Born in 1632, Spinoza grew up in the large Sephardic Jewish community of seventeenth-century Amsterdam. The community was made up largely of marranos, Iberian Jews who’d been forced to convert to Christianity under the Inquisition, yet had continued to practice their faith in secret. Many marranos had recently fled Portugal for Amsterdam, at that time the most religiously tolerant city in Europe. As a teenager Spinoza, already a brilliant scholar of the Jewish textual tradition, began to question the received beliefs of the rabbis and other elders in the community. When he came upon the philosophical writings of his older contemporary, Descartes, Spinoza was taken by the carefully reasoned form of the French thinker’s argumentation. Impressed by the clarity of the analyses, Spinoza nonetheless found himself dismayed by inconsistencies in Descartes’ conclusions. Soon he set about adapting Descartes’ rational style to his own, more subtle purposes.

Spinoza challenged the older philosopher’s segregation of mental substance from material substance, arguing instead that mind and matter were not two separable substances but simply two different attributes, or aspects, of one and the same substance, which he called Deus, sive Natura, “God, or Nature.” This unitary substance could appear either as matter, on the one hand, or as mind, on the other, depending upon the vantage we viewed it from. Just as, according to Spinoza, the vast and originating power that his contemporaries called “God” was nothing other than the creative dynamism and intelligence of Nature itself, so the human mind was simply the specific sensitivity and sentience of that part of nature we recognize as a human body. Every material body or thing, for Spinoza, had its mental aspect—all things were ensouled. The human body was the outward, material aspect of the human mind, as the mind was nothing other than the internal, felt experience of the body. “The mind and the body are one and the same thing …”Ω

It was such heretical assertions, articulated in numerous conversations with his contemporaries, that in his twenty-fourth year earned Spinoza the harshest possible reproach from the elders of the flourishing synagogue in Amsterdam: he was excommunicated, formally cursed, and banished from the Jewish community. Spinoza accepted this exile without the least objection, remarking only that it left him freer to pursue his researches without distraction. At once intensely rational and deeply spiritual, Spinoza was possessed of a remarkably empathic insight into the emotional lives of others. His radical identification of God with nature (and his insistence, starkly original at the time, upon the necessary separation of church and state) earned him an abundance of scorn throughout Christian Europe, ensuring that very little of his work could be published while he was alive. Yet such was the originality of his insights that some of the most innovative theorists of our own era claim Spinoza as their progenitor and inspiration.

Still, in one important respect Spinoza remains ahead of even those researchers who today claim his heretical insights as their own. Most of those who now assert the centrality of the body in any understanding of the mind—those who argue that it is really the body as a whole, and not an isolated brain, that is the true locus of awareness—still remain trapped within the confines of an unnecessary presumption. It’s a presumption that lingers as our deepest inheritance from the Cartesian tradition: the assumption that awareness, or mind, is a special possession of our species, a property that isolates humankind from the rest of material nature.

The primary dichotomy in Descartes’ philosophy, after all, was not the division between mind and body, but rather the divide between the mind and the whole of the material world. It was this more profound bifurcation between mind and matter that had ensured the rapid ascendancy of the Cartesian worldview and its long success in the West. By conceiving of itself as something entirely distinct from palpable nature, the rational mind of the Enlightenment was empowered to pursue its giddy dream of comprehending, and mastering, every aspect of the material cosmos. Descartes’ segregation of the mind from the body, in other words, was but a means to a grander end; it authorized the modern mind to reflect upon the material world as though it were not a part of that world—to look upon nature from a cool, detached position ostensibly outside of that nature.

And so, today, if the long-held distinction between our minds and our bodies is disintegrating in the face of researches from a wide range of disciplines, we may wonder whether this other, deeper segregation—between mind and materiality, or between sentience and the sensuous cosmos—is itself beginning to crumble.

Very few of those participant in the current “turn toward the body” seem to notice the wider, more subversive implications of their work. While they assert that the entirety of the body is integral to the mind, surely (they assume) it is only the human body that has this privilege, and not the body of an elk, or an aspen grove, or the dense flesh of the ground itself. Surely the gushing body of a river, or the ebb and flow of the breeze, has no real part in intelligence!

It is here that their timidity contrasts with the far-seeing audacity of Spinoza. He alone saw that the human mind could never be reconciled with the human body unless intelligence was recognized as an attribute of nature in its entirety. To Spinoza, every sensible phenomenon had its own mental aspect; every tangible body within the material world was also an idea within the vast, encompassing intelligence that was known inwardly (to some) as God and outwardly (to all) as nature.

Despite his outmoded methodology, laden with geometrical terms (with numbered definitions, axioms, propositions, and corollaries), the heart of Spinoza’s intuition remains prescient. For once we acknowledge that our awareness is inseparable—even, in some sense, indistinguishable—from our material physiology, can we really continue to maintain that mind remains alien to the rest of material nature? Consider how completely your sentient body is entangled in the crowd of creatures and elemental forces that enfolds you. Consider how thoroughly your organism is dependent upon these other lives: how your flesh is nourished and sustained by the plants whose leaves or fruits you ingest, by the other animals whose muscles you may eat, or whose milk you may drink, or whose carefully laid eggs firm the chocolate cake you nibbled on last night. And ponder, too, how your life sustains others in turn. Consider how your breath is taken up within the green chemistry of these grasses and whispering conifers, and how their exhalations add themselves to the swirling winds that embrace you, from which your lungs must drink, again and again, to fire your gestures and your streaming thoughts. Notice the pleasure that your fingertips find in certain wave-polished stones, the giddy thrill that your open palm, held out the window of a car, draws from the rush of wind that blasts against it. Notice the way your ears empty themselves toward the song of a wood thrush, or the manner in which your eyes are lured, like bees, by the interior azure of certain blossoms. The human body is not a closed or static object, but an open, unfinished entity utterly entwined with the soils, waters, and winds that move through it—a wild creature whose life is contingent upon the multiple other lives that surround it, and the shifting flows that surge through it.

Of course, our awareness is hugely informed by the exchange we carry on with those of our own species. Profoundly so. Yet the unique savvy of the human creature—the goofy grace of our gestures and, at times, of our thoughts—has also been shaped by our relation to the countless other earthly powers, both familiar and frightening, with whom we have coevolved. Throughout the obscure eons of our species’ unfurling, it was these darkly dangerous and many-voiced surroundings that necessarily compelled our body’s curiosity and desire, posing disturbing puzzles for our senses, prompting the human creature to pause, to ponder, and ultimately to reflect. And so it is misleading, today, for cognitive scientists to focus solely upon the human body in isolation from that larger matrix—as though our capacity for conscious reflection were somehow born only in interaction with ourselves, rather than with our world.

Today’s intrepid researchers have yet to notice that the human body, in itself, is no more autonomous—and no more conscious—than an isolated brain. Sentience is not an attribute of a body in isolation; it emerges from the ongoing encounter between our flesh and the forest of rhythms in which it finds itself, born of the interplay and tension between the world’s wild hunger and our own. The impulse toward thought grows from the gap between our thirst and an unexpectedly dry creekbed, as our curiosity finds consummation in the magnetism between our tongue and a prickly hedge studded with blackberries. Human awareness could not exist without a human body, true, but it could no more exist in the absence of ground, leaf, and flowing water. Mind arises, and dwells, between the body and the Earth, and hence is as much an attribute of this leafing world as of our own immodest species.



My first two years at college left me ensnared in words, in snatches of text and snarls of argument that gripped my thoughts but smothered my ability to feel the world in ways less verbal. I walked out after the second year and spent the next wandering as a street magician through the cities of old Europe, imbibing the twang and rumble of other languages, letting those odd styles of speaking loosen my gestures and shake up my perceptions. How big the world was beginning to seem! Returning to college, I again felt pressed into a too tight pattern by the texts and taxonomies, and found myself yearning for a way back out of the words into the wildness of things. When classes ended that year, I walked onto a New England highway and stuck out my thumb, catching a series of rides westward across the continent. Once the snow-decked ridges of the Rocky Mountains lifted themselves from the horizon I stared in happy amazement and stepped out of the last truck, thanking the driver and making my way into a town where I began performing magic, for tips, in the local bars. After a fortnight I’d earned enough to purchase a decent tent and a sleeping bag; I shouldered my backpack and walked into the mountains.

I had camped a fair amount with friends and family when growing up, but had never before pitched a tent alone in the backcountry. As my legs carried me past the last of the phone lines and into the thick of the forest, as the shadows deepened and the exclusively human world fell behind me, a great remembering shuddered through my muscles, as though a soul long buried were striding to the surface. My own real creaturely life, at last, was what was smelling those dank scents and hearing the pines rub against each other. Over the following days and nights, camping under high passes in snowfields agleam with moonlight, or hiking among rock-studded meadows articulated with gurgling rills, I found myself sliding through a vast array of feelings and moods, following thoughts as they meandered and fed into other insights and knowings—yet very few of these thoughts were embodied in words. I was thinking, yes, but in shifting shapes and rhythms and dimly colored vectors, thinking with my senses, feeling my way toward insights and understandings that had more the form of feelings blooming in my belly than of statements being spoken within my skull. A kind of spell had been broken; the school-hardened skein of words had softened, had loosened, had let me squeeze through and leave it behind like the grid of power lines I’d left at the edge of that wilderness, and so I was alone with my breath as the woods creaked around me and turquoise beetles climbed the grass blades and the owls hunkered down and waited for dusk.

It was there, in that solitude, that I first noticed how the drift of my thoughts was instilled and steadily carried by subtle alterations in the landscape. Walking in the woods kept my thoughts close and complexly patterned, while emerging into the wide meadows opened my ponderings out onto broad vistas of feeling, yielding insights into the expansive arc of my life and of the world’s unfolding. As the new sun climbed above the peaks I could see its light roll toward me across the field, igniting the grasses and the scattered wildflowers, charging the air with warmth as it approached until it burst upon me as well, gleaming my naked surfaces, wrapping me in the grin of morning as it rolled on through the stony valley, and I could feel the petals of my brain slowly opening to meet that warmth. Sunlight was a mood that colored all my thoughts as I hiked, although if there were no clouds to break the heat I noticed my reflections melting together by midafternoon. A kind of languor then seeped into my muscles, blurring the keen edge of my thinking, as a hazy dream logic began to infect insights that’d been perfectly precise an hour earlier.

The ways of the mind seemed more manifold and mysterious here than I’d ever realized. I was beginning to glimpse a complex array of images for mind itself, visible patterns of mental process far more fitting than the neurological categories and mechanical descriptions I’d been inundated by in my psychology classes. Here, all around me, was a field of patterned metaphors as precise as one could want for the dynamic life of the psyche.

I had always been struck by the way that certain thoughts can arise unbidden, suddenly slipping into awareness in a manner that compels my attention; I now noticed how kindred such thoughts are to individual birds that glide into view, some flapping across the sky on the way to elsewhere, others spiraling and circling, trying to espy their prey, another swooping down to alight on a near branch and survey the scene. Still other winged thoughts are entirely hidden within the trees; although I hear their calls at regular intervals I hardly notice them anymore, and feel them only as a vague disturbance in the thickets.

Other notions move mostly beneath my conscious awareness, like subterranean streams that surface here and there among the clumped grasses, quiet undercurrents of thought that find their way into visibility now and then before slipping back into the rocky depths and freeing my focus to wander elsewhere. Still those unseen waters keep flowing, nourishing the soil underfoot.

Many taken-for-granted knowings are rooted and steadfast in the mind, like the firs and Engelmann spruces interspersed at the meadow’s edge, or the aspens clustered in groves; I need the resilient strength of these powers to lean or climb on when structuring certain arguments or public assertions. Innumerable other insights, simple, small, and obvious, replenish themselves steadily like the uncountable blades of grass sprouting from the soil; among them lie the bric-a-brac of old and bedrock knowledges now broken and scattered, angling this way and that, feldspar and quartz glimmering on their surfaces.

There is a summer pulse to my awareness, too—an inward beat inseparable, now that I notice it, from the thrum of the crickets.

Mind, here in this high valley suspended beneath the blue, seems a vast thing, open and at ease. The thoughts that soar into view, the sedimented knowings, the bright blossoms of sensation are all held, here, within an encompassing equilibrium, permeated by a silence that swells and breathes with the cycles of light.

As the afternoon deepens and shadows lengthen among the trees, the sheer face of the peak at the southeast edge of this valley begins to glow with a ruddy light, and different strata of stone become apparent, the layers slanting smoothly up toward the southern sky until a point where the strata buckle and fold, down and up, a great fold in the long story of that massive cliff. Of what event is it the trace? I do not know whether that visible buckling of the layers bespeaks a sudden cataclysm or a long, slow application of pressure. I know only that the rock face speaks vividly to my senses, attesting to an uncanny depth of time—to a packed density of experience anciently undergone by matter itself, a density that now underlies and quietly supports our brief life in this open moment. Those folded layers speak, as well, of a startling malleability in even the most stable accretions of past experience. As though the solidified past of a continent, or the long-settled structure of a particular person, may still be upended and reshaped by huge and implacable forces that suddenly obtrude from outside any known frame of reference.

Just as (in a less powerful sense) a dark cloud is unexpectedly gliding into visibility from behind the high escarpment at the western perimeter of this bowl. Only moments ago the edge of that cloud seemed an innocent clump drifting on the verge of an unbroken blue; now that same cloud is rapidly swallowing what little is left of the open sky. Every mountain wanderer has learned this stealth lesson of the heights, the way that clouds can gather entirely hidden from view, secretly massing behind a high ridge that deceptively bounds a clear sky. Then a leaden shroud abruptly swings into view overhead, unleashing a stab of lightning upon the rocky precipices before breaking open and drenching your limbs as you lean over your unbuckled backpack, desperately digging in its depths to find the raincoat you idiotically stashed at the bottom.

This time, though, I don’t take off my pack—I stand there inhaling the darkening shade, eager to welcome the rain, if it comes, and let it wash the sweat from my chest. The crickets are still thrumming, but more sporadically; the whole tenor of this place has changed now that we’re hidden from the sun. The repeated cry of a jay, which I’d not noticed while it was sounding, now seems conspicuous by its absence. Throughout the meadow the boulders seem crouched in readiness, their lichen-scabbed surfaces sampling the air. In the midst of all this alertness something else is waking, is stirring and shifting, and then I realize it’s the forest needles skirmishing as a breeze starts to flow down from the western ridge, pouring itself through the skein of branches and now across this open meadow, the grasses swirling in the gusts, purple lupines and columbines bouncing as the wind rises.

Isn’t this how mind itself alters—one’s pleasureful pondering abruptly transformed by the unexpected intrusion of a difficult memory, or by the pressure of a long-forgotten responsibility suddenly making itself known? The chemistry shifts, the mood changes; every new thought is now shaded by the gray blanket overhead, or else enlivened by the prospect of rain.

If that dark ceiling does crack open, then this field will soon be a sodden marsh impossible to walk through. I survey my options, then tighten my pack and make my way between rocks and wildflowers toward the woods. The ground’s a bit higher there, and more solid, buttressed by roots a hundred times thicker than those twined in mats beneath the meadow. When I arrive among the trees I swing the pack from my shoulders, balancing it a moment on one knee as I extract my arm, then lower it to the ground, leaning it against a tall pine. I peel off my sweat-soaked T-shirt and hang it from a corner of the pack, then lean myself against the other side of the same trunk, the bark scraping against my spine. Overhead the treetops are tossing in the wind; down here all is weirdly peaceful and unperturbed, another world. After a stretch of breaths, I sense the thick trunk of my lean-tree subtly swaying my torso from side to side. Perhaps it is only my imagination? No, now I can feel it quite clearly. I gaze the neighboring trunks at eye level—subalpine fir, Engelmann spruce—trying to discern if they, too, are moving. If they are, I cannot tell.

The tree continues to rock me, gently, rooting my spine in the shallow soil and letting thoughts rise, fall, and dissipate. I wake to the strange sensation of being watched. But how, by whom? Then I glimpse it: just behind the near trees, a small movement. Like that of a leaf, flapping, except not quite—and then I recognize that, yes, it is an ear, flicking. A rather large ear. And just below it, a round eye is looking back at me—although perhaps not seeing me, for now a single antler rises into view as the buck turns its head down to continue browsing. I lean right in hopes of a clearer view: the deer looks up again. After a long moment, he slowly lowers his head, then suddenly raises it again, as if to catch me. I am per-fect-ly still, my breath less than it would take to stir a spiderweb. Finally the buck seems convinced; he returns to browsing, shifting his stance to munch another patch of leaves. Slowly, now, the deer moves toward my left, gradually emerging from behind those trunks, yet still masked by a spray of branches. Only then do my eyes glean an outline of its body, and receive something of that taut grace—the brown flank, the neck extending itself forward, then resting, and then gliding forward again, as one leg after another steps through the air. Not twenty feet in front of me, its tawny body slips easily among the boughs. I twist my torso to gaze it more directly, but … the buck has vanished. I stare dumbfounded through the lattice of trunks, tilting my body this way and that, listening for the thumping of hooves—yet hear only the surge in the high branches, and the utter quietude in front. I step away from my tree, striding forward several yards as I push past various limbs, yet nothing shifts or sounds in front of me. Off to my right, a faint chirping in the branches. But the deer is gone.

Impossible. Wasn’t a rather large, warm-blooded creature stepping between these very trees just a moment ago? How could it simply disappear, as though it were a mere figment?! Then again, I suppose I never did see it clearly—was watching its movements rather than staring at its stable presence—but still … it was present, was it not? Ahh, look at this leaf, and this other one, both clearly nibbled on, and if I look down—of course: here are the tracks, the double teardrops neatly pressed into the dirt. And look closer: each rear hoof, slightly smaller, lands in the same print that the front hoof just left—the clear trace of that silent gait.



But it was odd how familiar that fleeting encounter felt to me on that day. It seemed the precise image, once again, of a certain style of thought, a living metaphor for the way the mind moves. How many times has it happened, in the course of going about my work, that a potent thought will make itself felt at the edge of my awareness—an insight whose rightness I can sense even before I know its content—yet when I turn to fix my attention upon it, I find that it has already vanished, leaving only a vague flavor or trace? It’s the sort of thing one easily forgets. Yet it has happened frequently enough that now I’m alert to it. I often feel such an insight foraging in the thickets of my consciousness, and can sense its elegance, somehow, its sleek profundity and pertinence nibbling at the very periphery of my attention. Yet when I try to focus my gaze upon it, it slips back into the shadowed depths, leaving me with only a curious whiff of feeling—the spoor of a ghost—unable to say what that insight was, or even to what it pertained.

The frustration entailed by such phantom thoughts had disrupted my youthful confidence in my own ability, as a philosopher, to reflect upon matters with some accuracy. But I was now beginning to realize another possibility: that ideas had their own lives independent of mine. That indeed some vital ideas were like creatures wholly unaccustomed to human contact, wild notions whose robust elegance and vigor required that they keep their distance from those who might strive to define or domesticate them, twisting them from their native habitat. The real space of the mind no longer seemed like an indoor room—like a laboratory, or an operating theater, wherein subjects could be immobilized and exposed to the cool light of analysis—but rather more like a wooded valley, or a meadow shadowed by cloud: an open terrain through which I was wandering.

Deer, of course, are quintessential creatures to human culture. For much of civilized humankind, deer are the most familiar animals of the wild. They dwell just beyond the edge of our streetlights, unfazed by our machinations; they slip through our settlements when we’re at rest, and raid our gardens. The name “deer” (in its original spelling, “deor”) was once the Old English word for “animal” in general (as the term “wilderness,” or “wild-deor-ness,” once meant simply “the place of wild animals”). My dawning suspicion that certain ideas were like deer, visiting our awareness in much the same way that wild deer make contact with us—graceful, shy, lingering at the edge of our awareness, yet slipping back into the forest if too willfully focused upon—suggested that other ideas intersect our awareness more in the way of other animals. Some of them slither mostly unseen through the grass, sporting different hues and patterns in keeping with their favored haunts; others bask on warm rocks in the midafternoon, only to skitter away at our incautious approach. Certain lightweight thoughts flutter in the air around us, so small and erratic we easily neglect to notice them, while other more muscled notions lope unexpected across our roads, marking their passage with scent or scat. Dusky intuitions hunch on the middle branches, their eyes closed, listening intently for the soft rustlings of those other, tinier hints upon which they feed. Some of the most versatile ideas are entirely multiple, embodied by a thousand humming lives lofting and veering in concert; others are solitary powers, reticent and sly, able to keep their own counsel. There are insights we come upon only at the edge of the sea, and others we glimpse only in the craggy heights. Some prickly notions are endemic to deserts, while other thoughts, too slippery to grasp, are met mostly in swamps. Many nomad thoughts migrate between different realms, shifting their habits to fit the terrain, orienting themselves by the wind and the stars.



This manner of loosening conventional conceptions of mind, playful as it seems, gains new sustenance and substance when one learns that the word “idea” and the word “species” were once synonymous terms—one Greek, the other Latin—for the same enigmatic phenomenon! Both “idea” and “species” derive their current meaning from the ancient use of a single Greek term, “eidos”—a word that originally signified “the visible look, or outward form” of a thing. It was this word, “eidos,” that the Greek philosopher Plato employed to speak of the immaterial and unchanging “forms” that alone, according to him, truly exist—the eternal “ideas” that can be known only by the pure, rarefied mind or intellect. (In ancient Greek, “idea” was simply the feminine version of “eidos.”)

In the philosophy propounded in Plato’s later dialogues, the palpable trees or clouds or toads that we perceive with our bodily senses are but ephemeral manifestations of universal, bodiless archetypes, the Platonic ideas—the ideal tree, the ideal cloud, the ideal toad. According to the Socrates of Plato’s dialogues, whenever we ponder an individual oak tree, that which is genuinely knowable of that oak is not the sensible tree but the essential form, the idea, the ideal oak tree of which each individual oak reminds us. (The word “ideal” is simply the adjectival form of “idea.”) The palpable tree is subject to change, to growth and decay, and hence has only a very provisional and insubstantial existence. The ideal oak, untainted by materiality, is eternal and unchanging, and hence—according to Plato—it alone can truly be said to exist. As we come to recognize these transcendent essences, or ideas, behind their material instantiations, and as we learn to contemplate these universal ideas in their purity, our mind gradually frees itself from the prison of the body and attains that transcendent, eternal state that is its truest home.

It was thus via Plato’s philosophy that the word “idea” spread into European languages, as the primary term for the immaterial stuff that the mind ponders, slowly evolving the various nuances of meaning that the term has for us today.

Meanwhile, Plato’s most precocious student, the protobiologist Aristotle, began to deploy his teacher’s term in a subtly different manner. Aristotle challenged Plato’s claim that the universal “ideas” (or forms) have any separate existence apart from the particular beings that materially embody those ideas. He questioned, in other words, the Platonic teaching that the forms “oak” or “toad” have their own utterly transcendent and prior existence independent of particular toads or particular oak trees. For Aristotle, the universal form of oak tree was simply that quality that all oaks had in common with one another; it was that which made them oak trees, rather than maples or pines. When we carefully contemplate a particular tree, according to Aristotle, it is this universal form that is received or recognized by the rational intellect. But this universal has no transcendent existence apart from the individual trees that exemplify it. Hence Aristotle began to employ his teacher’s word, “idea,” to speak of the group of individuals that share a common form, those individuals that constitute a particular kind of tree, a particular kind of plant or animal. And it is Aristotle’s usage of Plato’s term “idea” that was precisely translated into Latin by the word “species”—a term that originally signified, like the Greek “idea,” the outward form or “look” of any entity.

In Aristotelian usage, then, first the Greek term “idea” and then the Latin term “species” came to mean a collective group of individuals that share a common form. Through the subsequent development of European languages and the emergence of modern English, the word “species” has retained much of its earthly, Aristotelian meaning, while the word “idea” reverted to its more ephemeral Platonic meaning, as an immaterial image or thought pondered by the mind.

This quick glance at the early history of these two terms reveals that the diverse flapping, leaping, and leafing forms that we now call “species” were once experienced (by some of our most canny ancestors) as presences entirely akin to “ideas.” This, of course, because “ideas” were then held to have a much more independent and impersonal reality than they do in our time. Today “ideas” appear to have lost much of their universal, transcendent character—they no longer seem to be realities existing entirely independent of us. Like thoughts, notions, and insights, “ideas” are now assumed to be the mostly private ephemera of an individual mind, inhabitants of an interior zone of reflection that is unique to each person. You have your ideas, and I have mine. Sure, there may be some ideas that we hold in common, but that is because they have been taught to us both, or because we have agreed upon them—not because they subsist out there independent of human culture and its conventions. “Species,” meanwhile, has lost all apparent association with the intellect. In contrast to the internal character of my thoughts and ideas, species seem entirely objective aspects of the external material world.

Yet how powerfully those rooted and antlered forms echo the manifold shapes that still move within our mind! It is this resonance that was communicating itself to me in the course of my solo walkabout in the Rockies, gradually confounding the clear distinction between inner and outer worlds, as the elfin mood of dusk blurred the boundaries between daytime and night, dissolving the sharp edges of trunks and softening the boulders.



With the first hint of dusk in those high valleys, various flying insects launched into the air, including large flies that would bedevil me where I sat cross-legged, usually on a boulder, watching the light fade from the upper ridges. It was during those crepuscular hours that I discovered a useful technique for disbursing such unnerving, whirring beings when they disrupted my contemplations. (It’s a technique I still use to this day, although only when I’m off in the backcountry, since it requires a focused clarity and precision tough to muster in the middle of town.) Whenever a fly’s feverish orbit around my head begins to unravel my poise, tearing apart with its buzz the simple calm of my mountain ponderings, I search my inward awareness for any small but annoying thought whose unpleasantness matches, in some way, that monotonous sprite buzzing again and again past my undefended ears. Oddly, such an irksome thought always seems easy to find at such a moment—as though the fly’s buzzing had already drawn forth that nagging notion from the depths of my awareness. Once I’ve become conscious of that thought, I shift my attention to the air just in front of my face, watching that near space through which the fly weaves, again and again, trying to catch its trajectory in my gaze, waiting patiently for the serendipitous moment when I will manage, for an instant, to focus my eyes upon the fly. As soon as I do so, in that split second of visual contact, I offer my vexing thought to the insect. At which point the fly—to my considerable amazement—buzzes away! Sometimes my eyes have been able to follow the fly as it departs into the distance before me, becoming smaller and smaller until it dissolves. I am left sitting on the rock, unburdened of both bug and bothersome thought, released into the ringing silence.



I suppose it was only by leaving behind, for those weeks, the compulsion to communicate with words that I became so vulnerable to the expressive power of all those other-than-human styles of sensitivity and sentience. It was not merely the polymorphous play of rhythms, the syncopation of shapes that swerve and sprout beyond the confines of the city, but also how startlingly immense the land became when I encountered it without the steady filter of words, the discovery that I was palpably immersed in a field of unfoldings so much wider than myself and my intentions. It was not just the resonant metaphors offered by stones and grasses and muscled creatures, but also the rightness, somehow, of recognizing mind as a broad landscape within which I was wandering, a deep field with its near aspects and its distances, its moods shifting like the weather. For surely mind has its depths: memories buried, for instance, beneath the ground of our current awareness, or recent insights momentarily concealed behind the close matters we’re obsessively stuck on.

There seemed something more than metaphoric here, something strangely right about this resonance between thought and the earthly terrain. For clearly there’s something about the psyche that exceeds us and overflows all our knowings, confounding every notion of mind as a self-contained space within our head. Certainly, I still felt that there was an interior quality to the mind. But my encounters with other styles of sentience were loosening the conception of my own mind as a closed zone of reflection, stirring long-slumbering memories from my earliest years of life, bringing faint whiffs of a forgotten intimacy between awareness and the elemental earth. As though the leap and vanish of a deer into the forest or these other movements of shadows and grass and rain were not merely metaphors but part of the very constitution of the mind, of its real structure and architecture. And it was then that a simple thought burst upon my awareness—not like a bolt of lightning, but rather like a gentle rain beginning to fall around me, soaking my head and my chest, moistening the ground and raising its mingled scents to my nostrils: What if mind is not ours, but is Earth’s? What if mind, rightly understood, is not a special property of humankind, but is rather a property of the Earth itself—a power in which we are carnally immersed?

What if there is, yes, a quality of inwardness to the mind, not because the mind is located inside us (inside our body or brain), but because we are situated, bodily, inside it—because our lives and our thoughts unfold in the depths of a mind that is not really ours, but is rather the Earth’s? What if like the hunkered owl, and the spruce bending above it, and the beetle staggering from needle to needle on that branch, we all partake of the wide intelligence of this world—because we’re materially participant, with our actions and our passions, in the broad psyche of this sphere?

It was a thought that sparked and rippled along the whole surface of my skin, as though all the pores of that smooth membrane were opening at once, as though the skin itself were coming awake. Or as though I myself was awakening as that shimmering membrane at the outer bound of my body—as this luminous shape resonating with the other shapes that surround me: rocks, grasses, trees—each contour a sparkling surface of metamorphosis and exchange between that being and the charged air around it, as a sort of eros played between us, an electric tension binding us all into the expansive Body of the place. The sensations along my skin were subtly shifting, I realized, in tandem with the changing scents of soil and wood and dusk as these wafted in at my nostrils, my own tenor transforming with each alteration in the breeze, my face awakening to the innumerable nuances drifting in the vorticed air around me. And my eyes widened with the recognition that a similar interchange was going on throughout the whole invisible ocean of air as it riffled through the forest needles and twisted the grasses and washed against the rock escarpments, each gust carrying chemical insights between the insects and the swaying blooms of this valley, every breeze exchanging pollen between the trees. I was alive in a living field of experience.

The full-bodied alertness I now felt seemed no more mine than it was the valley’s; it seemed a capacity of the land itself that had been imparted to my body. Much as the life then beating in my chest and rolling through my veins was fed by the mountain air of that place (by the calm or blustering atmosphere that surrounds us wherever we are, and that we’ve been imbibing, ceaselessly, since the moment of our birth). Is not awareness, too, a kind of medium or atmosphere—a capacity that blooms within us, swelling and subsiding, only because we are penetrated by it, encompassed by it, permeated? Are we not born into mind as into an unseen layer of the Earth, gradually opening ourselves to the nourishment of this medium, adapting ourselves to its lunar rhythms, aligning ourselves with the way it glimmers and sings in our particular species?

Mind as a medium, yes. As an invisible and ceaselessly transforming layer of this world, a fluid medium that permeates our bodies. As though the air itself were aware! As though the unseen air that enfolds us, and circulates through us, were the very stuff of awareness. Yet not merely the air considered as a mix of gases; for isn’t there also a kind of sparkle and hum to awareness, an electric quality—as though it were charged with a kind of tension, or snap? Not the element of air alone, then, but the element of fire as well, mercurial—a subtle flame dispersed throughout the medium. Much like the way the sun’s radiant fire is buffered and broken up by Earth’s atmosphere, dispersed and scattered among countless molecules of gas, and thus muted, transmuted, into a medium suitable for spruces and bears and belted kingfishers. Not exactly the air of this world, then, but the way sunlight lives in this air—this unseen medium charged with fire. This awakened atmosphere. This awareness in which we and the mountain trees are immersed. This mind.



Interesting poetry, perhaps. But why should we take such a curious claim regarding the nature of mind as anything other than poetry—anything other than a momentary set of metaphors used to convey a purely personal experience? If such an assertion purports to carry more than a merely personal meaning, then surely the methodology of science must be brought to bear, testing it as a hypothesis subject to proof or disproof. Clearly, with regard to the stuff of consciousness, science itself must set the rules!

Unless such recourse to science, as the sole arbiter of collective truth, is thoroughly misplaced when we come to matters of mind or consciousness. For consciousness is a quintessentially quicksilver phenomenon, impossible to isolate and pin down. As soon as we try to ponder the character of consciousness, we discover that it’s already escaped us—for it is really the pondering that we’re after, rather than the thing pondered. We find ourselves unable to get any distance from awareness, in order to examine it objectively, for wherever we step it is already there. Perhaps we can at least say clearly what awareness is not, and can thus narrow down an assessment of its true character. Yet here, too, we are foiled, for any entity that we notice or name—in hopes of separating it from the substance of awareness—is, alas, already entangled in that substance.

Awareness, or mind, is in this sense very much like a medium in which we’re situated, and from which we are simply unable to extricate ourselves without ceasing to exist. Everything we know or sense of ourselves is conditioned by this atmosphere. We are intimately acquainted with its character, ceaselessly transformed by its influence upon us and within us. And yet we’re unable to characterize this medium from outside. We are composed of this curious element, permeated by it, and hence can take no distance from it. For this reason alone, awareness will never be fully amenable to the methods of empirical, objective science. While it conditions and makes possible every scientific endeavor, awareness will never entirely be made over into an object for science. It remains an enigma, a wonder, not by virtue of any miraculous quality, but by the plain and obvious fact that we are in it, and of it.

By suggesting that we all inhabit a common awareness, I am not claiming that your thoughts and dreams are the same as my thoughts and dreams, or that my awareness is the same as that of a magpie, or a coyote, or a mountain hemlock. For we each engage the wider intelligence from our own angle and place within it, each of us entwined with the breathing Earth through our particular skin. This ecological articulation of mind thus yields a radical and irreducible pluralism. It is only as palpable bodies that we participate in the immersive mind of this planet, and as your body is different from mine in so many ways, and as our limbs and senses are so curiously different from those of the pileated woodpecker or the praying mantis, just so are our insights and desires richly different from one another. Each creature’s experience is unique, to be sure, yet this is not at all because an autonomous awareness is held inside its particular body or brain. Sentience is born of the ongoing encounter, the contact, the tension and entwinement between each body and the breathing world that surrounds it. While each of us encounters only a corner of this world, it is nonetheless the same outrageous world—the same Earth—onto which our various senses open, the same inscrutable Earth that each engages with its fingers or its feathered wings, with its coiled antennae or its spreading roots.

Now, if my experience arises from the interaction between this body and the elemental field that surrounds—if my awareness is thus provoked by the same vast and compassing planet that calls forth and sustains your awareness—then how much sense does it make to continue to say that each of us has our own self-sufficient mind neatly tucked inside our particular head, while the surrounding Earth is just an object, utterly bereft of all intelligence? Is it not far more parsimonious to admit that mind is as much a property of the windswept Earth as it is of the myriad bodies that flock and congregate upon its ground? Shall we prolong the painful split between mind and body by continuing to neglect our carnal entanglement with this immense Presence, or shall we finally heal that age-old wound by acknowledging Earth’s implicit involvement in all our experience—as the solid ground that supports all our certainties, and the distant horizon that provokes all our dreams?

As long as we overlook our ongoing intercourse with the Earth, then we are compelled to double each human body with a separate mind—since mind’s wild fluidity, its creativity and openness, seems then of an entirely different order than our corporeal, physical frame. But as soon as we recognize that our bodies are always intertwined with the broad flesh of the Earth, and that our conscious experience is sustained and steadily informed by that very involvement, then the need for a multitude of individual, immaterial minds drops away … There is a profusion of individual bodies; there is the enveloping sphere of the planet; and there is the ongoing, open relation between these. The fluid field of experience that we call “mind” is simply the place of this open, improvisational relationship—experienced separately by each individual body, experienced all at once by the animate Earth itself.

I do not mean here to minimize the effect that interpersonal relationships have upon our human experience of mind, or to neglect the patterning influence that any culture, and language, has upon our awareness. I mean only to point out a truth all too easily forgotten in this technological era, which is that culture can impose its patterns only within the constraints set by the biosphere itself. Family and friends have their pull upon us, as do our various traditions of behavior and belief, yet none of these can dissolve the inexorable influence that the planet has upon our experience. The languages we speak do indeed limit our conscious conceptions of the world, yet no words can dispel the power that gravity and rain and the steady need for Earth’s air have upon the form of our bodies, the shape and texture of our thoughts.Ω



We may, of course, continue to speak of mind as an excellence utterly unique to our species, a capacity that springs us free from our embedment in the earthly community of animate forms. We may continue to hold that the rustling of experience—of exultation and grief, of compassion and confusion—is a purely human thing, and hence that the felt stirrings undergone by other creatures are mute and expressionless phantoms, automatic reflexes entirely closed to creative nuance. We may persist in the modern assumption that a dammed-up river has no impulse of its own, that the mystery of mind has no pertinence to a meadow or a dying woodland, or to a nascent thunderstorm gathering above the plains, seething and crackling with energy before the first bolts snap the air.

But by doing so, we seal ourselves into a numbing solitude—a loneliness already settling around us as the complex creativity of forests gives way to the numbered productivity of even-aged tree farms, as the diverse riffs of songbirds steadily fade from the soundscape, and the wild, syncopated chant of the frog chorus that once rocked the fields every spring dwindles down to the monotonous hum of a single street lamp. Do we really believe that the human imagination can sustain itself without being startled by other shapes of sentience—by redwoods and gleaming orchids and the eerie glissando cries of humpback whales? Do we really trust that the human mind can maintain its coherence in an exclusively human-made world?

Perhaps the broad sphere, itself, needed our forgetfulness. Perhaps some new power was waiting to be born on the planet, and our species was called upon to incubate this power in the dark cocoon of our solitude. Our senses dulled, our attention lost to the world, we created, in our inward turning, a quiet cave wherein a new layer of Earth could first shape itself and come to life. But surely it’s time now to hatch this new stratum, to waken our senses from their screen-dazzled swoon, and so to offer this power back to the more-than-human terrain. The cascading extinctions of other species make evident that the time is long past ripe. The abrupt loss of rain forests and coral reefs, the choking of wetlands, the poisons leaching into the soils, and the toxins spreading in our muscles compel us to awaken from our long oblivion, to cough up this difficult magic that’s been growing within us, swelling us with pride even as the land disintegrates all around us. Surely we’ve cut ourselves off for long enough—time, now, to open our minds outward, returning to the biosphere that wide intelligence we’d thought was ours alone.



Mind, then, as the steady dreaming of this Eairth, the unseen depth from whence all beings draw their sustenance. Mind as wind, this whooshing force, the medium that moves between and binds all earthly beings. This mystery rolling in and out of breathing bodies, invisible: wafting up from the soil and gusting down from the passes in vortices and curling waves that splash against the grasses. A fluid receptacle, clear as crystal, for the inpouring fire of sunlight; the pellucid nighttime lens through which our eyes receive the stars.

Sentience was never our private possession. We live immersed in intelligence, enveloped and informed by a creativity we cannot fathom.


Ω See, for example, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, trans. Colin Smith (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1962), and The Visible and the Invisible, trans. Alphonso Lingis (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1968); Janet Price and Margrit Shildrick, eds., Feminist Theory and the Body: A Reader (London: Routledge, 1999); Tamsin Lorraine, Irigaray and Deleuze: Experiments in Visceral Philosophy (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1999); Francisco Varela and Humberto Maturana, Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the Living (Boston: Reidel, 1980); Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch, The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1991); George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, Metaphors We Live By (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980), and Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to Western Thought (New York: Basic Books, 1999); Antonio Damasio, Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain (New York: Putnam, 1994), and The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness (New York: Harcourt, 2000).

Ω Spinoza, Ethics, Part Three, Proposition II.

Ω From this perspective, we could say that the brain itself is an introjection of the earth, an analogue or avatar of the planet happily riding atop our spine. (An introjection is the opposite of a projection—something outside oneself is replicated within.) Not only does the sensorial environment (with its elemental mix of animals, plants, and landforms, its available foods and its lurking predators) steadily exert a selective pressure upon the patterned associations between neurons—but also the large-scale structures of the brain (the cerebal tissues and organs found across persons and even across species) have formed themselves in response to the most stable structures of the perceptual field, to the openess of the horizon and the density of the ground on a planet with this specific gravity, to the chill nourishment of rain and the steady singing of birds … The brain is an introjected earth.





MOOD

(Depth Ecology III)


After all, anybody is as their land and air is. Anybody is as the sky is low or high, the air heavy or clear and anybody is as there is wind or no wind there. It is that which makes them and the arts they make and the work they do and the way they eat and the way they drink and the way they learn and everything.

— GERTRUDE STEIN





As soon as we breathe out, letting mind flow back into the field that surrounds us, we feel a new looseness and freedom. The other animals, the plants, the cliffs, and the tides are now participant in the unfolding of events, and so it no longer falls upon us, alone, to make things happen as we choose. Since we are not the sole bearers of consciousness, we are no longer on top of things, with the crippling responsibility that that entails. We’re now accomplices in a vast and steadily unfolding mystery, and our actions have resonance only to the extent that they are awake to the other agencies around us, attuned and responsive to the upwelling creativity in the land itself.

When we allow that mind is a luminous quality of the earth, we swiftly notice this consequence: each region—each topography, each uniquely patterned ecosystem—has its own particular awareness, its unique style of intelligence. Certainly the atmosphere, the translucent medium of exchange between the breathing bodies of any locale, is subtly different in each terrain. The air of the coastal northwest of North America, infused with salt spray and the tang of spruce, cedar, and fir needles, tastes and feels different from the air shimmering in the heat of the southwest desert. Each atmosphere imparts its vibrance to those who partake of it, and hence the black-gleamed ravens who carve loops through the desert sky speak a different dialect of squawks and guttural cries than the cedar-perched ravens of the Pacific Northwest, whose vocal arguments are often instilled with liquid tones. Likewise, the atmosphere that rolls over the Great Plains, gathering now and then into swirling tornadoes, contrasts vividly with the blustering winds that pour through the Rocky Mountain passes, and still more with the mists that advance and recede along the California coast. The specific geology of a place yields a soil rich in particular minerals, and the rains and rivers that feed those soils invite a unique blend of grasses, shrubs, and trees to take root there. These, in turn, beckon particular animals to browse their leaves, or to eat their fruits and distribute their seeds, to pollinate their blossoms or to find shelter among their roots, and thus a complexly intertwined community begins to emerge, bustling and humming within itself. Every such community percolates a different chemistry into the air that animates it, joining whiffs and subtle pheromones to the drumming of woodpeckers and the crisscrossing hues of stone and leaf and feather that echo back and forth through that terrain, while the way these elements blend is affected by the noon heat that beats down in some regions, or the frigid cold that hardens the ground in others.

Each place has its rhythms of change and metamorphosis, its specific style of expanding and contracting in response to the turning seasons, and this, too, shapes—and is shaped by—the sentience of that land. Whether we speak of a broad mountain range or of a small valley within that range, at each scale there is a unique intelligence circulating among the various constituents of the place—a style evident in the way events unfold in that ecosystem, how the slow spread of a mountain’s shadow alters the insect swarms above a cool stream, or the way a forested slope rejuvenates itself after a fire. For the precise amalgam of elements that structures each region exists nowhere else. Each place, that is to say, is a unique state of mind, and the many powers that constitute and dwell within that locale—the spiders and the tree frogs no less than the humans—all participate in, and partake of, the particular mind of the place.

Of course, I can hardly be instilled by this intelligence if I only touch down, briefly, on my way to elsewhere. Only by living for many moons in one region, my peripheral senses tracking seasonal changes in the local plants while the scents of the soil steadily seep in through my pores—only over time can the intelligence of a place lay claim upon my person. Slowly, as the seasonal round repeats itself again and again, the lilt and melody of the local songbirds becomes an expectation within my ears, and so the mind I’ve carried within me settles into the wider mind that enfolds me. Changes in the terrain begin to release and mirror my own, internal changes. The slow metamorphosis of colors within the landscape; the way mice migrate into the walls of my home as the climate grows colder; oak buds bursting and unfurling their leaves to join a gazillion other leaves in agile, wind-tossed exuberance before they tumble, spent, to the ground; the way a cat-faced spider weaves her spiraling web in front of the porchlight every summer—each such patterned event, quietly observed, releases analogous metamorphoses within myself. Without such tunement and triggering by the earthly surroundings, my emotional body is stymied, befuddled—forced to spiral through its necessary transformations without any guidance from the larger Body of the place (and hence entirely out of phase with my neighbors, human and non-human). Sensory perception, here, is the silken web that binds our separate nervous systems into the encompassing ecosystem.

Human communities, too, are informed by the specific sentience of the lands that they inhabit. There is a unique temperament to the bustling commerce and culture of any old-enough city, a mental climate that we instantly recognize upon returning after several years, and that we mistakenly ascribe solely to the human inhabitants of the metropolis. It is a result, we surmise, of the particular trades that the city is known for, or the dynamic mix of ethnicities that interweave there, or the heavy-handed smugness of the local police force. Such social dynamics, however, are steadily fed by the elemental energies of the realm—by the heavy overcast that cloaks the sky for weeks at a time, or the splashing speech of the river that rolls through downtown, tossing glints of sunlight into the eyes of all who walk near, or by the way that the greasy exhaust from forty thousand commuting cars interacts with the humidity of the summer air. The dismal social ills endemic to certain cities have often been stoked by the foolishness of urban designers who overlooked the particular wildness of the place, ignoring the genius loci, the unique intelligence of the land now squelched and stifled by local industries. A calloused coldness, or meanness, results when our animal senses are cut off for too long from the animate earth, when our ears—inundated by the whooping blare of car alarms and the muted thunder of subways—no longer encounter the resonant silence, as our eyes forget the irregular wildness of things green and growing behind the rectilinear daze.

Still, even the stone structures of a metropolis may become expressions of the genius loci. Old buildings regularly worked over by the sun, rain, and wind finally become gestures of the local earth. The very architecture of any city old enough to have negotiated with gravity, century after century, for the stance of its walls and the solidity of its foundations, is now a conduit for the pulse and power that rises steadily from the ground. The people who take up residence and work in that city are channeled into patterns of life appropriate to the realm by the edifices that surround them, by the worn-smooth cobbles of the winding streets and the slightly sagging structures within which they dwell.

Thus the old city of Prague, which straddles the Vltava River with its statue-laden bridges and its battlements, its narrow lanes and its Gothic towers, holds certain chthonic qualities in place even as the recently released tides of capitalism sweep across it. The strange and brooding psyche of the local earth is preserved and curiously protected in the hand-built substance of this town, where High Gothic structures from the fourteenth century jive with ornate Baroque edifices from the seventeenth, where somber Romanesque churches converse in muted tones with audacious Art Nouveau neighbors. Despite the corrosive power of the capitalist economy (usually a kind of universal solvent), an earthly magic dwells and moves within the city of Prague. It’s a power that cannot easily be eradicated here, where the pagan Green Man still peers down from the shadowed corners of medieval churches (stone vines spiraling from his gaping mouth), where zodiacal clocks in the looming clock towers tick off the mythical hours, and ravens squawk in the branches above a cemetery so thick with tilting headstones that even the ghosts cannot squeeze between them. Given solid expression in the ornate structure and statuary of so many buildings, the telluric intelligence of the local earth had only to recede into the old stonework in order to survive the sterile era of Soviet communism, with its anti-aesthetic of mass efficiency, or to weather the new occupation by the culture of total commerce. From within those aged walls, the energies pulsing up from the ground continue to exert their influence upon all who live and work there. Hence the kabbalistic and magical arts still flourish in the city of Prague. I am acquainted with a molecular biologist there, respected for his research throughout Europe, who at night composes and interprets astrological charts for the country’s intelligentsia. I have been befriended by an accomplished and erudite geologist in that city who regularly turns his attention to the arcana of geomancy in the off hours. Come evening, the live sounds of chamber music—Mozart and Smetana and Janáček—echo through the narrow streets, while in the morning crowds of hand-carved marionettes dangle behind shop windows throughout the old town, their painted eyes peering at each passerby, awaiting the curious person who will finally bring their limbs to life. In old Prague, as in other venerable cities whose cobbles have been bloodied and buffeted by succeeding ages, the built scape of the city does not stifle the sentience of the land, but rather ensures that that power continues to vitalize the human community.

The intelligence that moves within the Czech landscape is very different from that which animates the city of Paris, as the wide sky reflected in the meandering Seine contrasts vividly with the low overcast often mirrored in the Vltava River. The disparity between the broad resplendence of the Parisian esplanades or the tastes of Parisian cuisine and the narrow alleys or flavors common to Prague expresses a difference in their human histories, to be sure, but also in the very ambiance of their respective terrains, and the specific fertility of their soils. Meanwhile, the contrasting bustle of Rome—the grand bluster of its mythic statuary and the convivial ethos of its many fountains—bespeaks the very different emotional climate of that peninsula, and of the elemental forces (the specific goddesses and gods) that compose the terrestrial psyche of that land.

For each land has its own psyche, its own style of sentience, and hence to travel from Rome to Paris, or from Barcelona to Berlin, is to voyage from one state of mind to another, very different, state of mind. Even to journey by train from Manhattan to Boston, or simply to walk from one New England town to another, is to transform one’s state of awareness. Traveling on foot makes these variations most evident, as the topography gradually alters, mountains giving way to foothills, and foothills becoming plains, as the accents of the local shopkeepers transform in tandem with the shifting terrain. The texture of the air changes as the moisture-laden atmosphere of the highlands, instilled with the breath of cool, granitic caves and the exhalations of roots and matted needles, opens onto the dry wind whirling across the flatlands, blending the scents of upturned soil with hints of exhaust from the highway, and—especially strong in some places—the acrid smell of processed fertilizer.

Such alterations in the unseen spirit of the land are mostly hidden to those who make the journey by car, since then all the senses other than sight are held apart from the sensuous earth, isolated within a capsule hurtling along the highway too fast for even the eyes to register most changes in the disposition of the visible. Still, subtle clues drift into the cabin, now and then—the insistent stench of those fertilized fields, or the reek from an unfortunate skunk finding its way even into nostrils well insulated by air-conditioning. If we turn on the radio, then our ears, too, may be assailed by the shifting psyche of the land—the percussive hip-hop and blues of the city opening onto the lilting voices and plucked strings of country music (laced with funk in regions closer to Gotham and more plaintive as we roll into more rural spaces). Along broad stretches of the interstate, the wavelengths give way to a saturated array of Christian stations, with smooth- or gravel-voiced preachers citing chapter and verse with a rhythmic passion exceeding even that of the urban rap artists. This, too, is a register of the mind of that locale.

Certainly there are roads more conducive to sensory alertness than the highway, whose rectilinear, manicured margins induce a kind of stupor in the speeding driver, a steady trance of abstraction—an onrushing flood of memories and future concerns with few ties to the sensuous present. Unpaved, country back roads invite a more open and improvisational style of thought, one that stays bound, albeit loosely, to the twisting topography. This is a more meandering cogitation, vaguely punctuated by leaning mailboxes and rusting maroon tractors, by barking dogs racing the car or a kestrel motionless on a fence post.

Yet how much more thoroughly this land would feed our thoughts if we were not driving but rather strolling on foot along these lanes—or even pedaling a decent bicycle, the gusting wind swelling our lungs as our muscles work themselves against the slope!

If the automobile isolates our speeding senses from the land, the airplanes in which we fly abstract us entirely from the grounding earth. After checking our bags at the airport, we tighten our buckles and loudly levitate up out of the ecosystem, shaking our senses free from the web of relationships that compose the specific sentience of that place. Only to plunk down some hours later in an entirely different ecology—an entirely different state of mind—without experiencing any of the transitional terrain between them, without our nervous system being tuned and tutored for this change by the gradual changes in the topography as we move across it. It’s a recipe for madness, don’t you think?—the way we now force our body to slip from one mode of awareness into another weirdly different awareness, without undergoing the slow, perfectly calibrated transition between them (the gentle metamorphosis that the earth instills in our body as it alters around us). No wonder that we feel dazed and discombobulated after an extended flight! “Jet lag” we call it, dutifully resetting our watches, as though it were merely a consequence of entering a new time zone. As though it had nothing to do with abruptly finding ourselves in a world whose background colors, shapes, and smells diverge drastically from those where we were a few hours earlier. A new time zone? Well, yes, if by this we mean a place whose rhythmic timing, or pulse, is oddly other than that where we just came from—a zone whose specific dynamism tempts our skin and jangles our ears in weird new ways, crashing our sensory organization, forcing our nervous system to reorder itself as best it can. The sudden strangeness is jarring to our animal body, and especially rattling when we’re compelled to adapt to the new circumstance in a matter of minutes.

Hence, after flying in jets for several years, many adapt by simply blunting their senses, numbing themselves to all but the most homogeneous facets of a place, taking refuge in only the most fabricated spaces, eating in the identical themed restaurants that now sprout from the pavement in every corner of the continent to meet the spreading demand for anesthetic ease and familiarity. Each airport seems merely a new annex of the last airport, each new downtown an extension of the last: by lingering only in the hotels and conference centers where their meetings unfold, they’ve no need to subject themselves to the unruly otherness of the living locale.

Yet for those who have kept their animal senses awake—for those who venture beyond the made-to-order spaces, traveling more on foot or by bicycle than they do via the jet or the automobile—the journey from one ecosystem into another is precisely a journey from one state of mind into another, different, state. From one mode of awareness, flavored by salt and the glint of sunlight on waves, to an altered, inland awareness wherein the cries of those gulls become only a vague, half-remembered dream.



Transformations in the texture of the mind are not brought about only by journeying from one geography to another. Those who dwell steadily in a single terrain, whether by choice or necessity, also experience profound shifts in the collective awareness. The psychological qualities of any place steadily metamorphose as the powers that compose that place shift among themselves—as the dawning sun, for example, pours its first warmth across the rooftops—or as that place exchanges specific constituents with other places. The migratory route of certain birds may bring large flocks to settle for weeks or months in a particular bioregion; their arrival will alter the psyche of that realm even as those birds enter and partake of that very psyche. Such large-scale alterations in the collective sentience are especially obvious, while other, more continuous transformations go mostly unnoticed. Nonetheless, we can be sure that there are delicate changes unfolding in the local mindscape, changes that imperceptibly—but inevitably—affect our emotions, our thoughts, and our actions.

If the subtle intelligence of a place is inseparable from the medium of air that circulates invisibly within and between the inhabitants of that locale, it follows that some of the most dramatic modulations within the collective psyche are those that alter the sensuous quality of the atmosphere, changes that we commonly ascribe to “the weather.” Transformations in the local weather often confound our conscious plans, sometimes curdling the unseen medium into a visible fog that slows our steps and clogs our thoughts, or congealing the invisible depth around us into a thicket of slanting raindrops. Changes in the weather transform the very feel of the world’s presence, altering the medium of awareness in a manner that affects every breathing being in our vicinity. We sometimes refer to such weather phenomena, taken together, as “the elements,” a phrase that suggests how basic, how primary, these powers are to the human organism. The ephemeral nature of such phenomena—the way such modulations in the atmosphere confuse the boundaries between the invisible and the visible, between inner and outer, between “subjective” and “objective”—ensures that the weather holds a curious position in the civilized world of modernity. We refer to it constantly; inquiring about or commenting upon the weather establishes the most basic ground upon which any social communication can proceed. Although it rarely occupies our full attention, the weather is always evident on the periphery of that attention, an ever-present reminder that the reality we inhabit is ultimately beyond our human control.

For the activity of the atmosphere remains the most ubiquitous, the most intractable, the most enigmatic of practical problems with which sedentary civilization has daily to grapple. Despite the best efforts of science and the most versatile technological advances, we seem unable to master this curious flux in which we’re immersed. We rely on satellites to monitor its unruly behavior from outside, hoping to gain from such external data a rudimentary sense of its large-scale patterns, so we might better guess at its next moves.

But suppose we were to analyze this restless dimension from within—that is, from our own perspective as sentient animals thoroughly permeated by this flux? How then would we articulate its many modes of activity, its storms and its calms, its clarities and condensations as they resound in our organism and roll across the terrain? We would need a term that suggests the subjective quality of these elements, the way they alter the palpable mind of the place, transforming the awareness of all who live there.

For our own species, at least, it’s clear that such changes in the ambient weather don’t really force a change in our conscious thoughts, but rather alter the felt context—the somatic background within which thinking unfolds. From our own creaturely perspective, then, we might say that shifts in the weather are changes in the disposition of the land. Different atmospheric conditions—different kinds of weather—are, precisely, different moods.

Wind, rain, snow, fog, hail, open skies, heavy overcast—each element, or mood, articulates the invisible medium in a unique manner, sometimes rendering it (partly) visible to our eyes, or more insistently palpable upon our skin. Each affects the relation between our body and the living land in a specific way, altering the tenor of our reflections and the tonality of our dreams.





TORPOR


During the summer, near the coast, one sometimes wakes to a day that seems like any other, although as one goes through the motions of dressing and preparing breakfast one notices one’s thoughts lagging behind, as though they have yet to fully separate themselves from the state of sleep. A slowness attends all one’s cogitations—the newspaper today seems written with less zip, reporting the same old thing with the same stale phrases, and when you put it aside you wonder if a minute’s rest on the couch would be in order before tackling the day’s work. The immediate tasks to be accomplished are, after all, somewhat vague and unfocused; it’s difficult to remember just what they are.

Only upon stepping outside, and surveying the world from your stoop, does the material cause of this mental lethargy become apparent. For the leafy trees, the electric wires, and the other houses are all bathed in a humid atmosphere that renders their outlines fuzzy and imprecise, while the mountains that usually rise from the far edge of town have dissolved, or are wholly shrouded, somehow, in the moisture-thick air. There’s no cloud to be seen in the washed-out sky, only the too-big sun, hovering in the east, sweating like a spent tennis ball mouthed by too many dogs; its dull heat presses in from every direction.





LUCIDITY


Then there are those rare days, not entirely unknown in any region of the planet, that dawn with a clarity that muscles its way into every home and office, lending a crispness and cogency to almost every thought. One feels uncommonly good on such days, and others do, too; deliberations move forward with unaccustomed ease. Ambiguities resolve themselves—or render themselves more explicit, the choices more defined and clear-cut. There’s a delicious radiance that seems to come from the things themselves, from even the tables and the plush rug, and when we step outside we can taste it in the air and the way a few fluffed clouds rest, almost motionless, in the crystal lens of the sky. How far our vision travels on such days! When we climb to the top of the street, we can see clear to the mountains that rise from the plain in the neighboring state. Long-term goals abruptly become evident; possibilities far in the future seem more accessible, lending perspective to the present. Hence planning goes more smoothly, with a marked absence of the usual friction—no sweat.

Although, to be sure, we’re not always in sync with such felicitous weather—with the strangely clarified transparence that lifts the weight of the whole suburb on such unpredictable days, or that wraps the aspen branches outside our cabin with such a pellucid and form-fitting cloak of blue. Sometimes we’re still carrying the strains and stresses of recent weeks, struggles that followed us into our dreams and now cling to our face and our feet, or perhaps we’re still in the dank doldrums due to the wreck of a relationship we’d trusted our hearts to. These are the worst days for depression, when everyone else we meet moves so smoothly through the world. Even if we’re off on our own, well away from the human hubbub, the despondence can be darker on such days, when it seems the stones and the singing sky and the blades of grass are all tuned to another frequency. There’s an insistent and eager harmoniousness to things, an ease that we sense on the periphery—the hillside itself humming with pleasure for a whole afternoon—yet the mood cannot penetrate through the thick pellicle of our pain. The mismatch of the world with our own traumatized state feels distressing, even terrifying, shoving us deeper into the pit.



Of course, I am writing of these earthly elements, or moods, from an entirely human perspective. Indeed, I’m writing from the subjective perspective of a single human creature—myself. Nonetheless, I write with the knowledge that there cannot help but be some overlap between my direct, visceral experience and the felt experience of other persons—whose senses, after all, have much in common with my own. Moreover, I’ve confidence that my bodily experience is a variation, albeit in many cases a very distant variation, of what other, non-human, bodies may experience in the same locale in that season, at a similar moment of the day or night. For not only are our bodies kindred (all mammals, for instance, sharing a common ancestry), but also we are all of us, at the present moment, interdependent constituents of a common biosphere, each of us experiencing it from our own angle, and with our own specific capabilities, yet nonetheless all participant in the round life of the earth, and hence subject to the same large-scale flows, rhythms, and tensions that move across that wider life.

The world we inhabit is not, in this sense, a determinable set of objective processes. It is our larger flesh, a densely intertwined and improvisational tissue of experience. It is a sensitive sphere suspended in the solar wind, a round field of sentience sustained by the relationships between the myriad lives and sensibilities that compose it. We come to know more of this sphere not by detaching ourselves from our felt experience, but by inhabiting our bodily experience all the more richly and wakefully, feeling our way into deeper contact with other experiencing bodies, and hence with the wild, intercorporeal life of the earth itself.





STILLNESS


The computer keys fall and rise beneath my fingers, letters arranging themselves on the screen as I list the matters I must attend to in the next days. Drop off a clutch of letters at the post office. Compose a decent lecture for the conference on Thursday. Clean the stove and the oven. And since we’re having guests, I’d better gather up this year’s receipts from the various boxes and baskets and stand-alone piles where I’ve tossed them, and maybe organize them in a respectable fashion. The guests are my parents; they’re arriving Wednesday—tomorrow!—to spend time with their two grandchildren. Tomorrow. How exactly do I expect to find time to craft a half-decent lecture for that conference? I’ll have to come up with some sort of outline, and then just wing it. Meanwhile, my partner’s been scowling at me all day because I forgot to fix the vacuum cleaner last week. (As if I’ve any idea how to even take that gizmo apart. When I fixed it last year it was sheer luck: the bulky part fell down the stairs while I was trying to pry it open, then miraculously starting working like new, so all of a sudden she decided I’m a mechanical wizard. Not that I don’t enjoy the respect, but sooner or later she’ll discover that I’m a quack, the last person one should trust with any tool more complicated than a shoehorn.) Anyway, I must remember—remember!—that the voice I reached at the power company said they’ll indeed turn off the gas and electric if I don’t get a check to them by Wednesday. Tomorrow. Too late to send it by mail. Maybe I can swing by there on the way to Hannah’s dental appointment. After the dentist we’ll have to head straight to the airport to pick up my folks; but why in Earth’s name is she going to the dentist again—what kind of scam are these doctors running? If my daughter’s teeth weren’t perfectly fine, she couldn’t bite her friend Finn so effectively; and if she comes home with one more coloring book from the waiting room, with all those grinning animal faces proclaiming how important it is to see the dentist every six months, I’m gonna sue the dentist for corrupting minors. Why does he need so many visits anyway—doesn’t he have any friends?!

As the overwhelm hits, I feel a shot of acid in my stomach, and feel it register, too, as a fleeting wince on my face. Not good. This upcoming lecture has me on edge for some reason—maybe ’cause it’s in my hometown, for once, and so various acquaintances will be there, expecting something dazzling. Christ.

Something catches my peripheral vision, and I turn toward the window. I feel my eyes widen in surprise: snowflakes! A great crowd of snowflakes floating down, a deep thicket of slowly tumbling white. How long has this been happening? I stand and stare for a few moments, then pull on a sweater and step out the door into a landscape transformed as if by a spell. My steps make no sound—the white blanket already plush upon the ground and layered in tufts upon the juniper and pine branches, as flakes drift down like loosened stars. A hundred of them swerve into my face, melting cold against my skin as I walk slowly through a world utterly transfigured by this silent grace cascading through every part of the space around me.

The surge and press of the week’s worries have somehow vanished. When I try to call those concerns back to mind, I simply cannot find them behind the teeming multitude of slowly falling flakes. Past and future have dissolved, and I am held in the white eternity of a moment so beautiful it melts all my words. All weight has lifted; the innumerable downward trajectories have convinced my senses that I am floating, or rather rising slowly upward, and the ground itself rising beneath me—the earth and I ascending weightless through space.

A sound: the flutter of a bird’s wings, and a small explosion of snow from a branch the bird launched from. Then, just silence. Not silence as an absence of sound, but as a fullness … as the very sound ten thousand snowflakes make as they meet the ground. A thick silence, muffling the whole valley, and for all I know the whole cosmos. I cannot imagine that any bird, any squirrel, any coyote or hare is not similarly held in the visible trance of this slowly cascading silence.

The clumps on the branches deepen …

The snow falls through the night, the porch light illuminating a charmed space through which powder floats steadily down. I turn it off before heading to bed, then step outside to inhale the darkness: now even the house, and the truck asleep in the driveway, have fallen under the spell.

By morning the snowfall has stopped. Yet the enchantment holds; when I step outside and snap my boots into my skis, there is a soft stillness everywhere. I glide between the trees and onto the dirt road, whose countless ruts have disappeared; unbroken goodness extends from the tips of my skis in every direction. There is a hushed purity to the world, and to awareness itself as I float across the snowy fields. The dentist will wait, and the power company will get its check when the roads are clear, whether today or tomorrow. Thursday’s lecture is forming itself, easily, as I glide over the white expanse, my body writing its smooth script across the clean, unmarked pages.

Now and then a high limb releases its too-heavy mound of snow, and a spray of powder drifts down in sheets, glittering, scintillating, then vanishing into the clarified air.





WIND


Of all the elements, wind is the most versatile and protean, offering in each region a different range of personae, varying itself according to the season and often, too, according to the direction from whence it arrives. Even if we consider only a narrow range of its incarnations, we still find ourselves overwhelmed by their variety, and so must choose only a few examples from an outrageous array of styles:

Toward the tail end of a heavy winter, when a few days of unexpected warmth bring whiffs of spring, and a buried store of state-specific memories proper to that season send a few green shoots into one’s consciousness, the winter will often reassert itself, swooping low at night to chill the walls of your house and repossess the snowy fields. When you step outside in the morning, the newly melted surface of the snow has now frozen solid and slick like a pane of glass. And gusting across that glass, a fine mist of crystals speeds past the trunks of trees, tinkling in eddies against the windows of the house as the main current of wind gallops through the valley. Boots slip along the frozen surface as you try to take a few steps, ears and face stung by the icy blast. Nothing in the landscape beckons or reaches out to you, for each bush or branch or telephone pole seems entirely focused on staying in place, every home holding fast with all its fingers to the ground beneath, each being doing its best to become an inconspicuous part of the ground, a mute lump or appendage of the earth, affording the wind nothing other than a smooth surface to glide past. Under the onslaught of the chill wind, each entity subsides into the anonymity of the earth, and even you, too, find your individuality subsumed into the rigor of standing solid against the frigid blasts, as your body makes itself into a smooth stone. Thought is stilled, all interior reflection dissolves, no memory apart from this ancient kinship and solidarity with the density of heartwood and metal and rock. The outward roar of wind forces one to find the blessed silence of stone at the heart of the mind. Anonymous, implacable, unperturbed—the biting cold of a winter wind returns one to one’s unity with the bedrock.

Yet a wind of comparable velocity in the late spring can have a nearly opposite effect. As when after a long hike one ascends to a high pass from the eastern foothills and peers over into the valley beyond. A moist breeze is riding up the western slope, carrying fresh scents from the forests below, and clouds previously unseen are slowly massing on that side of the range. The wind becomes stronger, more insistent, and you realize that a storm is brewing; it’s time to head down and find shelter. But something holds you on the pass. As the wind begins to rage, pouring over the crest and rushing down the boulder-strewn slope behind you, it tugs your hair back from your head and fills your cheeks when you open your mouth, whipping your unbuttoned shirt like a kite as an exuberance rises in your muscles. Laughing, crouching, and leaping in the wind, facing into it and feeling the first raindrops as you gulp from the charging gusts, imbibing the storm’s energy, meeting its wildness with your own as you dance drenched like a grinning fool down the trail—a wild wind can return us to our own vitality more swiftly than any other element! And the needled trees swaying and tossing above us as we descend—are not they, too, caught up in something of the same mood? Not the giddiness, perhaps, but the exhilaration that lies beneath it, the way the wind challenges us in this season when the sap’s already been rising in our veins, testing our flexibility, waking our limbs and our limberness, goading us each into our own animal abandon, our own muscular dance?

There are also the winds of autumn, those that whirl through the streets tearing the dry, ruddy-brown leaves from their moorings. Alive with the scents of fallen fruit and soil and smoke, the autumn wind teases our nostrils as it whooshes past, scattering the humped piles of carefully raked leaves, mingling their constituents with other leaves spiraling down from the branches. Soon the oaks, maples, and beeches stand denuded and exposed, their fractaled complexity silhouetted against the sky. Our bodies witness this gradual release of leaves, this stripping away of color from the gray, skeletal limbs, and cannot help but feel that the animating life of things is slipping off into the air—that the wind moaning in our ears is composed of innumerable spirits leaving their visible bodies behind. We feel enveloped by a rushing crowd of unseen essences—sighing, whooshing lives that reveal themselves to us only as fleeting smells, or by a momentary turbulence of dust and spinning leaves. The wind is haunted, alive. Only in this liminal season, before the onset of winter, does the wild psyche of the land assert itself so vividly that even the most rational persons find themselves lost, now and then, in the uncanny depths of the sensuous. Their animal senses awaken; the skin itself begins to breathe.

The disorientation is intensified by the autumn night—especially those bright, shadow-stalked nights when the howling wind hurls clouds across the face of the moon, loosening perception from its common constraints, since to our gazing eyes it seems not those glowing clouds that are racing south but rather the lustrous moon that is gliding smooth and swift toward the north, swimming upstream against the same current that buffets our legs and the gesturing branches.

For wind is moodiness personified, altering on a whim, recklessly transgressing the boundaries between places, between beings, between inner and outer worlds. The unruly poltergeist of our collective mental climate, wind, after all, is the ancient and ever-present source of the words “spirit” and “psyche.” It is the sacred “ruach” of the ancient Hebrews, the invisible rushing-spirit that lends its life to the visible world; it is the Latin “anima,” the soulful wind that animates all breathing beings (all animals); it is the Navajo “Nilch’i,” the Holy Wind from whence all beings draw their awareness.

Indeed, whenever indigenous, tribal persons speak (often matter-of-factly) about “the spirits,” we moderns mistakenly assume, in keeping with our own impoverished sense of matter, that they’re alluding to a supernatural set of powers unrelated to the tangible earth. We come much closer to the shadowed savvy of our indigenous brothers and sisters, however, when we realize that the spirits they speak of have a great deal in common with the myriad gusts, breezes, and winds that influence life in any locale—like the wind that barrels along the river at dusk, chattering the willows, or the mist-laden breeze that flows down from the foothills on certain mornings, and those multiple whirlwinds that raise the dust on hot summer days, and the gentle zephyr that lingers above the night grasses, and the various messenger-winds that bring us knowledge of what the neighbors are cooking this evening. Or even the small but significant gusts that slip in and out of our nostrils as we lie sleeping. Modern folk pay little heed to these subtle invisibles, these elementals—indeed, we tend not to notice them at all, convinced that a breeze is nothing other than a mindless jostling of molecules. Our breathing bodies know otherwise. But we will keep our bodies out of play; we will keep our thoughts aligned solely with what our complex instruments can measure. Until we have indisputable evidence to the contrary, we will assume that matter itself is utterly devoid of felt experience.

In this manner we hoard and hold tight to our own awareness—like a frightened whirlwind spinning ever faster, trying to convince itself of its own autonomy, struggling to hold itself aloof from the ocean of air that surrounds it.





THUNDERSTORM


On a warm afternoon, new leaves creeping out of the just-opened buds, when the apricot trees shamelessly offer their blossoms to a thousand bees, one notices a faint rumble in the air. It dissolves back into the incessant whirring of bees, until there comes, sometime later, a similar trembling. The tremor is more felt than heard, a vibration noticed more by our bones and the trunks of the fruit trees than by our conscious reflections. Behind the branches, far off to the west, a darkness is gathering, a vague threat on the horizon. Yet now the irregular rumble once again, more audible, ominous. The rabbits are sniffing the air, hesitant. And how odd; what’s become of all those bees? Now only a few stragglers are moving among the blossoms. Birdlife is more evident—several wingeds swooping between the trees, expending an unusual amount of energy. Everyone here is now feeling it: the background hush that’s come over the land as the clouds thicken into a too-early dusk—the rabbits ducking into their digs—a deep quietude broken by the alarm call of a bird and a bit later by the thudding violence in the near distance. As though the sky is a skin that’s stretched taut. Everyone is finding somewhere safe and hunkering down, tremulous, waiting.

Then, quietly, a soft breeze stirs the tips of the grasses, rippling the blades, spreading perhaps a kind of pleasure there among the green life, an eager anticipation very different from the threat vaguely sensed within one’s muscles and the muscles of other animals.

And then without warning the air splits open: white fire tracing an impossibly erratic path between the sky and the hills opposite, a jagged gash burning itself into one’s retinas and turning the entire landscape into a negative afterimage of itself, for an instant, before the shadowed darkness returns. Silence. And then the shattering sound of that splitting, the syncopated cracking, exploding in the skull and reverberating off the cliffs. The sound from which all other sounds must come. The Word at the origin of the world. And as the visible world settles back into itself, another bright flame rips haphazard through the gray, and soon the anticipated yet unprepared-for SHOUT!!! ruptures the air and shudders through the ground underfoot.

Nothing, no creature or stone or flake of paint on the wall, escapes the shattering imperative of the thunderbolt’s shout—the way it undoes and re-creates us in a moment. No awake creature is distracted at that moment, no person remains lost in reverie or inward thought; all of us are gathered into the same electric present by the sudden violence of this exchange between the ground and the clouds, the passionate mad tension and static that reverberates through all of us in the valley this afternoon. This rage in the mind.

This passion now rising, it seems, in the branches of the ponderosas on the hillside opposite, and soon in the swaying limbs of the closer cottonwoods, and now in the roiling needles of junipers and piñons along the dirt road—some power is moving rapidly across the valley, a tumult of wind in the branches, and at last the rushing cool sound of





RAIN.


A few drops, at first, on my shoulder and nose, as I hear it begin to pelt the soil of the orchard. Then I am taken up within the cold thicket of drops, soaking first my clothes and then the smooth-skinned creature beneath those clothes, rolling off my nose and dripping off the apricot branches to pool among the grasses, spilling down my arms and gathering in the cuffs of my jeans.

The obvious effect triggered by the rain is release—a steady, dramatic release of tension, like held-back tears finally sliding across our cheeks.

Lightning still flashes through the downpour, and the stutter of thunder, but all this water drumming on my head eases the violence of that darker percussion, drawing attention back from the splintering tension in the sky to my own cool and shivering surfaces, and to the splashing patterns in the near puddles—returning awareness to the close-at-hand. Earlier, when the lightning first struck nearby, all attention was gripped by the present moment, yet that moment was a vast thing, opening onto the entirety of the clouded sky, including the whole lit-up span of the valley. A strong rain, however, rapidly shrinks the field of the present down to an intimate neighborhood extending only a few yards in any direction. The forest of droplets tumbling down all around me is not easily penetrated by my senses. Past and future seem utter abstractions, yesterday and tomorrow are far-off fictions; I am gripped in the slanting immediacy of water and mud and skin. I tilt my face upward, blinking, trying to follow individual drops as they fall toward me. Difficult. I give up and just open my mouth. The sensuous density of the present moment, and me inside it, drinking the rain.

I head into the house to peel off soaked clothes and towel myself dry. The rain beats an irregular staccato upon the roof. I stand at the window, staring out. Drops slam against different points on the pane, the impact bursting them into smaller droplets that slide waywardly down the glass, each droplet picking up others as it descends—every added straggler increasing the velocity of the drop, until they all pool along the bottom.

Even the interior of the house is transformed by the thrumming rain; objects here seem more awake to the things around them—the table, the lamp, couch, chairs, bookcases, and books all seem to have shed their distracting ties to the world outside and are now committed citizens of this small but commodious cosmos wholly isolated from the rest of the valley. The familiar bonds that these objects have with one another and with me are all heightened, somehow, by the pounding of water on the roof and the walls.

Later, after the rain has dissipated, I open the door onto a different world—a field of glistening, shiny surfaces, of beings quietly turning their inward focus back outward, as creatures poke noses out of burrows and a thrush swerves down to a puddle’s edge and then hops in to splash its wings in the wet. Everything glints and gleams, everything radiates out of itself as a hundred scents rise from the soil and the fungus-ridden trunks, from insect egg cases and last year’s leaves and the moist, matted fur of two squirrels chasing each other along the roof gutter. A tangle of essences drifts and mingles in the mind of this old orchard, each of us inhaling the flavor of everyone else, yielding a mood of openness and energetic ease as the clouds begin to part and the late afternoon sun calls wisps of steam from the grass.



But wait: Are we not simply projecting our own interior mood upon the outer landscape? And so making ourselves, once again, the source and center of the earthly world, the human hub around which nature revolves?

It is a key question, necessary as a check to our ingrained arrogance, and as a way of bending our attention, always, toward the odd otherness of things—holding our thoughts open to the unexpected and sometimes unnerving shock of the real. So are we merely projecting our emotional states onto the surroundings? Well, no—not if our manner of understanding and conceptualizing our various “interior” moods was originally borrowed from the moody, capricious earth itself. Not, that is, if our image of anger, and livid rage, has been borrowed, at least in part, from our ancestral, animal experience of thunderstorms, and the violence of sudden lightning. Not if our sense of emotional release has been fed not only by the flow of tears but also by our experience of rainfall, and if our concept of mental clarity is nourished by the visual transparence of the air and the open blue of the sky on those days of surpassingly low humidity. If our sense of inward confusion and muddledness is anciently and inextricably bound up with our outward experience of being wrapped in a fog—if our whole conceptualization of the emotional mood or “feel” of things is unavoidably entwined with metaphors of “atmospheres,” “airs,” and “climates”—then it is hardly projection to notice that it is not only human beings (and human-made spaces) that carry moods: that the living land in which we dwell, and in whose life we participate, has its own feeling-tone and style that vary throughout a day or a season.

In truth, it’s likely that our solitary sense of inwardness (our experience of an interior mindscape to which we alone have access) is born of the forgetting, or sublimation, of a much more ancient interiority that was once our common birthright—the ancestral sense of the surrounding earthly cosmos as the voluminous inside of an immense Body, or Tent, or Temple. Before the invention of the telescope, the glimmering stars of the night sky appeared much closer than they do today. For the ancient Egyptians and Mesopotamians, the vault of the sky was considered the canopy of an enormous tent held up by the mountains that rise at the boundaries of the world. For the Haida people, a seafaring tribe of woodcarvers and wordsmiths who inhabit a rainswept archipelago off the west coast of what’s now called Canada, to enter into one of their traditional cedar-plank houses was to situate oneself within a living analogue of the cosmos, for the universe itself was perceived as a huge house with holes in the planks where the stars gleamed through.

Similarly, a Navajo hogan—the traditional dwelling of the Dineh people of the American Southwest—is experienced as a microcosm of the enveloping house of the world. Indeed, in the absence of telescopes, some such conception of the cosmos as an immense interior or enclosure seems to have been common to a large majority of human cultures, as though a sense of the interiority of the surrounding world—this broad house of land and sky—is all but irresistible for the human creature.

The cosmology of Aristotle and Ptolemy, which held sway throughout Europe until the seventeenth century, was itself a refined instance of this same notion. It held that the universe was a nested series of concentric, crystalline spheres turning independent of one another around the central, solid sphere of the earth. Each of these transparent (and hence invisible) spheres carried one of the celestial bodies on its surface as it moved. Since to our unaided vision there were only seven independently moving bodies in the night sky, so in the pre-Copernican universe there were seven concentric, invisible spheres carrying the sun, the moon, and the visible planets, along with an eighth, outermost sphere carrying all the “fixed stars” as it turned. The sphere closest to us was that which carried the moon, followed by that bearing Mercury, then Venus, and then the sphere bearing the fiery Sun on its surface. Beyond that turned the sphere holding Mars, and then Jupiter, then Saturn (the outermost planet known to the naked eye), and finally the background sphere of fixed stars.

There was a great intimacy to this vision of the cosmos, with its invisible but ordered spheres enveloping the earth, cradling this world in their grand embrace. For all its complexity and observational refinement, it remained an extension of our ancestral, indigenous view of the universe as an immense enclosure. And so, when Copernicus and his followers wrecked this Aristotelian image of the cosmos, Western civilization suffered the dissolution of the last, long-standing version of that huge interior.

We can hardly imagine the visceral disorientation and sheer vertigo precipitated by that shift, as first the spheres holding the planets and then the outermost sphere of fixed stars abruptly dissolved into a boundless depth. Europeans soon found themselves adrift in a limitless space, a pure outside. Only in the wake of this dramatic disorientation, and the attendant loss of a collective interior, did there arise the modern conception of mind as a wholly private interior, and hence of each person as an autonomous, isolated individual.

Psychological qualities once felt to be proper to the surrounding terrain—feeling-tones, moods, the animating spirits-of-place known to reside in particular wetlands or forests—all lost their home with the dissolution of the enclosing, wombish character of the pre-Copernican cosmos. For unlike quantities, qualities are fluid properties arising from the internal, felt relations between beings. Such feeling-tones now had no place in the physical world—itself newly conceived as a set of objects that had no internal relation to one another. Nature was beginning to be experienced as a pure exterior—a world of external, mechanical relationships: a world of quantities.

It is only natural that psychological qualities fled from this open exteriority in the wake of the Copernican revolution, taking refuge in the private space now assumed to exist inside each individual. Feelings and moods are mercurial powers; they require at least a provisional sense of enclosure to hold them. Once they could no longer be contained by the sensuous cosmos, no longer held inside the curved embrace of the spheres, these fluid qualities quit the so-called outer world entirely, taking up residence within the new interiority of each person’s “inner world.” Henceforth they would be construed as merely subjective phenomena.

Yet there remains something exceedingly tenuous and unstable in this incarceration of felt qualities within the solitary precincts inside each person. For where, really, is this “inner” world? Does it exist somewhere inside our bodies? This seems unlikely, for whenever we open up a human body we find therein only a clutch of organs and tissues just as physically measurable as the things and objects outside the body. Perhaps it resides in the brain? If we cut into the brain, we discover a crowded mass of specialized cells, densely packed, with no breathing room between them. When we speak of our “inner world,” however, we mean a spacious place where imagination dances and takes flight, an open field wherein thought has free rein, yet various ambiguous agencies (dimly sensed fears, tranquil yearnings, molten desires) vie for our attention, a realm with room for all kinds of adventurous forays. Clearly, then, we are referring to something other than the crammed thickness of our bodily interior. Where, really, is this expansive “inside” to which we allude, this spaciousness and depth wherein subjectively felt qualities have their home?



Despite a few thunderstorms last month, this land is dry—too dry. All around my home the piñon pines are desiccating and dying from the deepening drought. Most of the fish once endemic to the Rio Grande that waters this valley have now vanished; the river’s flow usurped by too many industries, too many developments, too many golf courses. Sometimes clouds arrive, bringing hope of rain that hardly ever falls. Like today, a rare overcast afternoon in late spring—cloud cover stretching from the Sangre de Cristo peaks behind me to the Jemez Mountains on the western horizon, with nary a stitch of blue visible to the eye. The underside of the clouds is more defined than is common here in the high desert, the furrowed texture of that gray ceiling unusually clear. Here and there in the distance are small spots where a wispy, feathered blur slants down toward the ground: light rains falling on the far-off earth.

It is strange, this broad overcast extending its wings like a huge bird over the whole valley. The dense topography overhead seems as solid and palpable as the ground underfoot. And so the beings I meet as I walk between these two densities—rabbitbrush and sage, a red-shafted flicker testing with a few knocks the rotting shutter of an old window, a hare ducking under a sapless piñon, and the dry piñon snags as well—all seem curiously familiar today, as though we are co-conspirators in the same scheme, vital characters in the same broad story.

The dissolution of the concentric, crystalline spheres of the Aristotelian cosmos had opened the way for the very slow, gradual discovery of a new collective interior, less exalted than that earlier cosmos yet far more wondrous. After three and a half centuries spent charting and measuring material nature as though it were a pure exterior, we’ve at last begun to notice that the world we inhabit (from the ocean floor to the upper atmosphere) is alive. The feelings that move us—the frights and yearnings that color our days, the flights of fancy that sometimes seize us, the creativity that surges through us—all are born of the ongoing interchange between our life and the wider Life that surrounds us. They are no more ours than they are Eairth’s. They blow through us, and often change us, but they are not our private possession, nor an exclusive property of our species. With the other animals, as with the crinkled lichens and the river-carved rocks, we’re all implicated within this intimate and curiously infinite world, poised between the tactile landscape underfoot and the leaden sky overhead, between the floor and the ceiling, each of us crouching or tumbling or swooping within the same big interior. Inside the world.





THE SPEECH OF THINGS

(Language I)


The blades of my paddle slice the smooth skin of the water, first on one side and then on the other: klishhh … kloshhh … klooshhh … kloshhh … The rhythm matches the quiet pace of my breathing as I rock gently from side to side, gliding over the gleaming expanse of sky; the luminous vault overhead mirrored perfectly in the glassy surface. Tall, snowcapped mountains rise from the perimeter of this broad sea, and also seem to descend into it. In front of me, to the west, are the peaks of the Alexander Archipelago, the long cluster of islands off the southeast coast of Alaska; behind me are the glacier-hung peaks of the coast range. The liquid speech of the paddle sounds against the backdrop of a silence so vast it rings in my ears. The sky arcs over this world like the interior of a huge unstruck bell; the hanging sun is its tongue.

Between my kayak and those western slopes two smaller islands nestle close to one another. I am paddling toward them. I don’t know the names of those islands, for I’ve not been in this region before. A breeze raises a pattern of ripples on the water’s surface, then passes by: the mirror returns. Klishhh … kloshhh … klishhh … Sometimes another, more rapid rhythm becomes audible as a pair of ducks materializes out of the near distance, flapping just above the water’s surface. The thudding of their wings against the shallow layer of air swells in volume and then fades as their shapes dissolve back into the distance on the other side of my kayak.

The islands draw closer with each flex of my arms, widening their span and soon filling my gaze with green, gentling my ears with the liquid lapping of water against rocks. I sense vaguely that I am being watched. So I scan the rocky shore and the dense wall of forest above the high-tide line on each island, but can see no one. Only when a flash of white snags the corner of my eye do I notice the eagle perched high on a dead trunk jutting out from the coast of the more northerly island. Its lustrous head is cocked slightly—a single eye following the glints on my paddle blades. And perhaps the gleam off my glasses, as well, for when I turn my face toward it the bird launches with a few flaps of its huge wings, banks, and soars off through the passage between the two islands. I adjust my direction and follow it, gliding beneath the needled woods on either side. After a time I emerge from the channel; the echo of my paddle-strokes off the double wall of trees widens out and dissipates, giving way to a muffled sound drifting up from the south, a faint but dissonant clamor that rises and falls in intensity. Curious, I swerve the kayak to the left and begin paddling down the west coast of the southernmost island. When I round a spit of land, the noise gets louder, a low-pitched, polyphonic rumble that I cannot place at all. It fades to silence as I stroke across a broad bay, and then rises to my ears as I glide around another peninsula, although more intermittent now, and as I listen to this dark music I realize that it’s an entirely organic cacophony, a crowd of rambunctious grunting tones vying with one another. As I cross the next bay it fades again. Only when the kayak slips around the next point and I see the long, rocky spit on the far side of the following cove—its jagged terraces and angled rocks bedecked with a jumble of sleek, brown humps—do I recognize that I’m entering the neighborhood of a large sea lion colony.

Oddly, the brown bodies opposite are mostly quiet as I come into view; a few grunts reach my ears as they negotiate places on the rocks. I can’t make out any pups, and so this cannot be one of the rookeries where sea lions gather to breed and give birth, but must be one of their communal haul-out sites. A very popular haul-out site: I count over eighty adult sea lions as I paddle slowly across the cove, and know there must be many others hidden from view. But it’s their immense bulk that startles me as I gaze through my binoculars. These are northern, or Steller, sea lions, far larger than their southern cousins; later I learn that the bulls can weigh up to 2,500 pounds, and can reach over eleven feet in length. I see some of them staring in my direction as I paddle. When I’m halfway across the cove, one such bull on a slab of a rock near the water raises himself up on his flippers, dips his head a couple of times, and begins roaring in a deep, guttural voice that resounds in the hollow of the kayak and reverberates in the cave of my skull. Soon two other large bulls lying on a ledge above the first raise their torsos and begin hollering as well, and within a few moments it seems every sea lion on that rocky outcrop is sounding its barbaric yawp over the waves. The raucous din is unnerving, and an upwelling of fear rises from the base of my spine. I lay down my paddle, and in an effort to quell the oncoming panic I do the only thing that I can think of, the single savvy act that might ease the tension in this encounter: I begin to sing.



This was a response to animal threat that I discovered some years earlier when, cross-country skiing along a snow-covered stream in the northern Rockies, I emerged from the woods into a small, frozen marshland—and abruptly found myself three ski-lengths away from a mother moose. She’d been feeding with her child among the low willows. The moose looked up as startled as I; she was facing me head-on, her nostrils flaring, her front legs taut, leaning forward. Her eyes were locked on my body, one ear listening toward me while the other was rotated backward, monitoring the movements of her calf. My senses were on high alert, yet somehow I wasn’t frightened or even worried; I took a deep breath and then found myself offering a single, sustained mellifluous note, a musical call in the middle part of my range, holding its pitch and its volume for as long as I could muster. As my voice died away I already sensed the other’s muscles relaxing. Drawing another breath, I sang out the same note again, relaxing my own body and pouring as much ease as I was able into the tone. Within a moment the moose leaned her head back down and casually began nibbling the willow tips. I sounded that liquid tone one last time, finally pushing off with my poles and slipping on past.

The simple appropriateness of what I’d done slowly made itself evident to my thinking mind as I glided through the woods. For the timbre of a human voice singing a single sustained note carries an abundance of information for those whose ears are tuned to such clues—information about the internal state of various organs in the singer’s body, and the relative tension or ease in that person, the level of aggression or peaceful intent.



And so, floating in my kayak, assailed by a chorus of bellowing grunts sounding from throats large enough, it seemed, to swallow me in a few gulps, I find myself singing back. Although not, this time, in a particularly mellifluous tone. If I had offered a gentle, calm note, the sea lions would never have heard me through the clamor of their own growling, and in any case I could never have generated such a soothing tone from within my already freaked-out organism. Instead, the musical tone that I utter forth is as loud and as guttural as I can manage, with my head thrown back in order to open my throat—a kind of low-pitched, gargling howl: “Aaarrrrrrggghhhh …, Aaaarrrggghhhh …, Aaaarrrrggghhhh …” I hold each guttural howl for as long as I can, finally pausing to draw a deep breath, at which point I notice, amazed, that the sea lions have stopped growling. I lower my head to look at them; they’re now sniffing the air toward me, shoving one another to get a better glimpse of this large, brightly colored duck that can make such an ugly racket. My ears pick up the sound of fifty or sixty noses snorting and snorfling (and sometimes sneezing) as they sniff the breeze. My own nostrils can hardly sort the thickly mingled scents of salt spray and sea lion breath and the dense, floating beds of kelp as I take up the paddle and begin, like a fool, paddling closer. My own creaturely curiosity has gotten the better of my reason; I cannot help myself, enthralled by my proximity to these breathing bodies so weirdly akin to, and yet so different from, my own. The smell of them grows steadily stronger as I ease my kayak between the strands of kelp. When I get within about twenty-five feet of the rocks, that large male on the lower ledge—the same bull who initiated the alarm the first time—lifts his torso up on his flippers and starts bellowing. Straightaway a few others join in, and by the time I’ve laid the paddle across the kayak nearly all of the sea lions are hollering bloody murder. And so I am gulping air and mustering myself and about to launch into my own guttural harangue when, directly between me and the sea lions, the water’s surface begins to bubble. Small bubbles at first, which soon give way to larger ones, and then a huge upwelling of water as, without any further warning, a gargantuan body blasts! through the surface into the sky—flying on outstretched wings that, as I stare wide-eyed, resolve themselves into the splayed pectoral fins of a humpback whale. The whale twists almost belly side up before its bulk crashes down, drenching me with spray and sending a huge wave rolling over the hull of the kayak, slamming the paddle against my life jacket and almost sweeping it away before I catch hold of its end and drag it back. In front of the kayak, the long, pleated folds of the humpback’s underside are slipping slowly beneath the surface … and then the whale is gone.

I grab the paddle and desperately begin to back-paddle, thinking that the giant may try to capsize me, although after a few moments I realize that I’ve no idea what the whale is up to, or where in the depths it might now be. So I brace the paddle across the hull, gripping it tight with both hands, and simply wait. After a minute I hear the pip, pip, pip of tiny bubbles breaking, and by the time I locate them the water to my left begins boiling, and then upwelling, and before I can prepare myself that massive bulk explodes through the surface like a fever-mad hallucination—barely eight feet from the kayak—right side up this time and parallel to the boat although lunging in the opposite direction, immense pectoral fins dangling before it slams down. The swell catches my boat sideways and damn near flips me over, except that I counter-lean hard to the left, rocking back up in time to glimpse an incongruously small, almost human-like eye peering at me as it glides just above the waterline. The whale spouts, and a breeze blows its exhaled spray into my face, drenching my already sopped body, and then I’m overcome by the rousing stench of its breath. “Sewage-like,” I think at first, but then it occurs to me, “What a blessing, to inhale the breath of a humpback whale!” The smell’s intensity is jangling my neurons as the enormous apparition slides back down, leaving only a slim dorsal fin visible for a last moment before it vanishes beneath the surface.

I am left stunned, my entire body shaking in the kayak—the visual field trembling around me as I try to calm the tremor in my muscles. I feel as though the great god of the deep has just intervened between me and the sea lions, surfacing as a kind of warning, as if to say, Not too close, mortal, to these kinfolk of mine! Unable to quell the shaking, I lower my head to offer a mumbled prayer of thanks to these waters—but jerk my head back up as a loud SPLASH! sounds in my ears. My eyes widen in alarm. For the sea lions, apparently agitated by this visitation from the humpback god, are starting to dive off the rocks en masse. They’re sliding down from the upper ledges and waddling over to the lowermost brink, where they’re now plunging into the water in bunches, clusters of them tumbling into the brine and swiftly surfacing, and then surging—with their torsos half out of the water and with a holy clamor of guttural bellowing—straight toward me!

There is simply no way that I can escape their rapid advance: the fluid sea, after all, is their primary element, and not the customary milieu of this oafish stranger struggling to maneuver in his plastic, prosthetic body. I do not know by what wisdom, or folly, my animal organism chooses what to do next. Of course, there are not many options, and no time to think: my awareness can only look on in bewilderment as my arms fly up over my head and I begin, in the kayak, to dance. More precisely, my upraised, extended arms begin to sway conjointly from one side to the other, with my wrists and my splayed fingers arcing to the right, then to the left, then to the right, to the left, right, left, right …

As soon as I begin these contortions, the clamoring sea lions rear back in the water and fall silent, as their their heads begin swiveling from one side to the other, tracking my hands with their eyes. Astonishing! Seventy or eighty earnest mammalian faces twisting this way and then that way, this way and that, over and again. And all in perfect unison, like a half-submerged chorus line. After a couple minutes I drop my hands down to take up the paddle—but straightaway the sea lions start bellowing and surging forward. No! My hands fly back up and I resume the dance, my taut arms swaying left, then right, then left again as the whiskered crowd falls silent, their necks craning from side to side yet again, over and over.

My arms keep up their ritual, the kayak rocking this way and that. As I consider the situation, my happy relief at finding a way to save my skin gradually yields to a deepening dismay. For I can find no way out.

Whenever I even start to lower my hands the dark-eyed multitude lunges forward—so halting my dance is not an option. I examine my predicament from every possible angle, but cannot discern any exit strategy. And so I keep my arms high, inclining from one side to the other, smiling rather feebly at all these attentive, whiskered faces while the muscles in my upper arms grow more and more exhausted. After a long while the ache in my shoulders has become intolerable; I can no longer think. My right arm is giving out.

Slowly I bring that arm down while the left keeps up the rhythm. The sea lions, weaving from side to side, are now focused on the single, swaying metronome of my left arm. My right shoulder rests. An idea dawns. My gaze stayed fixed on the sea lions off in front of me as with my right fingers I begin groping around for the shaft of the paddle. On finding it I heft it slightly, balancing it as best I can in an underhand grip. Then, awkwardly, with my left arm rocking side to side above my head, I cross my right arm in front of my chest and begin rowing as best I can on the left. My right hand scrapes the unwieldy paddle against the left side of the kayak to get some traction. I do all this blindly, for my eyes are locked on the weaving faces of the sea lions, my left arm still swinging above my head. Slowly, arduously, my clumsy rowing manages to maneuver the kayak around the right flank of the floating mob. When most of the sea lions are off to the side, I bring down my left hand as well, clasping the shaft now with both sets of fingers, and begin paddling, hard, into the open water, without looking back. After seven or eight minutes I sneak a quick glance behind me: sure enough, a few sea lions are still trailing me, but at a respectful distance, and with little more than their noses above the surface …



Something in that charged encounter changed me. I notice it, sometimes, when I’m playing with my two children, or when the howling of coyotes wakes me in the middle of the night. My confrontation with the sea mammals brought home to me something crucial about language—something mightily different from what I’d learned at school and at college. I’d been taught that meaningful speech is that trait that most clearly distinguishes us humans from all the other animals. We have meaningful speech, while other creatures do not. But my unnerving meeting, in the wet, with the humpback and the mob of sea lions showed me otherwise. It made evident, in a way I could no longer ignore, that there exists a primary language that we two-leggeds share with other species.

When we speak of “language,” we speak of an ability to communicate, a power to convey information across a thickness of space and time, a means whereby beings at some distance from one another nonetheless manage to apprise each other of their current feelings or thoughts. As humans, we rely upon a complex web of mostly discrete, spoken sounds to accomplish our communication, and so it’s natural that we associate language with such verbal intercourse. Unfortunately, this association has led many to assume that language is an exclusive attribute of our species—we, after all, are the only creatures that use words—and to conclude that all other organisms are entirely bereft of meaningful speech. It is an exceedingly self-serving assumption.

Other animals, commonly possessed of senses far more acute than ours, may have much less need for a purely conventional set of signs to communicate with others of their species, or even to glean precise information from members of other species. My encounter with the sea creatures had initiated me into a layer of language much older, and deeper, than words. It was a dimension of expressive meanings that were directly felt by the body, a realm wherein the body itself speaks—by the tonality and rhythm of its sounds, by its gestures, even by the expressive potency of its poise. A near-catastrophic confrontation had plunged me into a space of earnest communication that unfolded entirely without words, a carnal zone of articulations broadly shared across species. It was a dimension wherein my verbal self was hardly present, but where an older, animal awareness came to the fore, responding spontaneously to the gestures of these other animals with hardly any interpolation by my “interior” thinking mind. It was rather as if my body itself was doing the thinking, trading vocal utterances and physical expressions back and forth with these other smooth-skinned and sentient creatures. Their flippers and fins were obviously shaped to a liquid medium very different from my own primary element, yet the most basic sensations of threat, or calm, or pleasure could still be swiftly exchanged—via the tautness or relaxation of various muscles, coupled with the tone of our uttered sounds—by virtue of our mutual existence as kinetic and sonorous beings inhabiting the same biosphere.

Sure, we were all mammals—the sea lions, the whale, and I—yet the sense I was left with was of a still more basic commonality or community of bodies, indeed of a communication shared as well with the waves shuddering under the kayak and splashing their speech upon the rocks. To the fully embodied animal any movement might be a gesture, and any sound may be a voice, a meaningful utterance of the world. And hence to my own creaturely flesh, as well, everything speaks!

Certain sounds that reach our ears convey the felt intent of other persons, while certain other, rumbling sounds bespeak a change in the weather. A rippling sequence of whistling tones expresses the exuberance felt by a thrush as the sun climbs above the horizon; other tones convey the dark magic of the night itself, speaking through the hissing tires on wet pavement.

Our human conversations are regularly influenced by this carnal layer of language, the apparent meaning of a friend’s phrase altering with the pace of her speaking. The tenor of a spoken exchange may be transformed, without either of us noticing, when a break in the winter clouds allows the sun to spill its song over the muted hues of the city street where we stand, or by an abrupt and escalating argument of honking vehicles on the same avenue.

I began to notice this animal dimension in my own speaking—conscious now not only of the denotative meaning of my terms, but also of the gruff or giddy melody that steadily sounds through my phrases, and the dance enacted by my body as I speak—the open astonishment or the slumped surrender, the wary stealth or the lanky ease. Trying to articulate a fresh insight, I feel my way toward the precise phrase with the whole of my flesh, drawn toward certain terms by the way their texture beckons dimly to my senses, choosing my words by the way they fit the shape of that insight, or by the way they finally taste on my tongue as I intone them one after another. And the power of that spoken phrase to provoke insights in those around me will depend upon the timbre of my talking, the way it jives with the collective mood or merely jangles their ears.

Such was the linguistic dimension into which I was borne by that meeting with the lions of the sea—an initiation seared into my memory by the shock of being swamped by a humpback whale, and by the exchange of fetid breath with that wild intelligence. I now found myself more porous to other shapes, to smooth-surfaced desks and motley dogs, more aware of the conversation my animal body was carrying on with the other bodies around it, how it tensed in certain office buildings and loosened in dialogue with adobe walls. I noticed the skin on my skull tightening under the hum of fluorescent lights, and—once while cycling—felt my shoulder muscles open and expand as a red-tailed hawk took wing from a passing telephone pole. I heard more keenly how much my voice borrowed the rolling lilt of the person I was talking to, or took on the staccato stiffness of her syllables, and I noticed that she, too, was infected by the inflections of my voice, such that each conversation was also a kind of singing to one another, like two blackbirds trading riffs between the cattails—or like two humpbacks sending their eerie glissandos back and forth through the depths.



I’ve already spoken of my songful method for diminishing the threat posed by another, larger creature unexpectedly encountered in the backcountry—a simple way to convey that I intend no harm to the other. I should now report that my clumsy attempts at more nuanced communication with a wide range of animals, over many years of getting myself lost in the wild, have also made evident a uniquely efficacious way to bring one’s specific intentions across to a member of another species. The technique—obvious, I know, yet only stumbled upon after much costly trial and error—consists in bringing your wandering attention entirely back to your own limber and sensitive body, becoming at ease with yourself and the slow rhythm of your breathing, and then just commencing to talk to the other animal in your mother tongue—in English or French or Inuktitut, or whatever language is really most comfortable. For if you speak honestly, then the audible modulations of your voice, along with the alterations in your visible musculature, and the olfactory emanations from your skin, will all be of a piece with the patterned meaning of your words, and so will readily convey something of your intent at a palpable, visceral level to the keen senses of the other animal.

Even when simply addressing a maple tree, or a boulder-strewn hillside, you can be sure—if you are honest, and so relaxed within your flesh—that there are sensate presences out and about that are affected by the sound and the scent and perhaps even the sight of your gestured intent, whether they be squirrels, or a swarm of termites chewing its way through the resonant hollow of a fallen trunk, whether a small, silent bat flapping erratically through the night air, or the airborne insects that the bat is hunting, or even the impressionable air itself, absorbing your chemical exhalations and registering in waves the sonorous timbre of your voice. And so your loquacious utterance is heard, or felt, or sensed—and it would be wrong to believe with certainty that you are not being understood. The material reverberation of your speaking spreads out from you and is taken up within the sensitive tissue of the place …

The activity that we commonly call “prayer” springs from just such a gesture, from the practice of directly addressing the animate surroundings. Prayer, in its most ancient and elemental sense, consists simply in speaking to things—to a maple grove, to a flock of crows, to the rising wind—rather than merely about things. As such, prayer is an everyday practice common to oral, indigenous peoples the world over. In the alphabetized West, however, we’ve shifted the other toward whom we direct such mindful speech away from the diverse beings that surround us to a single, all-powerful agency assumed to exist entirely beyond the evident world. Still, the quality of respectful attention that such address entails—the steady suspension of discursive thought and the imaginative participation with one’s chosen interlocutor—is much the same. It is a practice that keeps one from straying too far from oneself in one’s open honesty and integrity, a way of holding oneself in right relation to the other, whether that other is a God outside the world or the many-voiced world itself.

Nonetheless, the older, more primordial style of prayer sustains a very different stance toward the local terrain than that which resolutely directs itself toward a divinity beyond the world. While the latter feels the sensuous landscape as a finite and restricted realm relative to its transcendent source, the first experiences the sensible world as the source of itself—as a kind of ongoing transcendence wherein each sensible thing is steadily bodying forth its own active creativity and sentience.

To our indigenous ancestors, and to the many aboriginal peoples that still hold fast to their oral traditions, language is less a human possession than it is a property of the animate earth itself, an expressive, telluric power in which we, along with the coyotes and the crickets, all participate. Each creature enacts this expressive magic in its own manner, the honeybee with its waggle dance no less than a bellicose, harrumphing sea lion.

Nor is this power restricted solely to animals. The whispered hush of the uncut grasses at dawn, the plaintive moan of trunks rubbing against one another in the deep woods, or the laughter of birch leaves as the wind gusts through their branches all bear a thicket of many-layered meanings for those who carefully listen. In the Pacific Northwest I met a man who had schooled himself in the speech of needled evergreens; on a breezy day you could drive him, blindfolded, to any patch of coastal forest and place him, still blind, beneath a particular tree—after a few moments he would tell you, by listening, just what species of pine or spruce or fir stood above him (whether he stood beneath a Douglas fir or a grand fir, a Sitka spruce or a western red cedar). His ears were attuned, he said, to the different dialects of the trees.

When I tell others of this man’s gift, overeducated folks often object to his turn of phrase, protesting the foolishness of alluding to the different “dialects” of the conifers as if there were actually a kind of spoken discourse in question. The rustling of needles, they point out, can hardly be considered the speech of a tree, since the sound is created not by the tree but only by the wind blowing through the tree. Curiously, these clever persons seem not to notice that it is demonstrably the same when they speak. We talk, after all, only by shaping the exhaled air that rushed into our lungs a moment earlier. Human speech, too, is really the wind moving through …

But meaningful speech cannot even be restricted to the audible dimension of sounds and sighs. The animate earth expresses itself in so many other ways. Last night while I lay sleeping the old apple tree in front of the house quietly broke into blossom, and so when, in the morning and still unaware, I stepped outside to stretch my limbs, I was stunned into silence by the sudden resplendence. The old tree was speaking to the space around it. Expressing itself, yes, and in the most persuasive of languages. The whole yard was listening, transformed by the satin eloquence of the petals. The spell quietly cast by the uttering forth of white blossoms was irrefutable and irresistible. (It has stayed with me all day, as a softness enfolding my thoughts, which is no doubt why I find myself writing of it now, late at night.)



So language, from the perspective of the fully embodied human, seems as much an attribute of other animals and plants as of our own garrulous species. Yet, as we know from many of the traditional, indigenous peoples among us, this is still too restrictive: language accrues not only to those entities deemed “alive” by modern standards, but to all sensible phenomena. All things have the capacity for speech—all beings have the ability to communicate something of themselves to other beings. Indeed, what is perception if not the experience of this gregarious, communicative power of things, wherein even ostensibly “inert” objects radiate out of themselves, conveying their shapes, hues, and rhythms to other beings and to us, influencing and informing our breathing bodies though we stand far apart from those things? Not just animals and plants, then, but tumbling waterfalls and dry riverbeds, gusts of wind, compost piles and cumulus clouds, freshly painted houses (as well as houses abandoned and sometimes haunted), rusting automobiles, feathers, granitic cliffs and grains of sand, tax forms, dormant volcanoes, bays and bayous made wretched by pollutants, snowdrifts, shed antlers, diamonds, and daikon radishes, are all expressive, sometimes eloquent, and hence participant in the mystery of language. Our own chatter erupts in response to the abundant articulations of the world: human speech is simply our part of a much broader conversation.

It follows that the myriad things are also listening, or attending, to various signs and gestures around them. Indeed, when we are at ease in our animal flesh, we will sometimes feel that we are being listened to, or sensed, by the earthly surroundings. And so we take deeper care with our speaking, mindful that our sounds may carry more than a merely human meaning and resonance. This care—this full-bodied alertness—is the ancient, ancestral source of all word magic. It is the practice of attention to the uncanny power that lives in our spoken phrases to touch and sometimes transform the tenor of the world’s unfolding.



The sense of inhabiting an articulate landscape—of dwelling within a community of expressive presences that are also attentive, and listening, to the meanings that move between them—is common to indigenous, oral peoples on every continent. Like tribal people I’ve lived with elsewhere, most of my Pueblo friends here in the Southwest are curiously taciturn and reserved when it comes to verbal speech. (When I’m with them I become painfully aware of how prolix I can be, prattling on about this or that for minutes on end.) Their reticence is not due to any lack of facility with English, for when they do speak their phrases have an uncommon precision and potency. It is a consequence, rather, of their habitual expectation that spoken words are heard, or sensed, by the other presences that surround. They talk, then, only when they have good reason to, choosing their words with great care so as not to offend, or insult, the other beings that might be listening.

Here are some observations made by a member of the Mattole Indians (an Athabaskan tribe that traditionally hunted and fished along the Mattole and Bear rivers near the northern coast of California):

The water watches you and has a definite attitude, favorable or otherwise, toward you. Do not speak just before a wave breaks. Do not speak to passing rough water in a stream. Do not look at water very long for any one time, unless you have been to this spot ten times or more. Then the water there is used to you and does not mind if you’re looking at it. Older men can talk in the presence of the water because they have been around so long that the water knows them. Until the water at any spot does know you, however, it becomes very rough if you talk in its presence or look at it too long.Ω



These injunctions bespeak a remarkable etiquette, the careful deference and decorum to be observed when around water. While this decorum may at first seem ludicrous to modern sensibilities, notice: such an etiquette ensures that those who practice it will remain exquisitely attentive to the fluid ways of water—from the shifting eddies along the river to the tidal swells and rolling breaks along the coast. Such deportment, with its linguistic deference toward the fluid element, inculcates a steady respect for that element, ensuring that the community will not readily violate the health of the local waters, or the vitality of the watershed.

Few of us today feel any such restraints in our speaking. Human language, for us moderns, has swung in on itself, turning its back on the beings around us. Language is a human property, suitable only for communicating with other persons. We talk to people; we do not talk to the ground underfoot. We’ve largely forgotten the incantatory and invocational use of speech as a way of bringing ourselves into deeper rapport with the beings around us, or of calling the living land into resonance with us. It is a power we still brush up against whenever we use our words to bless and to curse, or to charm someone we’re drawn to. But we wield such eloquence only to sway other people, and so we miss the greater magnetism, the gravitational power that lies within such speech. The beaver gliding across the pond, the fungus gripping a thick trunk, a boulder shattered by its tumble down a cliff or the rain splashing upon those granite fragments—we talk about such beings, about the weather and the weathered stones, but we do not talk to them. Entranced by the denotative power of words to define, to order, to represent the things around us, we’ve overlooked the songful dimension of language so obvious to our oral ancestors. We’ve lost our ear for the music of language—for the rhythmic, melodic layer of speech by which earthly things overhear us.

How monotonous our speaking becomes when we speak only to ourselves! And how insulting to the other beings—to foraging black bears and twisted old cypresses—that no longer sense us talking to them, but only about them, as though they were not present in our world. As though the clear-cut mountainside and the flooding creek had no sensations of their own—as though they had no flesh by which to feel the vibration of our speaking. Small wonder that rivers and forests no longer compel our focus or our fierce devotion. For we talk about such entities only behind their backs, as though they were not participant in our lives.

Yet if we no longer call out to the moon slipping between the clouds, or whisper to the spider setting the silken struts of her web, well, then the numerous powers of this world will no longer address us—and if they still try, we will not likely hear them. They withdraw from our attentions, and soon refrain from encountering us when we’re out wandering, or from visiting us in our dreams. We can no longer avail ourselves of their perspectives or their guidance, and our human affairs suffer as a result. We become ever more forgetful in our relations with the rest of the biosphere, an obliviousness that cuts us off from ourselves, and from our deepest sources of sustenance.



The propensity of our indigenous brothers and sisters to consult the animate earth around them, listening close to the land—carefully watching the patterned movements of other animals, attending to their diverse songs, signs, and gestures—all this is an obvious consequence of the expansive experience of language as a property that belongs to all things, and not solely to humankind. Given the near universality of this experience among native cultures, and given the fact that the abundant knowledge of indigenous peoples was traditionally transmitted orally rather than preserved in written form, we may suspect that literacy—reading and writing—brings a dramatic transformation in the human experience of language.

As, indeed, it does. Our experience of linguistic meaning, however, is affected differently by different writing systems. Literate but non-alphabetic cultures, possessed of more imagistic writing systems—whether hieroglyphic (like that inscribed on walls and stelae in ancient Egypt, and the very different glyphic writing deployed by Mayan scribes prior to European conquest), or ideographic (like the written characters used throughout China)—all exhibit a wider reflective distance from nature than is evidenced by the more thoroughly oral cultures around them. Yet this distance is eased by the pictorial derivation of many of the glyphs or characters, which often borrow their shapes (or parts of their shapes) from elements in the surrounding landscape. In these scripts, highly stylized images of humans and human artifacts mingle with characters derived from the shapes of monkeys and serpents and trees, from the rising sun and falling rain. Those who read such scripts, then, are continually reminded of language’s link to the more-than-human field of expressive nature. If the advent of writing grants a new visibility to human words—a somewhat static visibility that begins to enclose our gaze within the structured house of human language—nonetheless, many written characters in such scripts function as windows opening onto a living landscape that still speaks, onto a sensorial cosmos that still bears a kind of primary meaning.

Only when a more thoroughly phonetic system of writing spreads throughout a culture do its members come to doubt the expressive agency of other animals and of the animate earth. Only in the wake of the alphabet does language come to be experienced as an exclusively human power. The experiential shift can be attributed, in large part, to the way a phonetic script focuses our attention upon the specific sounds made by the human mouth. The written letters of an alphabet are no longer associated, by their stylized forms, with various entities and events in the surrounding earth. There is no indirect reference by the written characters to the sensuous world. Instead, the letters refer the reader solely back to his or her own mouth. Each letter, that is, is directly associated with a particular set of gestures, and sounds, to be made by the human tongue, lips, and palate.

Hence, instead of windows through which one might glimpse the wider landscape, the letters of an alphabet function more like mirrors reflecting the human back upon itself. Other animals—to say nothing of trees, mountains, and rivers—have no place in this new sign system, no expressive power in this new semiotic. Upon learning her ABCs, a human person can begin to dialogue entirely with her own signs, without any necessary mediation by the surrounding land.Ω

Of course, such a potent technology does not force its users to forget the animate, expressive power of earthly nature. But it does indeed make such forgetfulness possible, and for the first time.

Moreover, when reading an alphabetic text the reader finds himself in relation not only to a set of written injunctions, or to a clutch of compellingly written stories, but also to a voice, strangely like his own, that nonetheless seems to speak from an unchanging dimension apparently impervious to the growth and decay of bodily life. The alphabet, in other words, opens a new zone within human experience, a linguistic dimension that seems wholly unaffected by the flux of time.

It is only in relation to this powerful new magic (this technology that isolates and reifies human speech, disentangling the human tongue from the calls, cries, and whispers of the animate cosmos) that it becomes possible to intuit a humanlike God entirely outside the changing world, an omnipotent Voice to whom we, alone among all the animals, are beholden. Indeed, it is this very magic that catalyzed the emergence of monotheism, and the monotheistic faiths of the three “Peoples of the Book.” That very phrase, “Peoples of the Book,” should prompt us to recognize the scribal nature of these three traditions, each of which has its codified origin in a different version of the alphabet (the Hebrew aleph-bet for the Torah, the Greek alphabet for the New Testament, the Arabic alphabet for the Koran).

Monotheism is a noble notion in many ways, and one that has brought abundant gifts to humankind. By loosening our enthrallment to the rest of animate nature, monotheism (always accompanied by its handmaiden, the phonetic alphabet) sparked a new and more detached curiosity in relation to our material surroundings, a new spirit of practical inquiry and experimentation, catalyzing an outpouring of creativity in the arts, in philosophy and the sciences, in the invention of new technologies. Yet the relative detachment from earthly reality inaugurated by monotheism seems to have hardened, today, into a cool and calloused imperviousness to the suffering of other creatures and the plight of the living land. Even as we discern the imminent danger to ourselves, we seem unable to locate any exit from the hall of mirrors, so thoroughly transfixed have we become by our own reflections.

Our intelligence struggles to think its way out of the mirrored labyrinth, but the actual exit is to be found only by turning aside, now and then, from the churning of thought, dropping beneath the spell of inner speech to listen into the wordless silence. Only by frequenting that depth, again and again, can our ears begin to remember the many voices that inhabit that silence, the swooping songs and purring rhythms and antler-smooth movements that articulate themselves in the eloquent realm beyond the words. Only thus do we remember ourselves to the deeper field of intelligence, to the windblown thinking that is not ours, upon which all our thought depends.Ω

The ineffable and sacred One toward which all monotheisms direct themselves—the intuition of unity that long beckoned to our ancestors, the uncanny wholeness that seemed to whisper from behind the multiple local spirits and demons and gods—is still whispering even now, beckoning to us from beyond the monotonous hum and buzz of our worded thoughts, inviting us to free our senses from the verbal husk into which we’ve retreated. It calls to us from beyond the upholstered walls of these hollow caskets we’ve fashioned from the faiths of Abraham, Jesus, and Mohammed.

The mysterious voice toward which monotheism opens the heart is neither monotonous nor a monologue: it speaks through every utterance of breath and beak and branch, through the bugling of an elk and the liquid blink of a robin’s eye. For many centuries it seemed to speak from a realm entirely beyond the tangible, since it promised a wholeness that far exceeded the scope of the terrain we perceived around us, a floating eternity into which our fleeting lives might return. Such a luminous unity, we thought, could only be of another, disincarnate dimension—for here in the physical, heaviness rules: all is leaden, a burden, and painfully bound to the ground. We could not imagine that solid flesh might float in space, nor that the rough landscape we saw around us might compose only the merest fraction, or glimpse, of an immense luminescent Body, a shape as perfect and boundless as a sphere, spinning.

We now know, however, that the tangible world is itself such an iridescent sphere turning silent among the stars, a round mystery whose life is utterly eternal relative to ours, from out of whose vastness our momentary lives are born, and into whose vastness our lives—like those of our ancestors, our enemies, and our children—all recede, like waves on the surface of the sea.

An eternity we thought was elsewhere now calls out to us from every cleft in every stone, from every cloud and clump of dirt. To lend our ears to the dripping glaciers—to come awake to the voices of silence—is to be turned inside out, discovering to our astonishment that the wholeness and holiness we’d been dreaming our way toward has been holding us all along; that the secret and sacred One that moves behind all the many traditions is none other than this animate immensity that enfolds us, this spherical eternity, glimpsed at last in its unfathomable wholeness and complexity, in its sensitivity and its sentience.


Ω G. W. Hewes, as quoted by Alfred Kroeber and Samuel Barrett in “Fishing Among the Indians of Northwest California,” University of California Anthropological Records 21:1 (1960). I first found these lines in Freeman House’s wonderful book, Totem Salmon: Life Lessons from Another Species, published by Beacon Press in 2000.

Ω This thesis is developed carefully and at length in my book The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-Than-Human World (New York: Pantheon, 1996), chapters 4–7.

Ω The steady subjection of experience to an unending, internal commentary is itself closely related to changes wrought by the written word—most specifically, the advent of silent reading. The ability to read silently is a fairly recent acquisition in the history of the alphabet. For many centuries, Greek and Latin texts were written with minimal or no punctuation, even without spaces between the words. As a result, readers had to sound out the text—reading aloud, or at the very least mumbling quietly to themselves—in order to distinguish particular terms and so to discover the precise meaning. It was like encountering anend​lesss​tring​oflet​tersw​ithou​tknow​ingwh​erean​yword​begin​soren​ds; reading aloud was necessary for most persons in order to disambiguate the visual text. (Ancient Hebrew texts, however, did employ spaces between words. Yet the reader of such texts still had to sound out the text orally, for the Semitic scripts had no dedicated letters for the vowel sounds! Since only the consonantal, skeletal structure of words was written on the parchment, the reader had to speak the text aloud in order to work out the precise worded meaning, enspiriting those bones on the page with his own breath in order to make them come alive and begin to speak.)

Beginning in the seventh century, various scribal innovations were gradually adopted by the monks copying texts in monasteries (the main method of producing books before the invention of the printing press), including the cutting-edge innovation of introducing spaces between the words. Aerating the text in this way made it possible for skilled readers to decipher the written text without sounding it out audibly, thereby inaugurating a practice of silent reading. As the practice of spacing and punctuating the written texts was taken up by more and more monasteries, the ability to read silently spread slowly throughout Europe. Yet it was not until the twelfth century that silent reading finally became commonplace among literate Europeans.

Learning to read silently is thus a fairly recent and hard-won accomplishment, one that forged a new association, in the human organism, between the visual focus and inner speech. Even as you read these printed lines, pay attention, if you can, to the phantom auditory sensation it entails—the silent “hearing” of a sequence of words within your head. The phantom “hearing” of those phrases is often lightning-fast, far faster than it would take to sound out the words audibly, and yet it is there. Now consider how similar that sensation is to the common experience of (verbal) thought. Notice how very alike is the felt sensation of thinking—the often involuntary awareness of worded thoughts rapidly unfurling within your skull—to the sensation of words arising inwardly as you move your gaze across these letters.

It is likely that the interior chatter of verbal thought, which for many people is as incessant as it is repetitive, was greatly amplified (if not inaugurated) by the popular advent of silent reading in the late Middle Ages. As our eyes, moving across the lines of text, learned to provoke an internal flow of words, a tight neurological coupling between the visual focus and inner speech arose in the brain. Given the growing emphasis upon the practice of reading for the cultivation of the self, it inevitably began to influence—and interfere with—other forms of seeing. Soon our visual focus, even as it roamed across the visible landscape, began to release a steady flood of verbal commentary that often had little, or nothing, to do with that terrain. Such is the unending interior monologue that confounds so many contemporary persons—the “internal tape loop,” or the incessant “roof-brain chatter,” that Buddhist meditation seeks to dissolve back into the silence of present-moment awareness.

On the necessity of spaces between words for the cultural acquisition of silent reading, see Space Between Words: The Origins of Silent Reading, by Paul Henry Saenger (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1997). For the history of spacing and punctuation, see Pause and Effect: An Introduction to the History of Punctuation in the West, by M. B. Parkes (Surrey: Ashgate Publishing, 2008). Two other key works regarding the influence of such textual innovations upon the modern experience of the self are written by the necessary historian and cultural critic Ivan Illich. See his masterly book In the Vineyard of the Text: A Commentary to Hugh’s Didascalicon (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), and his earlier book, co-written with Barry Sanders, ABC: The Alphabetization of the Popular Mind (New York: Vintage, 1989). For an abundance of evidence regarding the perceptual effects of the written word, see The Spell of the Sensuous.





THE DISCOURSE

OF THE BIRDS

(Language II)


Asphere, suspended in the depths, its contour vague within the ink-black darkness, a black-on-black phantom so faint it may only exist in our imagination …

But watch: slowly, a thin margin of light rounds one edge of the sphere, outlining the orb’s curve against the dark like a golden bow stretched taut. The light’s edge is now gliding almost imperceptibly across the disk, leaving a radiance in its wake: the bright bow slowly thickening into a crescent of luminous blue. Soon other colors (white, brown, green) shape themselves within the blue as the shining frontier advances, until fully half of the orb’s visage is illuminated, then three-fourths, and then the entire face gleams perfectly round within the fathomless deep.

Although already that face feels uncentered, unbalanced. Why? Look carefully: a new margin, it seems, is now following the first, an edge of obsidian darkness sliding ever so slowly across the face, erasing its features as it spreads. And listen: a faint sound like a whisper seems to accompany the frontier of shadow as it proceeds. Can you hear it? Move in closer, listening … Yes, the leading edge of the dark is indeed an audible as well as a visible line, a whisper rolling slowly across the sphere like a wave, drowning its colors in the anonymity of night.

When the darkness reaches the farthest bound of the sphere, another audible wave slips in at the first side and begins its own journey, illuminating the orb as it advances, releasing the blue and the swirling white. The whispering, whistling sound that it makes as it moves seems identical to the hush of the previous, darker wave—a hypnotic, breathy music. Let’s swoop in closer still, to hear …

Ahh, now that moving frontier sounds like a many-layered rustling, an audible curtain woven from intertwined strands of rushing wind and watery tones, some rising and then falling, others dipping and lifting, ethereal. As we drop in to the sphere—its half-shadowed face expanding to fill our gaze—the rushing exuberance of this strange music pours over us, its tangled strands now distinguishing themselves as whirring, fluted phrases and whistling rhythms, as the buzzy trills of towhees and the syncopated quaver of song sparrows, as winter wren’s fevered twitterings and meadowlark’s fluid gurglings, the loopy gossip of solitaires against a woodpecker’s hammerings, loud nagging of jays and nasal warbling of house finches: all composing a dense membrane of speech sweeping slowly over the land, a sonic edge carrying warmth in its wake, an audible line with sections that fall almost silent as they pass over large bodies of water, over bays and seas, then grow louder as they approach dry terrain. The advancing line swells with plaintive cries of gulls and nasal whistles of sandpipers, avocets, and the guttural grunts of cormorants; with the singsong of curlews, goose honks, and the thrum of hummingbirds swerving between blossoms, now the seesawing lilt of robins, hoarse phrases of tanagers, a bunting’s mad rhythms, here the eerily ascending arpeggios of a Swainson’s thrush, there the cascasding arpeggios of a canyon wren, raucous banter of ravens (punctuated with clicks and fluid boinks), and then a loon’s mournful yodeling—each utterance with its own place, its own tonal niche in the rolling wave of discourse, within the swelling speech of the dawn as it breaks and spills the morning’s light over the land. And as the wave passes and moves on, the cacophonous chorus of each place quiets down, the individual singers giving themselves over to the day and its necessary doings.

To be sure, talk is still exchanged throughout the fields and the fragmented forests; across even the treeless shantytowns and the suburban backyards. There are the necessary check-ins, gossip, even an occasional bursting into song, yet it’s far more subdued and desultory than the dawn’s exaltation—no compulsion to expend such energy now when it’s needed elsewhere (finding food, raising the kids, avoiding predators). Only much later, as shadows lengthen and the light thickens to yellow and honey gold on the sides of houses, does the impulse begin to rise once again in the throat, drawn forth by the slowly sinking sun. And so from the fences, and telephone wires, and the upper branches of cottonwoods, a soaring crowd of voices lights the late-afternoon air, an interlaced paean of ebullience and earnest pleasure swelling with the precise approach of evening’s edge, as though it were the very voice of that edge. Which, of course, it is.

Until, as dusk dims into night, the choral abundance fades into a quietude much deeper than the muted talk of the day, a cool hammock of silence slung between the soft scratching of crickets and the far-off hoot of a great horned owl.

Such is the strange world we inhabit: an immense sphere around whose surface two long lines of birdsong are steadily sweeping—always opposite one another, two breaking waves of vocal exuberance rolling ceaselessly around the planet.



The wind is rising. I’m walking in a coastal estuary, the outflow of a small tidal river on the north coast of Long Island, near the city of New York. Over the last hour the ebbing tide has revealed more and more curving sandbars as the river’s waters slither among them, its central channel now accompanied on either side by smaller streams, rills and runnels carving delicate, rippling patterns in the sand. I wade through these various currents, heading toward the bay into whose waters this now-fragmented, many-fingered river is releasing itself. Above me huge, storm-laden clouds are steadily massing, blown landward by the wind out of the north, their leaden grays and maroons thickening, eclipsing the last patch of blue as they merge into a single, roiling topography overhead. The winds are now hissing the clumped grasses and wailing through a stand of limber trees rooted in a spit of land off to my right, the trees bending so low it seems they’re about to break. But they don’t yet, although the squall is gusting hard against my chest, shoving me backward again and again before I stumble forward. Now my face is being pelted with drops, whether from surface spray kicked up by the wind or rain finally falling I can’t tell, as the moan of the air rushing past my ears rises and falls. Soon a mist blurring the sea in front of me makes evident that it’s really raining. Already drenched, I keep leaning into the blustering surge, making my way through the tumult of unseen powers howling and whooshing and tearing at my coat.

And then, in the thick of this tempest, I hear several people serenely conversing. The measured calm of their voices somehow calms me down as well, though I cannot make out what they are saying. But where are they? Turning this way and that, peering through the gusting mists, I can see no one. Yet they sound so close at hand! Somehow these voices are being carried a long distance by the wind. Gazing around again, I assure myself that there’s nobody off in front of me, or behind me, or visible on either side. And then I look up … and abruptly recognize them, there, about seven feet above and a bit in front of me: five ducks flying into the wind, or at least trying to. They’re making no headway whatsoever, the gusts blasting so hard against them that with all their strenuous flapping they are unable to advance, but are basically held motionless in the surge. The five of them are arrayed in a haphazard line about twelve feet across. Every now and then one falls back and plunges toward another point in the wall of wind, hoping to find a soft spot. But to no avail. It seems obvious that the group of them had flown up behind me, and were heading out toward the open water when they ran into this bank of wind, an invisible edge held in place by the headlands around us. Still, they persist, and as they strive against the surge they call to one another in brief, oddly calm-sounding quacks; it was these phrases, reaching my ears through the maelstrom of wind, that at first sounded so like snatches of human conversation.

I listen to them now, as I watch their relentless attempts to break through the impasse, with sometimes one and then another making a brief foray or trying a new maneuver, and after a while their quacking speech begins to make new sense to my listening self. As if my watching eyes had clued in my listening ears, and so ears and eyes had abruptly merged into a single keen sense—for now I can feel those five birds much more clearly, can sense their strangely different intelligence just above me, there, as they wrestle the wind. I can now sense the clear intent in their staccato voices as they speak, as what had sounded like a single repeated utterance now varies subtly in rhythm and volume according to whether the duck speaking is testing the wind with its muscles or simply holding the status quo. Each voice alters its feel when the speaker is blown off course by the gusts, each duck using its quacks to inform the others about the state of the blast just in front of it while also apprising them of its precise location at that moment (since they’re unable to glance around without ceding ground to the wind), each also replying and reassuring the others, so that a whole array of nuanced meanings is passing back and forth above me.

The convergence between my listening ears and my gazing eyes has brought me much deeper into my animal body and my body’s world. It is now indelibly evident to me that these birds are not just beings of instinct—at least no more than I am—but are fully awake entities earnestly engaged in the thick of the present moment.

The extra strength of the wind at that spot, blocking the ducks from flying farther, is an interference pattern, I suppose, between two moving masses of air, although not being a bird, I’ve not had to pay attention to such flows in the unseen atmosphere, and so have scant savvy regarding the wind’s vicissitudes. It now occurs to me that the wingeds must know from daily experience a very great deal about the fluid structures and shifting topologies in the unseen medium of air. Probably many mammals—at least those who walk on all four of their legs, and so have not curtailed their use of smell—know all sorts of things about the shapes that smells take as they propagate on the wind: a potential mate’s distinctive trace spreading as an airborne gradient that alters with the breeze, or the phantom presence of one’s prey wafting as a ribbon of scent just above the soil. And winged insects, of course, chart their course by such gradients. But it is the birds—in their outrageous, many-feathered diversity—who have the greatest and furthest-ranging knowledge of the large-scale voluminous shapes that form and metamorphose within the invisible medium. It’s they, after all, who ride those shifting flows, they whose muscles daily navigate the unseen hints and whirling notions that ceaselessly arise, interact, and dissipate in the subtle awareness of the planet.



How easy it is for inherited concepts to stifle our senses! So often we assume that other animals are not conscious—that birds, for example, lack real intelligence, since their brains (or their “brain-body ratios”) are so much smaller than ours. “Birdbrains,” we say—a facile insult. Intelligence, we assume, is a strictly centralized phenomenon, mistaking our distinctively human form of intelligence for intelligence itself. As a mammal who long ago learned to balance on its hind legs, freeing its forepaws to manipulate objects, we specialize in a kind of curiosity that looks at things from different directions, turning them this way and that—a highly visual pondering that seems to unfold somewhere behind our eyes. It is a propensity for detachment that, as this book has already suggested, has been greatly intensified in the current epoch. An expanding complex of technologies now mediate between our body and the earthly elements; instead of navigating the elements directly, we’re accustomed to adjusting the switches on those technologies, using our intelligence to maneuver among a determinate set of abstract parameters rather than to improvise our way through an indeterminate and ever-shifting material field. When driving our cars, or while sitting in airplanes, we’re accustomed to fairly mechanical operations that require little strenuous effort. Whether sequestered in our offices tickling the keys on a keyboard, or simply turning the pages of a good book in bed, we spend much of our time deploying a very rarefied form of intelligence, manipulating abstract symbols while our muscled body is mostly inert. Hence thinking, for us, seems to have little bearing on our carnal life; it often seems entirely independent of our body and our bodily relation to the biosphere. If our reflections do result in a change of stance or an alteration in our actions, they still seem to issue as directives from a centralized thinker—or self—oddly independent of our materiality, a floating locus of awareness situated somewhere within our heads.

Other animals, in a constant and mostly unmediated relation with their sensory surroundings, think with the whole of their bodies. A nuanced creativity is necessary to orient and forage in a world of ever-changing forces. Equipped with proclivities and patterned behaviors genetically inherited from its ancestors, each wild creature must nonetheless adapt such propensities to the elemental particulars of the place and moment where it finds itself—from an unexpected absence of water in the usual watering hole, to a sudden abundance of its favorite food. No matter how precise are the instructions tucked into its chromosomes, they can hardly have encoded, in advance, the exact topology of the present moment. And hence a modicum of creative engagement in its immediate circumstance is simply unavoidable for any organism that moves (whether an elephant or an amoeba). It is unavoidable for any organism that must orient itself, now and then, to the rest of a steadily transforming reality. A spider sets about mending her web after it’s torn by a pounding rain, adding only those strands necessary to patch the precise dimensions of the hole. A monkey skillfully adjusts the strength of its arboreal leaps to match the distances of the various branches that loom up one after another. A foraging bull elk, stymied in his attempt to rejoin the herd by a newly flooding river, assesses his chances; will he plunge in to ford the swollen waters, or wait out the tumult?

Some may say that such decisions are not thoughts, that the animal is not aware of these choices. Yet it is clear that SOMETHING is aware in the present moment, monitoring the terrain and responding accordingly. It is true that we need not attribute such choices to a separable self within the animal, or to a thinking that unfolds entirely in some autonomous part of the creature’s brain before issuing its clear commands to the limbs. Never having separated their sentience from their sensate bodies—having little reason to sequester their intelligence in a separate region of their skull where it might dialogue steadily with itself—many undomesticated animals, when awake, move in a fairly constant dialogue not with themselves but with their surroundings. Here it is not an isolated mind but rather the sensate, muscled body itself that is doing the thinking, its diverse senses and its flexing limbs playing off one another as it feels out fresh solutions to problems posed, adjusting old habits (and ancestral patterns) to present circumstances.

This kind of distributed sentience, this intelligence in the limbs, is especially keen in birds of flight. Unlike most creatures of the ground, who must traverse an opaque surface of only two-plus dimensions as we make our way through the world, a soaring bird continually adjusts minute muscles in its wings to navigate an omnidimensional plenum of currents and interference patterns that alter from moment to moment—an unseeable flux compounded of gusting winds and whirling eddies, of blasts and updrafts and sudden calms, of storm fronts, temperature gradients, and countless other temperamental vectors and flows that may invisibly and at any moment impinge upon your feathered trajectory—whether from in front or above or below, shoving you from one side or the other or from several directions all at once. Flying is an uninterrupted improvisation with an unseen and wildly metamorphic partner. In order to stay aloft and on course (whether toward a certain stand of trees or an unsuspecting rodent moving among the grasses), tactile and kinesthetic sensations registering changes in the enfolding currents must translate instantly into muscular adjustments, diverse sinews flexing and extending to counter such perturbations even as those currents keep shifting, in a dynamic, rolling exchange between your wing muscles and the rushing muscle of the wind itself. It’s a kinetic conversation in the uttermost thick of the present moment. A barn swallow swooping, dipping, and banking for insects; a kestrel hovering directly above a field mouse; a crowd of crows mobbing a hawk; the bald eagle I once watched diving, talons first, toward a young loon; a gull kiting in the wind just above me, keeping perfect pace with the ferry I’m riding—whatever other styles of savvy these creatures may or may not display, all of them, while aloft, are thinking exquisitely along the whole length of their extended limbs. It is a brilliance we’re ill equipped to notice if we associate smartness only with our own very centralized style of cogitation. When we disparage the intelligence of birds, or the size of their brains, we miss that flight itself is a kind of thinking, a gliding within the mind, a grace we humans rarely attain in our contemplations (although if we’re following a falcon with our focus, we sometimes find our thoughts soaring as well).



Of course, we humans also think with our muscled limbs—less elaborately than the wingeds, but still: our legs steadily adjust their stride to match the steepness of the slope, our ankles flexing to meet the exposed roots and jumbled rocks as we walk. It’s an ongoing and attentive response to the unpredictable nuance of the present moment, a corporeal decision-making that underlies all our abstract reflections. Nonetheless, we’ve learned to associate thought only with the latter—with the very verbal (and sometimes numerical) cogitations coursing within our heads—and so have taken ourselves out of rapport with the other animals.

Walking through the forest, we often fail to register the vocal sounds of other animals, the whistles of squirrels and the intermittent calls of various birds, because although our bodies are in the forest, our verbal thoughts are commonly elsewhere. As Thoreau chides himself, “What business have I in the woods if I am thinking of something out of the woods?”Ω What business indeed! As soon as I call my errant spirit back home to its senses, my animal organism awakens from its slumber. Now the snap of a far-off twig brings a new alertness to my listening, as the hypnotic humming of insects and the dark squeak of two trunks rubbing against one another yields a keen awareness of my proximity to lives being lived at different scales from my own.

Here in the forest, all is body language. Tall spruces, orb-weaving spiders, a chipmunk poised on a fallen trunk rapidly gnawing something held in its forepaws, even the Jackson Pollock outbreak of bright lichens on a rock outcropping—all of these breathing beings are bodies, distant variants of my own flesh, as indeed my body is a distant echo of theirs. If each also has its sensations, its own experience of the world around it (which appears likely, since each responds appropriately to its context), it seems obvious that their experience is as weirdly different from my experience as their bodies differ from mine. We are almost wholly alien to one another.

Yet each organism in these woods seems to express itself directly, without the mediation of symbols or sentences. Hence the tension expressed by the sounds or movements of another creature will sometimes trigger a resonance in my own flesh. I’ve no doubt that my empathic sensations are dramatically different from those actually felt by the skittish deer or the squirrel, yet with regard to such basic experiences as fear, pain, and pleasure, it seems silly to assume that our feelings are entirely incommensurable. There is a subtle entanglement and confusion between all beings of the earth, a consequence not only of our common ancestry, and the cellular similarities of our makeup, but also of our subjection to variant aspects of the same whirling world.



Taking a cue from my friend Jon Young, a remarkably gifted tracker trained in several indigenous traditions, I’ve begun to tune my ears to the discourse of the local birds. Jon pointed out to me that there are five basic phrases in the vocabulary of most perching birds—a simplification, perhaps, but one that has enabled my listening to gain a first access to the language of the winged folk. The five elemental phrases that Jon identified among the perching birds (or passerines) are these: the song itself, the companion call, begging cries, male-to-male aggression calls, and the alarm call.

The song, a melodic string of tones and trills heard especially in spring and summer, is often particular to the males of a species. The song is a prime way of attracting females, and also seems to function as a territorial display, proclaiming one’s space and saying to others: keep out. Yet the songs of many species have also—to my ears at least—an exuberant and often celebratory quality unacknowledged by those who insist upon a strictly functional account of their intent. There’s often a palpable feel of contentment in the song (even, at times, a sense of real pleasure in the song’s production). It is this quality—the contented feeling-tone of the song—that instantly indicates, to a savvy listener, that there’s no overt source of distress in the vicinity of the singer. If a bird is sounding its song, we can be reasonably sure that there’s no evident danger lurking about.

The companion call is rarely indicated in my birding field guides. The call is commonly uttered by both the female and the male of a mated pair, usually in an alternating pattern. It seems a way of staying in close, auditory contact—a kind of checking in with one another—a brief chirping back and forth that lets each bird know the other’s whereabouts while both are foraging. Slight variations in the call may serve to indicate that the caller has found a good food source—“come on over”—or any number of other nuances. Whenever we hear the companion calls of one species flowing back and forth in a regular rhythm, it’s a clear indication that the birds are in a relaxed or “baseline” state, a condition of ease that expends little unnecessary energy. If the rhythm is interrupted—if one mate stops replying—then the other will call again in an irregular pattern, sometimes raising the volume. This interruption in the normal pattern is instantly noticed by other wildlife in the area (not only by birds but by squirrels, deer, fox, and others), alerting them to the possible presence of a predator or intruder. The alertness rapidly deepens if there’s no response for a long stretch. But if the first bird finally responds, then the rhythmic pattern of chirps will reassert itself, and the neighboring animals all relax.

The begging calls, usually heard in late spring or early summer, are made by fledglings calling for food, and cue us to look for the diligent behavior of the parents (darting hither and thither, hunting for the desired nourishment, and winging it swiftly to their young). Unlike the song or the companion call, begging cries don’t necessarily indicate a state of safety, since fledglings often aren’t sharp-witted enough to shut up when there’s a raptor or other predator nearby.

Aggression calls generally arise when a male songbird flies into the territory of another male from the same species. This call is often sounded on the wing, as one male tries to chase the other out of his space. The aggressive intent can usually be heard in the sound itself, and is especially obvious when one glimpses two birds with the same intense cry chasing one another. A good deal of energy is expended, but if we look around, we’ll see that other birds pay scant attention to the goings-on.

The alarm call is uttered whenever danger is sensed—when, for instance, there’s a potential predator in the vicinity. It’s both an expression of dismay and a stark warning to others, and it usually varies in volume with the degree of sensed danger. This call is the clearest sign of felt peril, and a clear departure from the baseline state. Upon hearing an alarm call, even birds from other, neighboring species halt whatever they’re up to, opening their attention toward the possible threat. Other animals, too, commonly stop and take notice. Wild mammals are generally familiar with the alarms of the local songbirds; hence, whenever such a call is uttered, the entire neighborhood is drawn to attention.

Avian alarms are also often triggered by us humans as we approach—although, caught up in our own musings, we’re usually oblivious to the wary commotion we set off as we wander the woods. If we’re alert to such cries, then the trajectory of another person walking among the trees can readily be tracked by our listening ears as a spreading ring of alarm accompanying that person as she moves, radiating outward in concentric circles from her presence.

Since many songbirds are ground feeders, they fly upward into the trees when they first sound the alarm, usually alighting (and this is crucial) on a branch just high enough to be out of harm’s way. So if we hear a series of alarm calls moving slowly through the forest, and the calls seem to issue from a height around seven or eight feet above the ground, it’s very likely that a human is setting off the disturbance. But if those alarms are sounding from a height of only three or four feet, it’s probable that a smaller, ground-dwelling predator is moving through the woods—a fox, perhaps, or a weasel.

If, however, the alarms all seem to sound from the upper canopy (from those birds, like chickadees and warblers, that hang out in the high branches), then an aerial predator is likely soaring or swooping nearby, and if we cast our eyes upward we’ve a chance of glimpsing the raptor that is causing all the hubbub.

Because the calls of birds often carry quite far through the tangle of branches and trunks that so easily confounds our gaze, by learning to distinguish the various vocalizations of the local songbirds—and by noticing whether a call gives evidence of a relaxed mood or expresses a state of alarm—we can suss out much of what’s happening at a fair distance from us in the woods. If, by consulting the neighbors and a few pocket field guides, we familiarize ourselves with the most common predators in our area, then by listening to hear the general elevation from which alarm calls are sounding—and by following, with our own animal ears, the passage of such calls as they propagate—we can glean the possible identity of the intruder, and even trace the trajectory of that creature as it moves within the forest. Such simple skills, honed by continued practice, clue us in to the activity of other animals, enabling us to move toward them and sometimes glimpse them without triggering such alarms ourselves.

As we begin to tune in, there’s an eerieness that dawns when we realize that most other animals are also listening closely to the discourse of the birds, and have been doing so all their lives. Since birds are by far the most agile creatures within the forest, able to swoop from place to place and to gaze around as they fly, they naturally know a great deal more about who’s presently afoot in the woods, and where, than the other animals. Their spoken utterances, each species with its distinct phrases (varying in tone in different circumstances), serve to keep the entire forest well apprised of what’s occurring within its depths. By familiarizing ourselves with the most basic terms of their language, we avail ourselves of a detailed outlet for “the news” already relied upon by numerous creatures.

Perhaps for this reason, the sacred language regularly attributed by tribal peoples to their most powerful shamans is often referred to as “the language of the birds.” A keen attunement to the vocal discourse of the feathered folk has been a necessary survival skill for almost every indigenous community—especially for the active hunters within the group, and for the intermediaries (the magicians or medicine persons) who tend the porous boundary between the human and more-than-human worlds.

There are, however, a few perching birds whose vocalizations are notoriously unreliable—wingeds who wield their words in highly unpredictable ways that seem to vary according to their whim. These are the same species often viewed as tricksters in oral traditions around the world. In many traditions, for example, the raven is rumored to be the most mischievous entity among the birds. For the peoples native to the Pacific Northwest of North America, Raven is generally held to be an outrageously prodigious trickster—far too clever for his own good—an audacious and somewhat self-absorbed magician whose antics actually created (largely by accident) the very imperfect world we now inhabit. In other regions of the world, a primary winged trickster may be Crow, or Magpie, or one of the insatiably curious jays. These birds—ravens, crows, jays, and magpies—compose the main members of the corvid family (Latin: Corvidae). The large, long-beaked corvids are all, by and large, omnivores—a trait that they share with human beings, bears, raccoons, and a clutch of other creatures, most of whom exhibit an intense curiosity in their cognitive as well as their gustatory habits. Uncommonly social, long-lived, and weirdly resourceful, corvids are able to adapt themselves to human settlements more brazenly than other birds. Their broad range of utterances seem to be spoken for different reasons in different circumstances and moods; hence their reputation, among some humans, as disreputable scoundrels whose discourse is not to be trusted.

It’s a reputation well worth heeding when eavesdropping on birds to glean a sense of what’s afoot in the wider landscape. Still, alliances can sometimes be forged with particular corvids. In the Alaskan interior, a collaboration between ravens and hunting wolf packs has been well documented. Soaring above the boreal forest, able to oversee much of what’s happening on the ground, ravens will sometimes lead wolves directly to an ailing deer or caribou. Their help is well repaid, since after the kill the wolves allow the ravens to partake of some remains. Human hunters, too, have been known to benefit from the raven’s scouting. When my Alaskan colleague, the ethnobiologist Richard Nelson, is out hunting deer to feed his family, he takes particular notice if a raven winging overhead starts to somersault in the sky—as though it wished to capture his attention. He’s learned that if he follows that raven’s trajectory he’ll likely be led straight to his prey, and so will have a chance to reciprocate the favor of the dark-winged trickster.



The feathered ones, then, have long been crucial allies for our kind. Watching them swoop and glide and carve their way through the air surely ignited many of our human aspirations toward freedom and flight. Their bewildering array of colors and chromatic patterns probably provoked many of our earliest acts of self-adornment, while their feathers figured prominently in human rituals and dances frequently influenced by avian courtship displays. Birds have ceaselessly inspired us with their mellifluent voices and polyphonic exchanges, undoubtedly instilling some of our earliest impulses toward song and spoken language. And during the enormously long course of our history as foraging primates, they also aided our survival in a far more immediate and practical manner. For it’s they whose cries often alerted us to the approach of dangerous predators. Further, by providing a cover for our stealth that was instinctively trusted throughout the forest, it was often the birds who enabled our best hunters to successfully approach and secure the prey that we needed to eat. They have been for us messengers, intermediaries, envoys from the forest and its wider life, bearers of intelligence we could not do without.

This ancestral sense of the wingeds as messengers, and as guardians of a sort, is preserved for many persons in the conception of angels. (The word “angel” itself comes from the Greek “angelos,” meaning “messenger.”) The iconography of angels has always shown them with feathered wings. Many contemporary mystics would have us view the wings of angels purely as a visual metaphor, as a way of imagining subtle energies that simply have no physical form. Yet it is likely that the wondrous qualities ascribed to angels were once associated with the elusive, winged presence of birds themselves.

Numerous hunting and gathering cultures have honored birds as emissaries from a more expansive field of intelligence. But with the rise of sedentary civilization and its written-down scriptures, intelligence—as we have seen—was gradually banished from the surrounding world and sequestered within our single species. It became more and more difficult to acknowledge or even recognize other animals as bearers of insight or sources of wisdom. If these winged singers still seemed to grant us a kind of grace even in our settled towns and cities—if there was something about their sudden, swooping visitations that still carried intimations of other dimensions, and something in their songs that touched a forgotten chord within our chest, a fleeting memory of contact with a wider, more ubiquitous awareness—well, then the uncanny nature of these encounters could hardly be attributed to the birds themselves. Since humans were now the sole carriers of consciousness in the earthly world, the unexpected meeting with a small, exceedingly awake feathered presence could only be interpreted as a visitation from a higher, more rarefied kind of human: a little person with wings. Through a concatenation of traditions including Judaism, Zoroastrianism, Christianity, and Neoplatonism, such winged persons came to be viewed as messengers, envoys from a celestial divinity—ultimately as members of the heavenly host, the supernal attendants of God.

Nonetheless, the most common characteristic in the many descriptions of angels, apart from their feathered wings, is their musical nature. Angels sing. Indeed, a “choir of angels” regularly heralds the arrival of the Holy One with hosannas of praise, the singing of angels announcing such moments when the divine presence is about to manifest itself, or about to withdraw. This pattern closely parallels the swelling music just before dawn, at birdlight, when the blazing sun is about to enter the great hall of sky, and then later: the rising chorus of song as that same radiance is about to sink below the horizon, and so to depart from the celestial hall.

Is it not obvious, then, that long before angels were conceived as invisible heralds of an unseen deity, they were inseparable from these feathered harbingers of the radiant sun itself? From the winged choir offering up its hosannas of praise every dawn and every dusk? Can we doubt that for our primate ancestors, it was these winged singers, the birds themselves, who were felt to be intermediaries between our ground-bound world and that celestial resplendence, that source, the great god of the day-lit world—whose face, even today, we dare not look upon directly?



After a series of lectures in New England, I wander along the rocky crest of some low mountains above the Maine coast. As I come into a wooded cirque, the song of a hermit thrush rings down from the upper branches. Soon another hermit thrush sounds nearby, and then two more from some slight distance, their several songs overlapping in the needled air, each with a different inflection, yet all of them utterly ethereal. I choose a single singer upon which to focus my listening, and let myself be carried by the song. The first sustained note of each phrase is held for a long moment, followed by three spiraling, rippling turns fading slightly at the end, until another sustained tone launches the next phrase on a different pitch from the last: “Sheeeeee fridiila-fridila-fridila … Sooohhh ridileee-ridileee-ridileee … Saaaayyy teedelaa-teedelaa-teedelaa … Seeeeeeee tidleee-tidleee-tidleee …” And it’s as though each phrase unlocks a different vertebra along my spine, spilling a ray of light into that node, and then the next phrase unlocks another node—“Sheeeeee teedelaa-teedelaa-teedela … Suuuuu ridileee-ridilee-ridilee”—until all my vertebrae have become transparent crystals trading gleams among themselves. The song drops to a middle register, and then a higher vertebra, and then a glimmering tone so high it’s almost beyond the reach of my hearing, and as it spirals there I feel the top of my skull opening as I seem to ascend, a single photon, into the sky.

The songs of birds, utterances at the origin of human language, release us from the bounds of our own speech—as their winged forms, watched intently, sometimes release us from the grip of the ground. Birds have long been our chaperones to the heights, as well as emissaries from there, rays of the sun taken solid form.


Ω From the essay “Walking,” in Henry David Thoreau, The Natural History Essays (Salt Lake City: Peregrine Smith Books, 1980), p. 99.





SLEIGHT-OF-HAND

(Magic I)


Mountains slice into the sky, carving the blue into a monster with eight or nine gaping mouths. As I move along the trail, those mouths variously open and close in slow motion, biting back at the sharp-edged peaks. The Himalayas are youthful mountains, only recently shoved skyward by the gradual collision of tectonic plates, their jagged edges not yet smoothed by the gradual erosion of wind and water. The narrow trail I’m following angles down along the slope of a broad ridge to the Sherpa village in the valley.

I am in my middle twenties, trekking through this gargantuan landscape with a young translator, Temba Sherpa. When we first arrived in this village some days ago, huffing and puffing after mounting a long series of switchbacks zigzagging up from the lower valleys, I’d made inquiries regarding a particularly powerful jhankri, or medicine person, rumored to live somewhere in the vicinity of this settlement. For that’s what drew me up into these peaks: I was traveling as an itinerant sleight-of-hand magician, hoping to learn from the traditional magic practitioners who ply their craft in these regions. In response to my queries regarding the jhankri’s whereabouts, we’d been pointed to one of the village houses where the magician’s parents lived; they, presumably, would be able to direct us to his dwelling.

Directions, however, were not so easy to obtain. Upon asking his gray-haired parents how we might find their son’s home, we were invited to stay with them for the night. I had by then grown accustomed to the curious obliqueness and indirection whereby traditional peoples speak of their magicians; in Indonesia, half a year earlier, I’d been forced to acquire a new depth of patience when trying to make contact with those dukuns, or sorcerers, about whom the most powerful stories circulated. I had finally learned to settle into some village in the general terrain of a specific dukun, and to make evident my intent simply by performing an innocuous bit of magic, preferably without calling overmuch attention to myself. When I was walking past the rice paddies in the morning, aware that a few of the farmers—with their ankles and forearms submerged in the water—would likely be looking curiously at me, I might sneeze a few times before reaching my open hand into the space above me and plucking a large, colored handkerchief out of the air. I’d blow my nose in the handkerchief and then reach up to let it vanish back into the space above my head—all with the utmost nonchalance, without interrupting my steps or turning to glance at the farmers. I merely walked on by. And then I would just wait, biding my time in the village, confident that word of this odd happenstance would make its way to the appropriate ears, and that at some moment I’d be contacted by the very magician I was hoping to meet. The contact, when it came a day or two later, was always indirect, most often through a young child who would tug on my sarong while I was reading, or pinch my arm while I was dozing, and then urge me to follow him up through the rice paddies—balancing on the low dikes that separate them—and into the woods.

But this was my first attempt to make contact with a magician here in the mountains of Nepal, and so, not yet familiar with the local etiquette, I decided to try a more direct approach. We accepted the invitation to stay at the home of the shaman’s parents, sleeping under yak skins on the second floor with the rest of the family (the first floor, partly dug into the steep hillside, was for the livestock: several yaks and a water buffalo). I was hoping their son, alerted to our visit, might turn up the next morning. If not, I assumed that the couple would give us directions to the jhankri’s dwelling that following day. Yet neither of these hopes panned out that next day, or the day after that. Our stay with the elder couple did provide me a chance to acclimatize to an elevation far higher than any I’d yet experienced, wandering the village and quietly adjusting myself to the rhythms of life in a Sherpa household. Like many of the homes in which I would find myself during the next six months, the house itself was elegantly simple, wooden beams and window frames set in a solid structure fashioned of hewn stones, plastered over with clay. Apart from the small partitioned-off room where Temba and I slept, the living quarters were a single long room. Along the front wall of this room was an open fireplace—the stove around which most human interaction seemed to unfold. It was here by the fire that people would gather to talk and to pick potatoes, their skins blackened, out of the hot coals.

The only person who did not come to the fire was an ancient old man, presumably the jhankri’s grandfather, sitting always off in the corner of that long room, his head somewhat bowed, his body motionless except for the thumb of his right hand, which was shoving one bead after another along the loop of prayer beads that dangled from his half-open fist. In concert with the flicking beads, a breathy prayer issued like an incessant mutter from his lips: “Om mani padme hung, om mani padme hung, om mani padme hung, om mani padme hung …” It was the mantra of Chenrezig, the bodhisattva of compassion—“Ah, the Jewel in the Lotus!”—transmuted by the old man into a kind of breathing. His lips never ceased shaping themselves to this mumbled prayer regardless of whether he was inhaling or exhaling. Yet apart from the minute movements of his lips and that single digit, his bent body was entirely immobile. No one had introduced us to this aged presence when we were taken into the house that first evening, and when I came to sit by the fire the next morning he was in the same corner, in the same stooped position. No one ever addressed him—or even acknowledged him. Although I at first found his muttering presence somewhat unnerving, after a couple of days interacting with the others by the warm fire at mealtime, learning some simple Sherpa phrases, and drinking chang (which seemed a kind of alcoholic yogurt) with Temba and the jhankri’s father in the cold evenings, I stopped noticing the old mutterer as anything other than a somewhat broken piece of furniture. Dementia, I noted to myself, is found in every culture.

On our third evening in this house, the father finally gave Temba instructions to the jhankri’s cottage, along with a hand-drawn map. The jhankri’s home, it now seemed, was many hours’ journey from the village; we resolved, nonetheless, to make our way there the following day. I slept well that night, my first decent sleep at this extreme altitude.

When I rose the next morning and came alone into the main room, the fire was still blazing. The jhankri’s parents must recently have headed out, and Temba as well. But when I sat down by the flames to forage among the coals, the quality of silence in the room seemed oddly different. Only then did I realize that the wizened old man was missing. He was not in his corner, nor anywhere else for that matter. Curious. Perhaps the others had carried him down the stairs so they could wash him in the open air? Gingerly nudging an ashen potato to the side of the hearth, I took it up in my fingers, tossing it from one hand to the other, back and forth. When the potato was cool enough to hold, I began peeling the black skin as I leaned over to the nearest window, peering out through the smoky glass into the fields. And straightaway dropped the potato. For there, on his own, was the rickety old man standing erect by a wooden fence at the near edge of a field. In his right hand was the looped string of prayer beads, slowly moving through his fingers; I could see his lips slightly opening and closing as the endless prayer rolled out of his mouth. I could not really hear it, although that muttered mantra had been so incessant these last few days that I couldn’t help but imagine it as I watched his lips. A raven swerved down to perch on one of the posts about twenty yards down the fence from the old man and his vacant stare. There was no one else to be seen. I had not thought that the old fellow could move his limbs, much less balance upright on his own.

As if to confirm my thought, the old man now appeared to be tipping over. His erect body had lost its precarious balance and was tilting further and further forward as I stared. The man was toppling in slow motion. I thought to cross the room and rush down the stairs, but couldn’t take my eyes off him as he tumbled over—his body finally bending at the waist as his right arm, extending downward, broke the fall. And there he now was, pitched forward, with only his feet and one hand touching the ground, his bent body teetering on its right arm. Then the left arm swung stiffly forward to plant its hand beside the right. Good. A stable position at last. I was about to head down to help when I saw him walking his hands slowly back toward his legs until he was able, remarkably, to raise himself to a standing position. It was an amazing recovery. As his arms gradually came back up, I noticed that the string of beads was dangling now from his left fist, rather than his right. I peered hard through the glass to see the right hand, and finally glimpsed it, now clenched, on his other side. I winced. He must’ve hurt that hand when it broke his slow-motion topple, and so passed the loop of beads to the other fingers.

But I was wrong. He wasn’t clenching his right hand in pain. It was clenched because it was holding something. I wouldn’t have realized this had not the old man’s torso suddenly erupted into fluid motion, the right arm arcing back and around in an outrageously swift movement as it flung—actually whipped—a stone straight down the fence line toward the raven. My wide eyes saw the throw’s arrow-straight perfection in the split second before it made contact with feather and bone—but when did it dawn on me that the old man’s absurd slow-motion tumble and ever-so-slow rise, moments earlier, had simply been a covert way of picking up a stone without startling his chosen target away from its perch? It could only have been after, for now there was no chance to think before the stone plowed straight into its destination. Except that the raven, in the feather-tipped instant before contact, hopped three inches straight up into the air; the stone whizzed through the vacated space in the single moment before the bird dropped back down to inhabit that space once again, utterly unruffled. The stone sped on past and buried itself in the upturned soil of someone’s potato field with a small burst of dust. I stared at the raven, coolly poised on its post as though nothing at all had happened. My mouth agape, I turned my stare back toward the old man: there he was, gazing into space, immobile except for the string of beads slipping one by one through his right fist, and the breathy prayer moving through his lips.

It occurred to me, then, that this man and that raven were probably not strangers to each other—that they had likely been testing one another’s skills for a long time.



The close alliance between traditional, indigenous magic practitioners and their animal familiars has by now been reported so much in the modern West that it has become a cliché. As with all such stereotypes, the familiar phrases and hyped images—the witch’s black cat, the brujo’s animal ally, the medicine person’s totem—function to hide (and sometimes to protect) a many-faceted reality whose complexity and practicality remain unexplored, unsuspected even by those today who most have need of its medicine.

In truth, it may not be possible to write of the enigmatic interchange between indigenous magicians and their other-than-human counterparts without falsifying this interchange. For as I’ve indicated over and again, the written word regularly draws both reader and writer into a style of awareness that is mostly closed to other species. Our commonplace practice of reading texts has its deepest ancestral source in the indigenous hunter’s careful reading of animal tracks pressed into the surface of the earth. But the recent transformation of this ancient craft into a purely human reading of our own tracks, trailing off across the page or screen, has made possible a degree of human self-involvement entirely unknown to our oral ancestors. Today, printed words such as these you’re reading circumscribe a symbolic space of communication that we carry on solely among ourselves, a hyperreflective style of cogitation far too abstract to register the incarnate intelligence of other animals (often so detached that it renders us, while we’re reading, oddly impervious to the promptings of our own animal flesh). The powerful, self-enclosed spell of the written letters easily eclipses that subtler magic—the nuanced exchange between the human animal and the animate earth.

How then to write of an unexpected dialogue that once happened between me and a shining spider, or the vital intelligence that confronted me once in the person of an immense grizzly after my kayak ran aground in a stream thick with spawning salmon? How to write of the moment, years ago, when while pondering a patch of crinkled lichen on a protrusion of granite I suddenly found myself falling down and down into the depths of that lichen, tumbling head over heels into a limitless and baroque universe of folded crimson?

And how to write of the odd sensations that came over me this day, as Temba and I hiked up the valley toward the home of the jhankri? I had noticed, months earlier in Indonesia, that my body would sometimes feel peculiar upon coming into the presence of a particularly powerful sorcerer—a feeling that would pass after a few days. I had at first misconstrued the experience to be that of some illness, a vague flu that I happened to come down with at that unfortunate moment. But after contracting a similar illness when I encountered another unusually strong dukun, I began to realize that it was not an illness at all—that I was misinterpreting sensations that simply were very new to my organism. I couldn’t explain this odd feeling within my limbs, yet once I realized that it wasn’t noxious, I found that there was nothing inherently unpleasant in the feeling; it was, simply, strange. And so I had learned to recognize the impressions, when they arrived, as an inward indication that I was standing close to a magician of unusual depth and strength.

Now, however, I was merely on the way toward the home of a healer I had not yet met—in truth I was still a half day away—yet already I could feel that same tingling along my skin and within the muscles of my arms and legs. Not that the feeling was precisely identical to that which I’d experienced those several times in Indonesia, but when I began wondering if I was getting sick, I abruptly realized that the sensations had the same telltale quality as those I’d felt before. Could it be that my organism was already sensing the jhankri’s presence? Or was my body merely anticipating the imminent encounter with this curious person, of whom I had heard only rumors?

In any case, I soon became aware of a new quality in this experience: the throb in my muscles was such that I could no longer wholly straighten my legs—or rather, it felt uncomfortable to fully straighten them. So while hiking along the trail I was no longer entirely extending each leg after its foot came down, as is our customary way of walking; instead my legs stayed somewhat bent even at their point of greatest extension. And as a result my stride now took on a springiness, a bounce, that was very new to me. You might think that such a way of walking would be tiring, especially when carrying a heavy pack, but in truth I found it increasingly pleasureful, a new and more playful relation to gravity. I noticed that my arms were oddly relaxed as well, dangling loose and swinging in the gravitational field. It seemed as though I was conscious of this enveloping field of force for the first time in my life, and could feel myself dancing within it, exploring the quality of gravity as though it were an elastic fabric stretched around me. This lucid sense of space was accentuated by the clarity of the many smells drifting through my awareness, my nostrils flaring at the scents rising from the dirt and from the various herbs we brushed past as we hiked. My nose, somehow, had come strangely awake.

This weirdly limber and prescient state stayed with me for the rest of our mostly uphill hike, which at long last brought us to the home of the jhankri. The modest stone house was set among a clutch of large boulders, close by the edge of a broad and very deep canyon. A narrow river wound its way far below. When we knocked, the door was opened by a woman with small, shining eyes, wearing a dark robe with a multihued square of cloth hanging from her waist. We bowed a simple greeting, after which Temba, as my translator, seemed to get tongue-tied and flustered. But she ushered us in. I set my backpack by the door; Temba did the same. Our hostess placed a pot of water, for tea, onto the fire.

My eyes had trouble adjusting to the dark; I could see only that the woman, by the light of the fire, was gesturing me toward the far end of the single long room. Still mostly blind, I took a few steps in that direction and stopped, waiting for the darkness to dissipate. I gradually became aware of the flickering glow on the high cheekbones and forehead of an upturned face. I placed my hands together and bowed gently—“Namasté”—but there was no reply. The firelit face was low to the ground, turning slowly from side to side; abruptly I realized that the turning head was sniffing the air on one side and then the other, scroonching its nose rather like an ape as it did so, widening its nostrils to better sample the air as I approached. The jhankri was squatting in a balanced crouch, forearms resting on knees. I moved to the side wall and settled onto the floor. He continued sniffing the air with short double inhalations, his upper lip rising and falling, and I felt the hairs rising on the back of my neck. Here I was in the close presence of an animal—a large primate so intensely aware and wary of my presence that my own animal hackles were aroused!

The jhankri’s wife approached our end of the room and set down two cups of steaming yak-butter tea on a low wooden bench. I looked around for Temba; he was still standing by the door where we’d come in. I called him to come sit down. But he didn’t budge. The jhankri stared at me, then abruptly raised himself and walked over toward the door with a strange, gangly grace. I saw that his knees never fully straightened; his legs stayed bent like taut springs as he moved through the thick air. I recognized the odd gait that my body had taken up that afternoon—noticed its primate-like resonance as the jhankri spoke a few words to Temba and led him back to sit with us—and I felt myself sliding further into a trance. My eyes, honed in some way by the singular state that had taken hold of me, could now see the currents of air whirling in small vortices and eddies as the jhankri’s limbs sliced through the space … Or were those eddies now visible by virtue of some residual smoke that hadn’t made it out the smoke-hole in the roof?

As the jhankri sat back down, I could sense the floor under my buttocks, and the bones within my buttocks. I could feel my skull as well, and the segmented tower of the spine holding my skull aloft, suspended in space. When I shifted position my spine swayed slightly, like the limber trunk of a young sapling bending in the breeze, until it found a new poise with my head balanced atop it.

Somehow, in this curious house, I could sense my materiality much more vividly, the physical density of the several layers of my body—and so could feel as well the solidarity between my thingly presence and various plants, even my kinship with the stones in the wall and the boulders outside the cottage.

The jhankri was staring at my face, sweeping his gaze across my skin and the various tracks or traces to be found there. I asked Temba to translate for me as I thanked the householders for the yak-butter tea. But Temba shook his head. So I offered my thanks directly to the jhankri, whereupon he spoke some words to me, gesturing toward the tea. When I raised my eyebrows toward my translator, hoping for some clarification, Temba simply shook his head and whispered, under his breath, “No … No. I cannot translate. We go now.” I asked him if the jhankri had told us to leave. “No. I cannot translate for you. We must go.”

I saw that Temba would not look directly at the jhankri. Yet our host, smiling slightly, was pushing the teacups toward us across the bench. I mumbled to Temba that surely we should drink the tea before leaving. But his hands were shaking, and one of them was tugging on my jacket: “We must go now. We go.” His anguish was palpable. “Now?” I asked. “Yes.” The tremble in his arms was shaking me out of the trance. Thoroughly flummoxed by the situation, I climbed to my feet and bowed again to the man, trying to thank him and his wife and to apologize for leaving so quickly, but Temba would not translate any of this—he simply pushed me toward the door. I reached for my backpack and dragged it outside. The door closed.

I waited until we’d stepped past one of the boulders, then turned to Temba: “What’s going on?”

“It is bad. Very bad,” he said. “I should not have brought you here. It will be bad for my family. They probably get sick. This jhankri may make them sick. Maybe I will die.”

“Did the jhankri say that he would make your family sick?”

“I could feel it when we went in the house—”

“But did the jhankri say that he would hurt your family? Did he tell you it was bad that we came?”

“I don’t know. But I should not have brought you here. It is a terrible thing.” He turned and started walking down the trail. It was late dusk, and I had no idea where we were headed. I leaned over my pack and started digging for my flashlight. Yet when I realized that Temba wasn’t waiting, I hoisted the pack and followed him down the darkening path.

We slept that night above a rushing stream, our sleeping bags huddled against each other for warmth. In the morning we decided to head toward the village where his family lived, and where he’d grown up. Temba had only recently moved to the big city, Kathmandu, in hopes of securing work as a mountain guide. I had been introduced to Temba some weeks earlier at the Sherpa Cooperative in Kathmandu, in a last-ditch effort by one of the directors to locate a translator willing to accompany me on my quest to learn from traditional jhankris in the high mountains. I had already been paired up, twice, with two different guides; each had backed out of the trek upon discovering that I was entirely serious in my intent to meet with the mountain shamans. Temba was the third and by far the youngest of those who signed on to the venture. This time I had been as explicit as I could, spelling out my aims at length while we were still standing in the office of the Sherpa Cooperative. Temba had insisted, then, that he had no problem with my interest in traditional magic, and that he’d have no difficulty translating for me in any interactions with the Sherpa jhankris. And so I had hired him as my guide and translator.

Yet now, in our very first encounter with a shaman from his own culture, Temba had been stricken with fear, almost paralyzed, hardly able to breathe in the jhankri’s presence, much less translate for me.

Already in Indonesia I’d become familiar with the fear that some dukuns seemed to inspire, even among the very villagers whom they helped back to health. It was often assumed that a shaman, in order to prevail against the harmful spirits that can sap the strength from a grown person, must be well acquainted with such spirits, and may even be consorting with such demons in the off-hours. This was especially the case with regard to the most powerful magicians, those who had the greatest success in curing diseases, easing community disruptions, or even altering problematic weather patterns. If such a shaman could bargain so successfully with the malevolent energies, regularly convincing them to back off, it seemed likely that he or she was on companionable terms with those shadowed powers.

Learning closely from several magicians in the Indonesian archipelago had exposed me to the profusion of rumors steadily circulating through each island’s population regarding the practice of harmful (or “left-handed”) magic by certain magicians or sorcerers. I’d slowly come to recognize that the abundance of these suspicions far outweighed the actual extent of such practices. The proliferating suspicions were less a consequence of actual acts than of the most common diagnosis offered by medicine persons to explain the ailments they work to heal. A diagnosis of witchcraft—a suggestion that a client’s illness was consciously inflicted by the deployment of bad (or malevolent) magic—readily implies that the disease can be alleviated by the diligent application of good magic. Indeed, such a diagnosis will often hasten the curative efficacy of such good magic or medicine. The resulting abundance of dark diagnoses, however, inevitably means that most shamans and medicine persons—most of those who work with magic—will occupy a very ambivalent place in their communities.

I had at first been surprised that the several shamans I came to know in Indonesia did little to counter the many suspicions and rumors that swirled around them. Yet I soon came to discern that the aura of danger surrounding the most potent magicians had an important benefit: it served to protect those practitioners from what would otherwise have been a ceaseless onslaught of requests for ritual assistance. The rumors ensured that only those persons who were in dire need of help would dare seek out the magician and his or her powerful craft.



Temba was young. I should not have been surprised by his reaction to the jhankri, given the response of the earlier translators back in Kathmandu. It was clear to me, from the effects I’d felt in my body when at his home, that this jhankri’s craft was at least as intense as any I’d encountered in Indonesia, and I was terribly frustrated that our meeting had been cut short. Whatever else I’d experienced, I’d felt no malevolence in his presence. Nonetheless, Temba’s stillevident dismay—and his fear for his own family—prompted some alarm. I was concerned for my teenage guide, and my sense of responsibility in all this began to thicken as the day went on. I was eager to get Temba back to his village, and to ascertain that his folks were all right.

I resolved to return to the jhankri’s home on my own at a later time.

By late afternoon we reached the monastery where Temba’s younger brother lived as a monk, and made arrangements to stay there for the night. That evening, I asked both brothers to begin tutoring me in the basics of the Sherpa language, and we stayed up much of the night trading terms and phrases. The next afternoon Temba and I finally made it to the small village where he’d grown up, and were welcomed into his parents’ house. Temba was hugely relieved to see they were in good health, and they were relieved to have some help digging up their potato fields. I moved into their home (upstairs, again, above the yaks’ quarters) for over a week, making steady progress on the language with Temba, trying out my clumsy skills on the neighbors while working in the fields. Finally, confident enough of my ability to communicate simple matters, I took my leave of the household—paying Temba well for the brief time we’d been together. I had originally thought I’d have his services for several months. I felt lousy backing out of our contract; it was now clear, however, that I would never learn from any of the Himalayan jhankris unless I approached them on my own. Temba stayed in his village; he’d help his folks for a time and then trek back down to the Kathmandu valley in search of a climbing expedition to sign on to, or any other job less nerve-racking than this one he’d mistakenly taken on.

I was alone with the great mountains now, and with the god-haunted winds, clambering over rivers on wobbling, ramshackle bridges and following foot trails winding above villages where pungent smoke rose from different hearthfires like prayers dissipating in the morning air. Flocks of small birds swerved and dipped in perfect unison, alighting on a roof and then all rising a moment later to undulate and billow in waves like a windblown cloth before settling in the branches of clustered trees. On some mornings the ringing of prayer bells sounded far-off; on others I remember the loud slap-slapping of prayer flags strung overhead as the breeze ingested the prayers printed on the colored fabric. Now the wind would carry those blessings wherever it blew …

On one afternoon, as I was hiking along a small river, a noisy clattering assailed my ears. Rounding a bend, I discovered the racket emanating from a wooden prayer wheel spinning above the middle of the current, a brightly painted cylinder whirling its carved prayers ’round and ’round, propelled by a simple waterwheel at its base.

Wherever I found myself at dusk, I’d make my way toward the nearest apparent settlement, where I was always offered food and a warm corner to sleep, then sent off in the morning with clear directions for my onward journey.

One morning I followed the dissonance of some blaring horns to a small semicircle of lamas and monks chanting in full regalia on a mountainside. They saw me watching from down the slope, and waved me over with big grins. I sat and joined them for the afternoon around their fire, charmed by the cacophony of the horns and by the throaty, bass voices intoning the liturgy, and the sweetness of the rice cake offerings I was urged to eat, and the many birds soaring overhead, apparently drawn by the festivities. Only after several hours, when I stepped upslope to urinate behind some trees, did I discover, with a shock, that upon the rock platform just beside where I’d been sitting (just above my seated line of sight) was the naked, disemboweled corpse of a young woman! I felt the blood drain from my face. Unfortunately I was already walking back down to my spot when I first saw that splayed, bird-pecked body, its innards still attached yet laid open on the rock, and so could not easily slink away. I tried to contain my nausea as I dizzily took my seat at what I now realized was a funerary rite. The festive celebration I’d been enjoying for several hours abruptly morphed into a macabre, haunted ritual, stained by my own fear. The clamor of the horns now seemed sinister to my ears, and strong smells that I’d thought were from the incense now assailed my nostrils as a threat. Even the blue sky itself began to seem an oppressive power as it imbibed the dark smoke of the central fire.

I had never seen a corpse displayed in such a manner, much less sat beside one for a whole afternoon. As I slowly gathered my rattled wits, I came to realize that the deceased woman’s body was being offered to the animal powers and the spirits of the air. Hence the broad-winged lammergeiers and the other carrion birds that’d been circling overhead all afternoon. Death was not hidden here as it was where I came from, not cosmeticized to mask its unnerving power, nor embalmed to stave off decay. Instead it was displayed in all its matter-of-fact awfulness as the ever-present underside of existence; indeed, here it was being offered as food to the wilder life that surrounds us. I was stunned, grappling with the demons stirred inside me by what was happening. Yet the monks were smiling and sometimes laughing, at ease with their prayers as they guided the woman’s spirit through the bardo—through the gap between worlds. By the time I left the gathering, bowing low to the various lamas, my idyllic sense of these mountains, and the prayer-infused breezes that move between them, had deepened considerably to make space for the earthen tones of danger, disease, and death that color life in this stark terrain. To make room in my awareness for the loss and racking grief that shadows life on this planet, the rain of tears that somehow enables all this staggering beauty. Only after this encounter was I able, for the first time, to return the ferocious gaze of Mahakala—the horrifying, wrathful form of the Buddha—who glared down from the inner walls of the small monasteries that I came upon in these high valleys.

At one such gompa, the resident lama was startled into laughter by my sleight-of-hand metamorphosis of a simple, weathered stone into another, carved with prayers, that I’d found some days earlier. He took my hand and led me down a long trail to the river, so I could watch his two students as they worked with temple woodblocks artfully carved with Tibetan ritual verses. Normally these precious woodblocks were used to print out liturgical books. But now—amazingly!—the students were stamping the woodblocks over and over into the flowing surface of the river, so that the water would carry those printed prayers to the many lands through which it traveled on its long way to the Indian Ocean.

Here, remarkably, was a culture wherein written letters were not used merely as a record of words once spoken, or as a score for oral speech, but as efficacious forces in their own right. The letters were not just passive signs, but energetic agents actively affecting the space around them. Whether written on the page of a book or carved into woodblocks, whether etched into standing stones or printed on flags, the Tibetan letters held a power that could be activated not only by human beings but by insects crawling through their cracks, and by water flowing along their shapes, and even by the breeze gusting across them. Human intentions, carried in dreams and prayers, mingled here with the intentions of stones, trees, and rivers. Clearly, “mind” in this mountain region was not a human possession; it was a power proper to every part of the elemental field.



We participate in this encompassing awareness with the whole of our body, as other animals participate in it with theirs, the snow leopard with its tensed muscles and the hawk with its splayed wing feathers. Every creature here inhabits and moves through the same field of mountains and melting ice, imbibing the same air, the same boulder-strewn awareness. Yet each animal filters this awareness with its particular senses, its access to the whole limited by the arrangement of its limbs and the specific style of its pleasures, by the way it obtains nourishment and the way it avoids becoming food for others. Each creature—two-leggeds included—has only a restricted access to the mystery of the real. As a human I may have compiled a great mass of data about the ways of the world, yet in a practical, visceral sense (carnal knowledge being the primary form of intelligence), an earthworm knows far more about the life of the soil than I do, as a swallow knows more about the wind. To be human is to have a very limited access to what is.

Science has tried to push past the carnal constraints on our knowledge by joining deductive reason to the judicious application of experiment. Traditional, tribal magicians or medicine persons take a different approach. They seek to augment the limitations of their specifically human senses by binding their attention to the ways of another animal. Steadily training his focus upon the patterned behavior of another creature—observing it closely in its own terrain, following and interpreting its tracks, becoming familiar with its calls and its styles of stalking or foraging—the medicine person renders himself vulnerable to another, non-human form of experience. The more studiously an apprentice magician watches the other creature from a stance of humility, learning to mimic its cries and to dance its various movements, the more thoroughly his nervous system is joined to another set of senses—thereby gaining a kind of stereoscopic access to the world, a keener perception of the biosphere’s manifold depth and dimensionality.

Like anything focused upon so intently, the animal ally will begin visiting the novice shaman’s dreams, imparting understandings wholly inaccessible to her waking mind. She may spend a whole night journeying as that other animal, stalking her prey and sometimes killing and devouring it, before awakening in this two-legged form. Most importantly, because the young shaman is now informed by two very different sets of senses, her allegiance to her own single species begins to loosen; she begins to catch glimpses of a shimmering, ever-shifting lattice of affiliations and interdependencies—the filamental web that binds all beings. Now and then she may catch herself pondering matters less from a human angle than from the perspective of the forest or the river valley as a whole …



In the course of these first months in the Himalayas I came into contact with several jhankris of very diverse skills, and I lived for several weeks with two of them, a husband and wife who were both highly regarded as healers. The woman was suspicious of me at first, since rumors of my own craft had preceded me up their valley. I’d made the mistake of doing some sleight-of-hand for a ragamuffin band of children in a small village, changing stones into Nepali coins and then back again before making them vanish into the air. News of these simple feats had spread quickly among the neighboring villages, arousing both curiosity and some alarm among the adult Sherpas. While magic of various forms had a clear place in this culture, it was odd for a white Westerner to even believe in magic, much less to display any such rapport with the invisibles. So the female jhankri glared at me when I first made my way to their hut; I realized that I was not welcome. Only by returning day after day, offering to help carry water up from the rushing stream, was I able to ease the initial antagonism. When her husband finally challenged me to show something of my own skill, I produced a brightly colored square of Sherpa cloth out of the air, then formed a small, empty pocket in the middle of the cloth, letting it dangle down from my fist. I invited the jhankri to blow upon the fabric. Then, singing softly, I opened the folds to reveal a gleaming quartz crystal. (The crystal was a talisman of mine that I’d been carrying in my pocket for most of a year.) The shaman took the quartz in his hand, holding it up to the sun. Then closing one eye, he brought the crystal close to the other, peering at me through its facets as he turned it this way and that. He asked if there were other crystals wanting to appear. I told him that I did not know, but that I hoped he would accept that crystal as a gift from the spirits.

Perhaps I could teach him some of the mantras that I used for my magic? Of course I would, yes, if in exchange he would allow me to sit in on some of his healing sessions …

It was a deal.

I moved into their household from the smaller family home where I’d been sleeping, and soon found myself accompanying the man, Dorjee, to a range of healings—usually in the evening and sometimes lasting the whole night.Ω Some of the healings were much stronger, in their feel, than others. In the most intense sessions Dorjee, aided by the rhythmic pounding on his dhyāngro (a large two-sided drum), slipped into a kind of delirium.

Meanwhile, during the days, I shared with him some basic techniques central to my practice of legerdemain, painstakingly walking his fingers through the most elementary sleights. However, apart from letting me attend the healings, the jhankri shared little or nothing of his craft with me. There was a younger Sherpa man who sometimes assisted Dorjee; the shaman’s comments or instructions were reserved for him. Much of what unfolded during the healing sessions was entirely opaque to my understanding; I could only witness the ritual gestures, letting myself be carried by the rhythms or distracted by the keen concentration in the faces of the others present.

But then, at the frenzied height of one such session, I was startled to see the shaman extract a bloody, tumorlike knot of matter from the side of a feverish woman’s abdomen. It was a remarkable happening, and had a powerful effect upon those watching. Only then did I realize that certain sleight-of-hand methods were already a part of Dorjee’s toolkit. For my conjuror’s eyes had glimpsed that bloody gizzard hidden in Dorjee’s palm for several moments before it was extracted from the client’s body.

The more I thought about it, the more I wondered whether Dorjee drew upon such legerdemain that evening simply because I was watching, as a way of displaying his own skill at something akin to my craft. When we were alone two days later I cautiously inquired about the extraction, praising his skill yet making clear that I had seen the deception involved. The shaman took no offense. Such a technique can be used, he said, only when other approaches will not work. I waited for him to explain. Dorjee sat down on the ground. Here is what he shared, at least as far as I could understand (putting here into my terms what he conveyed not only with words but with many gestures and facial grimaces):

There are certain demons whose grip on a sick person’s innards is so firm, so tenacious, that they cannot be dispelled by the jhankri’s phurba (a sort of magic dagger), or by any other means. No amount of trancework can induce such a demon to loosen its grip. It is in such cases that the jhankri must employ a bit of subterfuge to trick the demon out of the client’s body. For that malevolent knot of energy will not depart its host’s body unless it is provided with another physical body to inhabit. This can be a smallish object, as long as it is suitably sanguine to attract the demon (demons apparently love gruesomeness and gore). The bloody gizzard of a large bird will do nicely.

But here’s the rub: The demon must not be allowed to catch sight of this object beforehand, lest the demon become suspicious and realize the trap that is being set for it. Since a demon perceives the world through the senses of whatever body it currently possesses, the jhankri must therefore keep that bloody gizzard entirely hidden from the patient’s eyes. Once the patient herself has been lulled into a trance by the jhankri’s drumming and dancing, then the demon within her will also be in a trance, and so can be gradually lured up out of the innards toward the body’s surface, or skin, by various means. It is then, and only then, that the gory object must come into view, at that precise spot on the patient’s skin—as though it were being extracted from her body. For then the unsuspecting demon will be unable to resist being drawn across the skin by the proximity of the delectable, gristly form that has just appeared there. It’s as though that bloody gizzard or other object effectively sucks the demonic spirit into itself. The jhankri can now display that bloody object to the patient and the others present, before tossing it into the fire. If the patient recovers from her illness, the jhankri will know that the sleight-of-hand was effective, not in tricking the patient (as a Westerner might claim) but in tricking the demon—the actual illness—itself!

Dorjee was wholly earnest in his conviction that it was the demon who was being deceived, not the client or the client’s family. Because I had recognized the subterfuge employed, Dorjee insisted that I accompany him eight or nine days later to the village of the woman who’d received the treatment that evening. She was tilling one of the village fields when we arrived. She affirmed that the long-standing, debilitating pain in her midriff had eased and then gone away in the days following the healing, and had not returned. Her energy, meanwhile, had been slowly and steadily renewing itself; she felt well.

The healing by Dorjee was one of several uses of perceptual legerdemain that I have witnessed by traditional medicine persons. I came to believe that the shamanic application of sleight-of-hand for healing purposes is likely the aboriginal source of the entire craft of sleight-of-hand conjuring. For the skillful practice of sleight-of-hand magic is a kind of shock treatment for the person watching—a way of jarring his nervous system, and immune system, via the direct conduit of his senses. It is a potent technique for disrupting frozen patterns and fears, knocking loose the regenerative capacity of the body. Contrary to modern assumptions, sleight-of-hand conjuring probably originates not as an illusory depiction of supernatural events, but as a practical technique for unlocking, and activating, the fluid magic of nature itself.



Almost three months had passed before I made it back to the home of the powerful jhankri whom Temba and I originally met on our arrival in the high Himalayas. It had taken that long for me to feel even minimally attuned to the rhythms of life in this massive landscape. I had not wanted to return until I felt reasonably able to communicate clearly, albeit clumsily, by combining a growing repertoire of Sherpa words and phrases with a range of gestures. When Temba and I had made our awkward departure from the house of that jhankri, it was obvious that I’d have to be far better prepared before returning to that isolated place among the clustered boulders. The peculiar circumstances of that initial encounter had never been far from my reflections in the intervening months. I had two dreams during this time wherein I’d been met by that jhankri with his primate gaze. He did not speak during these oneric encounters; in one of them, he simply pointed out with his flaring nostrils some aspect of the ambient landscape to which I had not yet paid much attention. The day after that dream I indeed found myself more lucidly awake to the shifting hue of the icy peaks, and the way the cloud shadows as they moved followed the irregular contours of the mountains.

And now as I trekked along the narrow trail toward the jhankri’s home—approaching from the opposite direction than I had come the first time—I again found myself distinguishing the variegated scents drifting past my nostrils. Once again I realized that my knees were reluctant to fully straighten themselves, and found myself bouncing with unusual ease along the slope, my muscles responding with rare grace to the subtlest alterations in the terrain. Was my body drawn into this prescient state by virtue of aiming my steps back toward the dwelling of this particular magician? Or was I merely reactivating body memories from that trek three months earlier?

I do not know. I know only that once I discovered again their rock house camouflaged among the boulders and knocked solidly upon the door—and once the door was opened by the jhankri and I found myself gazing into that face slowly breaking into a grin—I was all but overcome by a sense of familiarity that reverberated through my organism, as though I had never really left this place. It was then, I suppose, that my apprenticeship began.



The strangest thing about my time with Sonam and his wife, Jangmu, was how deeply I came home to myself during those days and nights. Rather than sampling alien practices and exploring beliefs entirely new to me, it was the quality of my own felt experience that became ever more fascinating, the carnal thickness underlying even my most ephemeral daydreams. From that first evening in their house, I found myself noticing ordinary, physical sensations much more vividly than I had realized was possible. As though something in my hosts’ way of moving somehow untied and dispersed all my abstract reflections. The churning of words within my head simply fell silent when I was anywhere around Sonam, freeing my awareness to witness the unique intensities of particular textures, smells, and sounds as these registered along my skin or in the depths of my viscera. Their home, with its stone walls, had a palpable density that hunkered close as I slept on the mud-caked floor across from Sonam and Jangmu, and when I awoke in the mornings I seemed to emerge from my private dreams into the wider dreaming of this breathing house nested within the broad imagination of the bouldered hillside. My hosts were already at work, whether feeding their few animals or hauling water back from the stream or consulting the spirits regarding the faltering crop of potatoes in a nearby village. Later I would be carrying fallen deadwood gathered from a stand of trees by the far-below river, walking up the switchback trail behind Jangmu—she seeming to float up the steep trail in her bare feet while her back was bent forward, its huge load slung from a single rope tumpline around her forehead, me straining and staggering in my hiking boots with a far smaller stash of fuel under my arms. I remember how completely those walks annihilated any separation of my conscious thoughts from my aching shoulders and my hammering heartbeat and the step and stumble of my legs.

And herein was the strangeness: the more my consciousness sank into the muscled thickness of my animal flesh, the more I could feel the tangible earth around me swell and breathe and move within itself—trees, riverbanks, and boulders quietly responding to all the happenings in their vicinity. It seemed the ground itself felt my footfalls and nudged my steps in the most serendipitous directions, ensuring that I’d come upon some unexpected event at just the right moment—that I’d encounter a hawk just as it swerved into a tree to feed its nestlings, or that I’d step into the precise spot to glimpse, through a momentary opening in the monsoon clouds, two mountain goats coupling on the high ridge. As though by dissolving my detached cogitations into the sensory curiosity of my body, I had slipped into alignment with the sentience of the land itself. Awakening as this upright, wide-eyed, smooth-skinned thing, I noticed that all the other things around me were also awake …

It was as profound an experience of magic as any I’d yet tasted, and yet it was entirely ordinary. There was nothing extraordinary about it, not in the least. It was not the encounter with a supernatural dimension that unfurls somewhere beyond my everyday awareness, into which I might elevate myself now and then, but with a dimension always operative beneath my conventional consciousness, a carnal realm wherein my animal body was engaged in this ongoing interchange with the animate earth. Hence I began to feel far more palpably present, and real, to the rocks and the shadowed cliffs than I’d felt before. I felt that I was known to these mountains now. This experience—this awareness of my elemental, thingly presence to the tangible things that surround me—has remained, for me, the purest hallmark of magic, the very signature of its uttermost reality. Magic doesn’t sweep you away; it gathers you up into the body of the present moment so thoroughly that all your explanations fall away: the ordinary, in all its plain and simple outrageousness, begins to shine—to become luminously, impossibly so. Every facet of the world is awake, and you within it.

The deeper I slid into the material density of the real, the more I found that there was nothing determinate or predictable about existence. Actuality, this inexhaustible mystery, cannot be domesticated. It is wildness incarnate. Reality shapeshifts.



Eight days after I arrived in his home, Sonam and I hiked to a village several hours distant, where he’d been summoned by what seemed to me a kind of crazy woman. She had appeared the day before, with one eye half shut and the other overly wide, her matted hair so long unwashed that it stuck out suspended on one side of her head like the fire-blackened branches of a tree. She stared at me and spat on the ground a lot; when Sonam turned up, they spoke briefly before she slipped away. The next morning, he and I walked up a long side valley to reach the village. Apparently there had been two accidental but unrelated deaths in the settlement in recent days, and now a young boy was very ill; the people were alarmed and hoping to forestall any further bad luck. When we arrived Sonam stayed mostly on the outskirts of the village fields, consulting only one or two men that he encountered. He worked his way around the wide perimeter throughout the day, turning over mossy rocks, reassembling several half-tumbled chortens, climbing up into one of the few trees—all the while singing to himself—and at one point (as I noted in my journal) tossing some handfuls of water from an icy stream into the air with a shout. I followed him the whole time, yet at a respectful distance, not really sure what I should be doing and trying, unsuccessfully, to make sense of what he was up to. At one point several children brought us some potato bread still warm from a fire, which I alone ate. I had assumed Sonam would enact some sort of healing when we got to the town, but that was hardly the case. He didn’t even enter any of the houses. (In truth, I never saw my host overtly involved in any curing ceremonies, although an elderly Bön hermit who lived up-valley told me how, many years earlier, Sonam had brought back from near death another jhankri who at that time was a major healer in the region. But Sonam, as far as I could tell, did not work as a healer. He kept his distance from other people, and they kept their distance from him—although he was called upon, when necessary, to ease darker problems afflicting whole villages or stretches of forest, or even, as I’d heard, to alleviate the calamitous weather endangering a climbing expedition that had employed many Sherpas from the valley.)

Toward the end of the afternoon, Sonam indicated that he was done, and that we should head home. Could we not, I asked, accept some yak-butter tea in one of the houses before we walked back? No: he did not want to speak with the villagers. He bent down to tie several plants and twigs gathered during his work into a small bundle, which he gave me to place in my daypack. Refusing a last piece of the potato bread I’d kept in my pocket, he swung around and headed up the trail. I shouldered the pack and set out after him. The trail was the same we’d taken early that morning in the other direction, winding upslope and then along a steep incline that at times gave way to a precipitous drop-off to our left. Only when I leaned over the edge did the hiss of the river five hundred feet below separate itself from the sigh of the wind pouring around us. Prone to vertigo, at such places I made my way slowly, concentrating on smoothing my breathing while hewing close to the upslope side of the trail. In this manner I would fall well behind Sonam, who, twice my age, glided across the steep mountainside with a careless ease I could not fathom, his knees bent and his arms loosely outstretched, hands dangling limp like a drunken monkey. Sometimes he’d mock my fear by leaping onto a large rock at one side or the other of the trail, landing atop it with just one foot and then balancing there—the other foot swinging beside him—gazing around seemingly at ease until I finally caught up.

At one point I emerged from a harrowing stretch to see Sonam far off in front of me, and so I hustled along the widened path to catch up. The sun slid behind the mountains and a chill rose from the canyon. I had gotten to within forty or so feet of him when Sonam rounded a fold in the slope and vanished from view. As I approached that bend I heard the guttural squawk of a raven, loud, from somewhere nearby. After a moment I heard it again, and then as I rounded the bend I finally saw the raven, poised atop a boulder jutting out over the gorge, to the left of the trail. The bird was facing across the trail; as I watched, it hopped twice to angle itself more toward me, its eyes blinking like camera shutters as it cocked its head. It uttered another more subdued “squaaark” and then hopped down onto the trail. Yet as it did so the raven suddenly seemed to swerve toward me, for it expanded rapidly in apparent size. My arms instinctively flew up to shield my face, but then the bird simply alighted in the middle of the trail. Still, there was something all wrong about the way the raven landed on the dirt—its shape was contorted somehow, and the landing much too loud, until I realized that I was looking at Sonam, and not a raven at all. I blinked. And realized to my utter perplexity that Sonam was much farther from me than where the bird had been. What the hell was happening? I took a few steps toward him, whereupon my eyes discovered that the boulder on which the raven had perched was itself much farther than I’d thought, not eight feet in front of me but about twenty-eight feet away, and hence was a hell of a lot bigger than I’d perceived it to be. So it was this much larger rock from which the raven had just jumped onto the trail, transforming its feathers into clothes in the process. I stood there in a kind of shock, straining to fathom what I’d just seen. Straining even to allow what I’d just seen: a man turned into a raven, and then back again. A man I knew. A perfectly impossible metamorphosis had just unfolded before my blinking eyes.

Sonam was looking at me from where he was, his head tilted to the side. I could feel a tremor riding upward from my feet, my legs starting to buckle. I eased off the backpack in order to set it down, but Sonam walked over and hoisted it on his shoulders, motioning that we’d better keep going, as though nothing unusual had just happened. I took a few steps, then stopped and stared around, shaking my head rapidly, trying to make sure that what I was seeing was really there. Had what I’d just witnessed been merely a mistaken perception, a momentary confusion of my senses …? Sonam strode past me and headed along the trail. After a few yards he spun around and stared hard into my eyes. He swiveled his head from one side to the other, then opened his mouth and squawked—a perfect series of raven’s caws—before turning and leading the way down in the blue mountain dusk.


Ω I have altered the names in this chapter and the next, in order to respect both the privacy and the practice of the individuals mentioned.





SHAPESHIFTING

(Magic II)


The human body is precisely our capacity for metamorphosis. We mistakenly think of our flesh as a fixed and finite form, a neatly bounded package of muscle and bone and bottled electricity, with blood surging its looping boulevards and byways. But even the most cursory pondering of the body’s manifold entanglements—its erotic draw toward other bodies; its incessant negotiation with that grander eros we call “gravity”; its dependence upon cloudbursts not just to quench its thirst but to enliven and fructify the various plants that it plucks, chomps, and swallows; its imbroglio with those very plants and a few animals, drawing nourishment from them for its muscles, skin, and senses before passing that chomped matter back to the world as compost that might, if we were frugal, be used to nourish the soils in which those plants sprout; its bedazzlement by birdsong; its pleasure at throwing stones into water and through glass; its mute seduction by the moon—suffices to make evident that the body is less a self-enclosed sack than a realm wherein the diverse textures and colors of the world meet up with one another. The body is a place where clouds, earthworms, guitars, clucking hens, and clear-cut hillsides all converge, forging alliances, mergers, and metamorphoses.

We’ve already explored some ways that our body is altered and transformed as it moves through different lands. If this is so, it is because the body is itself a kind of place—not a solid object but a terrain through which things pass, and in which they sometimes settle and sediment. The body is a portable place wandering through the larger valleys and plains of the earth, open to the same currents, the same waters and winds that cascade across those wider spaces. It is hardly a closed and determinate entity, but rather a sensitive threshold through which the world experiences itself, a traveling doorway through which sundry aspects of the earth are always flowing. Sometimes the world’s textures move across this threshold unchanged. Sometimes they are transformed by the passage. And sometimes they reshape the doorway itself.

Despite the unending attempts to define and diagnose the body as a determinate object, the metamorphic character of our flesh makes itself evident in the most disparate contexts, whether when extricating oneself from the muddy suck of a swamp, or while caught up in the electric buzz and bustle of the city. Lest the experiences recounted in the previous chapter leave the impression that the capacity for metamorphosis is an entirely exotic affair, endemic only to peculiar persons dwelling in far-off mountains, allow me to provide a few very mundane examples, drawn from an ordinary life in North America, before taking up once again the matters that unfolded during my sojourn in the high valleys of Nepal.

The modern world of commerce and entertainment engages our corporeal susceptibility in multiple ways. I was in my late teens when I first became aware of the lingering influence that certain films at the local cinema had upon my organism. I am not referring here to the obvious trance we all fall into while immobilized before the big screen, but to the uncanny way that certain films would surreptitiously enter into my bloodstream, like a contagion. James Bond films were especially effective in this regard. When after the closing credits I filed out of the theater into the open air of evening, I’d naturally shift my thoughts to the practical matters of the moment. As I approached the corner of the block, however, trying to remember where I’d parked my car, my body would unexpectedly leap to the edge of the corner building and flatten itself against it, then slowly peer around the edge. Ascertaining that no one was approaching, I’d dash across the sidewalk to duck beside someone else’s automobile along the curb. I would survey the street beyond by gazing through the side windows of that car, moving slowly to keep my body’s contour from obtruding beyond the outline of the vehicle, and so from becoming visible to any eyes on the far side of the avenue. But from whom was I hiding? Whose presence was I hoping to glimpse as I slunk through the shadows, or later as I drove home, keeping the speedometer steady, slowing to stop at each traffic light with unusual precision, my peripheral senses keenly alert to the cars on either side of me? Who or what was I tracking? I had no idea. I hadn’t really chosen to enact any of these instinctive behaviors, but simply became aware of them as they were happening, amused and slightly startled by the curious spell that my organism was under. After fifteen minutes or so, the weird veneer of secrecy tinting the whole of my perceptual field would finally dissipate, the possession of my bloodstream by a phantom agent of espionage now finally exorcised by the press of homework or taking out the garbage.

This curious capacity for being drawn, physiologically, into the terrain of certain stories—abducted into another landscape that would only belatedly release me back into the palpable present—would also show itself, now and then, in relation to certain books. Since I accomplished my most pleasureful reading in bed, late at night, the chemistry of sleep usually served to reorient my limbs and finally transmit me back, in time for breakfast, to the thick of the commonplace. But when I finished reading a fat, nineteenth-century novel not at night but on some morning in late summer, placing it carefully back on the bookshelf, the transition was not so smooth; present-day objects, like the disposal unit loudly masticating scraps beneath the drain in the kitchen sink, and a bus wheezing by on the street, all struck me as ludicrous anachronisms, unreal apparitions beamed in from another planet. The pattern of printed words in that novel had rearranged my neurons: time itself was out of joint, and remained so for several days.

But written texts held another, even loopier magic, a capability for metamorphosis that became evident only when I took up the craft of writing. It is a type of transmutation well known, I suspect, to many writers, although precious few probably notice how bizarre this phenomenon really is. It shows itself when, after laboring over some essay, I send a draft to a couple friends or colleagues in hopes that they might read it. Whenever one of them subsequently mentions (on the phone, perhaps) that she is now perusing the piece, then—at that moment—a curious change occurs in the text. When I glance at my copy of those pages, I find that every passage has been altered, some dramatically, some only slightly. It’s the damnedest thing. But wait: looking closer, it appears that the precise words I’ve written are still the same, as is the order of those words, and the punctuation marks between them. Yet the whole thing reads differently. Problems I hadn’t seen before are now glaringly apparent, while previously unnoticed elegances also reveal themselves, gleaming like half-hidden gems among the clumped grass of the text. For I’m now reading the text with eyes very different from my own. My colleague has not even called me back to tell of her reaction to my draft. In all likelihood, she hasn’t yet finished reading it. It doesn’t matter. I do not need to know if she likes or despises the thing, only that she is reading it. That knowledge, alone, suffices to activate a dramatically different encounter for me with what I’ve written. And if I learn that another friend is reading it, then the text will transform yet again.

Once I discovered this shapeshifting, polymorphous capability in my written work, I realized that as an author I’d be much better served if I could effect these transformations on my own, before sending the pages out to be viewed by anyone else. After finishing the first drafts of subsequent articles, I undertook to read them from the imagined perspective of various colleagues. But to no avail. I was simply unable to conjure, on my own, any clear change in the texture and feel of what I’d written. Only by sharing it with others did the metamorphosis occur …



Even at this very moment, then, your perusing of these printed words is already influencing them, changing their tones, torquing the way they feel to others, and to me.

Unless, that is, I’m simply more susceptible than other authors to such mutations in my texts. If so, this predilection is likely related to a porosity of feeling that has been with me since childhood, an impressionable bent that shows itself, often enough, in matters linguistic. During my sophomore year of college, for example, I first became aware of my unsettling propensity to inadvertently take on the accent of whomever I was speaking with. Whenever I was on the telephone, my housemates always knew the nationality of the person I was talking to. If my lips were pursed, they knew I was conversing with one of our French classmates, while if I was talking in gutturals from the back of my throat, it was obvious that I was talking to a Russian classmate. If my arms were gesticulating wildly, flying through the air around the phone as I spoke, it was a safe bet that I was talking to a student from Italy. When one of my housemates, laughing, pointed all this out to me, I was appalled. I’d had no idea! Surely, I suggested, everybody else does the same? He shook his head. And indeed, once I began paying attention, I found that the vocal inflections of most folks varied hardly at all when they spoke to different people. But in myself this mimetic proclivity was instinctive and unconscious; it was only with a great effort that I was able to interrupt such changes in my own inflection and accent. Unfortunately, such interruption also disrupted the easy flow of my conversation, making me trip over my tongue and get tangled in the words. I finally gave up trying. But it was disconcerting as hell to know that my voice so easily took on the attributes of those with whom I conversed. I wondered what circumstance had rendered me so darn spineless, so passively porous to the style of others.

Two subsequent discoveries finally reconciled me to this odd proclivity of mine. The first happened when, as an itinerant magician, I began traveling more widely, interacting more often with people from other lands. Even in North America I noticed that foreigners gravitated to me, finding me somehow much easier to communicate with than most of my comrades. This was not merely because my accent would shift in a way that made my voice easier to understand, but also because whenever I found myself in conversation with someone from elsewhere, all of the colloquialisms endemic to the American idiom simply dropped out of my vocabulary. This, too, was an entirely inadvertent and unconscious move. For I had no overt awareness of which terms and phrases were idiomatic, and which were more proper to English as a whole. I had all but failed my high school English classes, utterly unable to fathom the byzantine grammatical rules for the proper usage of this language. Of course, I had no problem speaking the language, and in fact speaking it quite well; I inhabited the grammar easily enough, I just couldn’t make sense of it from the outside. So it was strange to discover that, without ever having paid attention to which turns of phrase were endemic to the local vernacular (having simply imbibed all these phrases at the same time as the rest of the English language, while growing up in suburban New York), my body nonetheless seemed to know, instinctively, how to make that distinction, and it spontaneously avoided such idiomatic phrases whenever it was conversing with someone from another land. I noticed this involuntary habit only by contrast, when I heard other friends talking to those same foreigners and was startled by the abundance of slang phrases and local colloquialisms that were unwittingly laced through their speaking, making it impossible for the exasperated visitor to follow much of what they were saying. But how could I so easily taste which turns of phrase were of local vintage?

I did not know. I knew only that I had a remarkable knack for making myself understood, and for understanding others, and this began to ease my dismay at the mimetic or copycat nature of my own discourse. My earlier difficulty learning foreign languages from textbooks had convinced me that I should forgo studying languages; I was now surprised by the ease with which I would pick up other tongues when traveling abroad and performing on the streets. Once I could hear the lingo all around me—could see the stance in which native speakers held themselves as they spoke, the way their faces folded when forming certain words—then I was able to feel my own way into the language as well.

Still, this physiologic sensitivity to others (this excessive somatic empathy) often left me confused when hanging out with clusters of people. Large groups were completely discombobulating: the divergent emotions of others picked up inwardly by my body were hard to navigate, and could precipitate an escalating sense of chaos within my organism. For this reason I studiously avoided parties—except those where there was an especially good dance groove, where the loudspeakers pulsed with polyrhythmic music that made me move. As long as I could lose myself in the rhythms, then the discordant sensations would dissipate within that wider reverberation. The other partygoers, with all their masked or bristling feelings, their sadnesses and their highs, would dissolve into the wallpaper as I was caught by this demonic oscillation rolling up through my legs and fountaining out through my arms and fingers. Dance was the improvisational ecstasy that dissolved the crossfire of other people’s emotions.

I discovered the real value of my hypersensitive nervous system, however, only when I ventured beyond the confines of civilization, and began lingering in traditional indigenous communities. There, for the first time, I found myself surrounded by folks who assumed that every part of the land was alive. The feelings that played through these persons seemed less confined or bottled up within them, and more a part of the general circulation between cedar trees, humans, woodpeckers, mountains, and lizards, between cloudbursts and streams studded with trout. My porous nature seemed much less of a problem here. That permeability had always meant that I was too easily affected by other persons—by other nervous systems shaped so much like my own. Yet such porosity was just right, I now realized, for engaging nervous systems very different from my own. It was just right for entering into felt relation with other, non-human forms of sentience.

I simply had not noticed this gift back where I grew up, since other animals and plants were not acknowledged there as sentient beings capable of creative expression. But in traditional and tribal communities I found myself among people who practiced paying attention to the polyvalent speech of a landscape assumed to be quivering with intelligence, and who regularly turned to the sensitives among them to interpret the land’s gestures. Here, such empaths were valued for their ability to dialogue with the leafing earth and its animal powers. The fact that a person was too impressionable to be at ease in the fuss and tumult of the human throng was a sure sign that she should make her home on the periphery of the village, working as an intermediary between the human settlement and the wider community of animate beings. Most of the medicine persons whom I met were precisely such individuals, whose sensitive nature empowered them to tend the boundary between the human collective and the local earth. By communicating (through their propitiations and their chants, through their dances and ecstatic trances) with plants, with other animals, and with the visible and invisible elements, the medicine persons’ craft ensured that the boundary between the human and the more-than-human worlds stayed, itself, permeable—that that boundary never hardened into a barrier, but remained a porous membrane across which nourishment flowed steadily in both directions.



Sonam was just such a person, keenly empathic, given to living at a distance from other two-leggeds so he could more directly hear, and engage in, the layered conversations occurring between the milky ice-melt rivers and the rhododendron forests and the monsoon clouds creeping slowly up the valleys like glaciers in reverse. He struck me sometimes not as a person but as a walking piece of the mountainside, acutely sensitive to the grasses sprouting from his loamy surface, and to the animals, large and small, that moved among them, but also as implacable as the rock that underlay that shallow soil, and as inscrutable to me as the weather. Sonam had an especially close rapport with certain beings of the neighborhood, including a cool wind that poured down the slope behind the house shortly before each dusk; it issued from a single small pass in the high ridges, and Sonam would climb up there to immerse himself in that rushing intelligence. There were other familiars to whom he introduced me, and certainly many that he never shared. But Sonam was an especially close ally, and apprentice, of Raven. In this he was similar to his maternal grandfather—that deceptively immobile old man whom I’d watched endlessly flicking prayer beads in the corner of the first Sherpa household I’d slept in.

In the days after the thought-shattering transformation I reported at the close of the last chapter, when I saw Sonam turn into a raven and back again, I was able to piece together some elements of how, I suspected, that remarkable feat was accomplished. For only after that event did I become aware of how thoroughly Sonam gave himself to the patient observation of those black-feathered creatures, gazing silently at a group of ravens perched and arguing in a cluster of low trees, or at a single dark bird standing on a near rock. Before the transformation, I had sometimes seen him from behind when he was sitting facing the gorge, cross-legged and immobile on the ground as his head rolled slowly from side to side between his shoulders. I had assumed this was some kind of yogic practice for relaxing the neck and spine. Now I recognized that the slow swiveling of his head was actually accompanying the flight of a raven as it spiraled, riding a warm updraft along the cliffs to the upper slopes. Sonam turned his whole head rather than his eyes, his focus fixed on the bird’s body as it banked and turned.

I discovered that he could sometimes call a soaring bird out of the sky, uttering a croaked cry with such precision that the raven would break its trajectory with a tumble and swerve onto the roof of the house.

It was not just the loud squawks that Sonam had perfected, but a whole lingo of conversational croaks and gutturals that I happened to have heard him deploy only once, when he thought I was not around, in interaction with three birds perched in the branches of a dead tree. The ravens had alighted in the snag while I was resting on the dirt with my back against a boulder, and soon began gabbing among themselves, clicking and aowawing and yawking, generating an impressive array of fairly soft, garrulous sounds I’d never really noticed before, and after a while another raven seemed to join the conversation from somewhere on the ground behind me. I listened for a time, and then peered around the rock: it was Sonam himself standing there, talking with the birds. As soon as he saw me he stopped. Now he was just listening to them. I bowed silently and walked away, wondering if he had merely been copying them or whether—although I could not quite bring myself to believe it—he was actually exchanging specific meanings with those birds, and they with him.

What was clear was that he had learned to precisely shape his throat and tongue in order to utter sounds that seemed, at least to me, perfectly indistinguishable from those of a raven. I recalled that just before I witnessed his avian metamorphosis, I had heard a raven’s loud caw coming from around the bend in the trail. It was only then, as I rounded that bend, that I caught sight of the raven, which cawed at me twice before, well, transforming into Sonam. And so I reasoned that Sonam had waited for a certain moment along the footpath (a trail whose twists and turns he knew intimately) when he would be out of my view for a long stretch. After positioning himself, he had used the loud croak of a raven to set up an expectation in my organism—an anticipation in my eyes—that as I rounded the bend I would encounter a raven.

Of course, there was much more involved. As a student of ravens, Sonam, I’m quite sure, had long practiced holding himself in the various postures of that bird, had practiced Raven’s ways of walking, of moving its head, of spreading feathered limbs. Learning to dance another animal is central to the craft of shamanic traditions throughout the world. To move as another is simply the most visceral approach to feel one’s way into the body of that creature, and so to taste the flavor of its experience, entering into the felt intelligence of the other. I have witnessed a young medicine person in the American Southwest summon the spirit of a deer by dancing that animal, have watched a Kwakiutl magician shuffle and dip his way into the power of a black bear, have seen a native healer dream her body into the riverdance of a spawning salmon, and a Mayan shaman contort himself into the rapid, vibratory flight of a dragonfly. In every case, a subtle change came upon the dancer as she gave herself over to the animal and so let herself be possessed, raising goose bumps along my skin as I watched. The carefully articulated movements, and the stylized but eerily precise renderings of the other’s behavior, were clearly the fruit of long, patient observation of the animal other, steadily inviting its alien gestures into one’s muscles. The dancer feels her way into the subjective experience of the other by mimicking its patterned movements, and so invoking it, coaxing it close, drawing it into her flesh with the subtlest motion of a shoulder, or a hip, or a blinking eye.

A key element in such kinetic invocations of another animal is the magician’s ability to dream himself into the wild physicality of that Other, allowing his senses to heighten and intensify as he becomes possessed by the carnal intelligence of the creature. The shaman himself must be convinced of his transformation if we who watch are to have a chance of experiencing the animal’s arrival. There is no room for fakery or mere illusion here; if the magician does not feel himself undergo a full metamorphosis into the other, then we who watch will never be convinced of the change. Yet this is not to say that there are not specific techniques employed to loosen our senses, particular perceptual methods used to enhance the invocation of the animal. Merely calling to the creature in one’s imagination will never suffice; one must summon it bodily, entering mimetically into the shape and rhythm of the other being if the animal spirit is to feel the call. One must unbind the human arrangement of one’s senses, and those of any humans watching, if the animal is to feel safe enough to arrive in our midst.

And so I was sure, now, that Sonam had timed his transformation along the trail so that it took place close to dusk, a moment when our eyes are less certain and more apt to confuse things. Further, he knew precisely at what distance he’d have to situate himself in order to appear, from that bend in the path, like a much closer figure about fifteen inches in height. He may well have chosen in advance the very boulder on which he’d stand, a rock whose plain surface, seen when rounding the bend, would allow it to appear as a much nearer and much smaller rock than it was, with not a man but a raven perched upon it. Sonam had waited till he was well out of my sight around that turn in the trail, had climbed onto that boulder and faced the path, bending his knees sharply so only the lower legs were evident. He had leaned his torso steeply forward while extending his arms straight back alongside that torso, his wrists and straight-fingered hands jutting past his rump like folded wingtips, entering the feathered mind of the raven by dancing that long-beaked form. He squawked very loudly as he heard me approach the bend, and then again LOUD, forcing the expectation in my organism that I was about to meet a raven at close quarters.

As I rounded the bend he simply kept up his dance, hopping on both legs together as he turned, swiveling his head in jerking movements, blinking his eyes like shutters and opening his beak to squawk one last time before hopping to the ground. During that descent to the ground Sonam lifted his arms and came out of the trance, or rather I started to slip out of the trance, for the way in which the raven dropped seemed incongruous. As my brain worked to make sense of what it saw, it first concluded that the raven was somehow much LARGER than a normal bird. This sudden growth in perceived size made it seem that the bird was swooping rapidly toward me (for such is often the case when a thing appears to grow rapidly larger), and so my hands flew up in front of my face. But then as it landed on the ground the sound was all wrong, somehow, and what had been a much-too-large bird resolved into a much-too-small person, until I realized that it was Sonam standing there, though much farther down the trail than the bird had been.

It had taken some time for my senses to recalibrate themselves. The shock of the encounter, my first wholly conscious witnessing of a full-bodied metamorphosis, was extreme. Certainly the transformation was made possible by Sonam’s rapport with the ravens. But it was also enabled by a strange contortion of spatial depth—by a temporary reversal of near and far along a precipitous trail in the mountains. The metamorphosis was activated by a momentary slackening of the grip that my eyes and ears commonly have upon the space around me. A momentary derangement of my senses, provoked by the precisely timed utterances and antic contortions of Sonam’s body.

And so not merely a confounding of my sensory organization, but an alteration of Sonam’s as well. In order to take on the attributes of Raven, in order to feel the hollowing out of his bones and the feathers sprouting from his flesh, Sonam had necessarily to alter his own organization. Only thus would he have been able to discover the flight muscles within his breast, and the precise posture for his head and neck. I believe it was his thorough immersion in the experience that so completely compelled my own participation in the metamorphosis.



Sonam and I gently but carefully avoided speaking directly of the event. It had happened; this I knew, and he knew that I knew. The transformation on the high trail had clearly been a demonstration of sorts, but it was also a lure, a suggestion of skills to be attained, a visual conundrum that served to clear my mind of distractions and train my attention on the simple tasks that Sonam now set for me.

These tasks mostly took the form of perceptual exercises that Sonam instructed me to practice in between various daily chores. The most consistent of these involved sitting or squatting on the ground while steadily focusing my eyes upon an arbitrary spot on the near surface of one of the huge rocks in front of his house, and doing so for long stretches without wavering, and preferably without blinking. This was easy enough for a few minutes, but then increasingly difficult; my eyes would begin itching, and fill with tears, and so I’d have to blink if I wanted to see anything at all. After a single blink I’d keep them focused there, at that spot composed of flecks of gray and black and tan and silver, gazing and gazing, until the surrounding surface of the stone appeared to melt and started to writhe, while the still point where I was focused maintained its circular quietude, a calm pond in the midst of what now seemed a seething nest of serpents. A series of blinks, or a minute shift of focus, would suffice to return the rock to its solid composure. I kept gazing. Sometimes the rest of the surface would stay stable, but the very patch where I was focused would begin to give way, dissolving backward, it seemed, into the interior of the boulder, and my focus would lose itself in that molten thickness.

Sonam seemed aware of the different instabilities that the exercise would bring on; after a while he began to enhance these odd effects by instructing me to place my focus not on the surface of the boulder but inside the rock, at a point about a foot behind the spot I’d been staring at. This was far more challenging than the earlier task. (Such exertions, however, were not entirely unknown to me. The challenges posed by Sonam were at first analogous to visual experiments I’d undertaken some years earlier, in the course of developing various sleight-of-hand effects. Yet his exercises quickly pushed my sensing organism far beyond the limits of my earlier practice.) Several afternoons later, Sonam instructed me to fix my gaze at a point in the air midway between myself and the boulder—a spot he indicated first with his forefinger, so I could train my eyes upon his fingernail before he withdrew his hand, leaving me to maintain that focus, as best I could, for an hour or more. This was plainly impossible. Like the previous exercise, focusing inside the rock, it amounted to letting two flat images of the rock’s mottled surface float off there in the near distance, like immaterial phantasms, while steadily resisting the impulse to resolve them into a single solid surface. It was a nerve-racking challenge, endlessly frustrating and headache-inducing. Nonetheless, I diligently brought my awareness back, and back again, to a point in the unseen air between me and that boulder (often imagining that a tiny insect was hovering there), and within three or four days I had developed a knack for keeping my focus suspended there, at least for a few minutes at a time.

The next directive was especially confounding. Sonam asked me to gather both of my listening ears into that small point in the air where my eyes were focused. What?!? I could not ascertain what he was asking until he acted it out with his hands: just as our two eyes regularly come together in a single focus, so also our two ears often converged upon a single point of sound out in the world—a yak bell ringing, a child crying. Sonam was simply asking me to concentrate my listening upon the very location where my two eyes were already focused. (I have since practiced this in crowded restaurants in the West, trying to pick out and listen in on a particular conversation within the general clamor of voices. To my surprise, I discovered that this was indeed much easier if I focused my eyes upon the specific couple whose precise words I wanted to hear. I did not need to see their lips, only to fix my gaze, and hence my awareness, upon their table.) This was no mean feat, given that there was no sound whatsoever coming from that point in the air between my face and the boulder—but once again I kept at it, trying to hone my concentration, letting ambient sounds fade into the background as I tuned the focus of my listening ears, always hoping that I might actually hear something at that spot if I listened intently enough. But I never did hear anything.

After fifteen days of such exercises, my muscles stiff from the long periods of immobility, Sonam took me hiking in the late afternoon up the slopes behind his home, switchbacking this way and that as the house slowly shrunk below us. After a while the grade became too steep for our legs alone; I had to use my hands as we climbed up between the jagged facets, finally reaching a small piece of level terrain—a narrow shelf beneath high cliffs. Through a break in those cliffs I could see the uppermost part of a single, resplendent peak to the northeast, its snowfields still agleam in the rays now long gone from the valley below us. We sat and waited in the crystal silence. Soon a breeze, quiet and cold, began pouring through that cleft in the rocks, and my friend began speaking a prayer to the moving air. The breeze became stronger. Sonam had me stand and face into it, as with his cupped hands he poured the gusts over my face, and then cupped them over my chest and stomach and legs. He had me turn, then, and directed the wind against the back of my head, onto my shoulders and my arms and the back of my legs, praying aloud the whole time. I understood nothing of what he said, and had no need to.

We made our way down slowly, with Sonam showing me where to place my feet. After a time, the wind fell silent and stopped. We reached the house as the dark itself settled around us.

On the next day, Sonam changed the exercises. I was no longer to gaze into boulders, but to train my vision—gently but unwaveringly—upon ravens. What if there were none around? No matter: I was to wait for them, to stay attentive to them, to be ready. While a few individuals seemed to hang out often enough near Sonam and Jangmu’s home, there was a particular place that Sonam showed me, less than a mile along the slope to the southeast, and just a short way above the main footpath, where the valley’s ravens liked to stop and linger. It was at the edge of a small patch of forest with assorted large rocks strewn about nearby, affording me several good sitting places, as the complexly bent and spreading branches of the low trees afforded perching for the ravens.

As before, it was a matter of the precise confluence of my eyes. Sonam asked me to try to focus upon a point just beneath the head of a raven, between the shoulders of the bird (he showed me on his own body) or, if the bird was facing me, at the top of its breast. But the ravens there, I found, rarely perched very long in a single spot before flapping to another. Still, the instruction was to keep bringing my attention back to that spot on each bird’s body, until I found myself gazing at an individual less nervous or ready to move, a raven that was more relaxed in the moment of our meeting. When such an opportunity arose, I was to sink my focus as best I could into the body of the raven, to a point midway between the top of its breast and its shoulders (near the base of the bird’s wishbone) and hold it there.

Sometimes there were no ravens present; more commonly, there were several haunting that forest edge, but at a distance of twelve or even twenty feet from where I sat. So this sinking of my focus into the body of a bird was a mostly imaginative act; the ravens were at first too far away for me to register or physically feel such a slight shift in the focus of my eyes. But Sonam was after something specific: he wanted me to feel the experience of meeting up with myself inside the bird. To feel the two sides of myself joining up with each other over there, in the torso of the raven. Although he spoke in simpler terms (constrained in part by my modest vocabulary), it seemed that Sonam was inviting me to notice the left and the right sides of my sensorium meeting up with one another over there, outside of myself, at that location in space where the separate gaze of my left eye and that of my right eye converged into a single focus.

The more I practiced this unorthodox meditation, the more I was able to sense what Sonam was after. If, while I was gazing one of the ravens, another swooped down and alighted somewhere between me and the bird I was watching, that interloper would hardly be noticed by me, or would be felt only as a vague ghost hovering between the solidity of my person and the solidity of the raven upon whom I was focused. It was as though I were no longer entirely located over here, where my body was sitting, for some piece of me had also gathered itself over there, beneath the purple sheen in the night-black feathers of the bird.

There was one male, however, who displayed a greater audacity than the others, swerving over to ponder me from close by (whether looking down from a near branch or peering sideways from the ground or—after a few days—from a perch on the same rock as I, although always just beyond the reach of my extended limbs). I at first thought there were several such individuals winging close to feed their curiosity, but soon realized that it was always the same fellow. If he was in the trees when I arrived in late morning, he’d soon swoop out of the leaves to look me over at close range. If he was out and about, then sometime later he’d likely drop in from elsewhere and bank onto a neighboring rock, squawking a few times, his clawed feet turning first one way and then the other to scrutinize me from each eye in turn. If I tried to utter a raven-like croak he’d answer me back straightaway, as if correcting my diction, yet he was still more garrulous when I spoke to him in Sherpa or even English. I got to thinking about how, in many species, there are certain individuals who stand out among the others of their kind for their curiosity and cleverness.

Many months earlier, in a village near a wild forest preserve on the south coast of Java, I’d been warned by the local fishermen that there was an unusually bold individual among the bands of monkeys that roam the forest canopy, a particular monkey much more daring and skillful than the others, especially at stealing things from humans. Because I wear glasses, I was urged by the fishermen not to enter that forest, for that sly monkey was known to silently accompany people in the branches far overhead, waiting for an opportune moment to swing low and snatch the glasses from their face. The villagers had had to organize several search parties for missing visitors who turned out simply to have been wandering half blind for several days, unable to find their way out of the woods.

Similarly, when I lived in the northern Rockies there was an old bull elk who was legendary among the local hunters. Larger than the other males thereabouts, he had once had the biggest rack of any bull in those mountains, although in recent years (folks said) his antlers were smaller. He was glimpsed often, yet no one had ever succeeded in planting a bullet anywhere on his person. His ability to elude hunters was uncanny, enabling him to melt away and vanish even as the hunter registered the glimpse. In earlier years the locals had taken the large bull’s readiness to show himself as a challenge, with each hunter eager to finally shoot him and be able to boast about the fact. But after so many years, the old one’s continued defiance of hunters had made him not only a legend but a revered spirit among the hunters and everyone else in the region. Hiking one October evening with a friend who’d grown up in that area—and hearing now and then the most beautiful of all earth-born sounds, which is the autumn bugling of elk—there abruptly sounded from far off the most heart-wrenchingly lovely of any call I’d ever heard, a bugling that was the most full-throated and deep and at the same time the most ethereal, ascending slowly upward through a sequence of clear overtones before ending in a series of gutteral grunts. I looked wide-eyed at my friend. It was the unmistakable call, he said, of that great elder, the phantom.

In these cases, and I could mention many others, the uniqueness of the individuals seems to reside not just in their intelligence but in their skill at interacting with other species. Since we notice their uncommon savvy in their dealings with us, we might assume that these animals display such chutzpah only toward humans. But this seems unlikely. That old elk doubtless relies on his remarkable wiles in relation to other predators as well, and (I can’t help but suspect) in his relation to every aspect of those wooded slopes, to unexpected changes in the seasonal cycle, or the sudden arrival of roads, and clear-cuts, in a favorite part of the mountains.

The observation by indigenous peoples that there exist particular individuals—among other animals as among our own two-legged kind—who are in a strangely different league from their peers has led some native traditions to posit that there exists an entirely different species to which such individuals belong, a class of entities who are able to cross between diverse species, taking on the ways of various animals as needed—able to trade wings for antlers, or to forsake paws for scaly fins or even fingered hands. This is the class of those who are recognized, when they’re in human form, as shamans—as magicians or sorcerers. But most contemporary persons, lacking regular contact with the wild in its multiform weirdness, have forgotten that such shamans are to be found in every species, that in truth they are a kind of cross- or trans-species creature, and hence a species unto themselves.



There was an odd thing about this one corvid whose curiosity led it to settle closer to me than the others dared. Its proximity, of course, made it the best possible subject for the practice Sonam had prescribed, fixing my gaze as best I could upon the feathers just below the bird’s head and then, once it was stabilized there, sinking my focus into the center of the bird’s flesh. Well, that raven had no problem with my gazing back at it, concentrating my eyes upon its ruffed feathers. But whenever I tried to accomplish the last step in the exercise, letting my attention penetrate behind the bird’s feathered surface, it would squawk and flap away to some farther vantage, as though offended by my intrusion. When, shortly after, the same bird would swoop back to gawk at me from a near perch, it took time for the two of us to reestablish some sort of basic trust as we pondered one another. Still, whenever I tried to move my focus into its body, the raven would get distressed and fly off.

It seemed hardly possible that the bird could notice the shift in my attention, for there appeared no movement on my part, only a tiny change in the angle of my eyes, while the larger changes in my focus (accompanying the bird as it moved) seemed not to faze it at all. Nonetheless, it happened again and again whenever my gaze dropped deeper; clearly I was violating the etiquette between us, and so I was never able to complete the exercise with this particular corvid. I finally gave up and started paying more attention to the other individuals.

Sonam came by one afternoon to check on whether I was making progress with the ravens. I had told him, the day before, that I was unsure whether I was really able to move my focus into a bird’s body, but that I did have the feeling that I was doing so. So he came ’round to watch and feel for himself whether I was getting anywhere with all this. He must’ve been satisfied, for he now added a further step to the exercise. I was to bring another sense, specifically my tactile sense, into the juncture where my eyes were focused.

It took me a while to fathom what Sonam was instructing. He first indicated the sense of touch by moving his fingertips across a rock’s surface. When I concluded that he was talking about the fingers, he said that was not what he meant. He began pinching the skin of my arms and legs and face until I finally got that he was talking about the sense of touch in its entirety. He wanted me to combine feelings of touch with the visual sense, or rather to bring my tactile sense to bear, over there, where my two eyes converged into a single focus. This became clear only when Sonam offered the example of looking into the fire at his house: if he just gazes at it with his eyes, then the flames will be interesting to look at, but when he adds his tactile sensibility to the focus of his eyes, then while watching the flames he will soon—as he mimed with his body—come to feel more and more hot inside his chest. He then led me through the woods to where a small brook gurgled its way down the slope. Here, he said, if he looks at the brook with his eyes alone, then he can see all sorts of things, including the surface patterns and the pebbles on the bottom, yet he feels nothing different inside his body or along the skin of his arms. However, when he brings the sense of touch into the focus of his eyes, then (as he again acted out for me) he begins to feel the fluidity of the water moving within him; it cools his insides and eases any tightness within his muscles.

From these demonstrations I gleaned that for Sonam, the tactile sense comprised not just the surface sensations of his skin but also all the visceral sensations within his flesh. I tried to feel something of what he was talking about while gazing into the cascading brook, without success. No matter. It takes much practice, he said, and will be easier if I practice with the ravens, with whom I was already getting somewhere.

So: while watching the corvids I was to marshal my tactile sensitivity and join it, somehow, to the focus of my eyes. A tall order. But I poured myself into the effort … with negligible results. It was rare enough that I could settle my gaze on a bird whose stance was quiet and stable. But then whenever I tried to bring my tactile awareness into that focus, the here-ness of my various body sensations would break my concentrated attention over there, unbuckling my eyes from their grip upon the bird, and so it would take me a while to find that focus again.

You might think that pondering these dark birds day after day would be boring. But this was hardly the case; ravens are outlandishly interesting creatures, graceful and awkward at the same time, cantankerous, keenly responsive to one another and to events in their vicinity. They are stunningly skillful fliers, as compelling on the wing as any raptor, yet apt to break into crazy looping stunts, sometimes in tandem with one another. The ravens in that valley had a wide range of cries, some grating and some bell-like and smooth. By lending them my attention I discovered as charismatic a creature as can be found carousing anywhere on earth.

After several days of exasperated effort spent on the baffling task set for me, the fruition arrived unexpectedly, when I’d given up for the afternoon and was making my way back toward the hut. A couple hundred yards along the trail I came upon a raven crossing the dirt to peck at the corpse of a small rodent. As the bird leaned forward, I felt something inside me tip forward as well, and lost my balance for a moment. I regained my equilibrium as the bird kept pecking at the carcass, but now couldn’t help noticing a sensation in my neck every time the raven reached its beak toward the ground. After a few tries, the bird succeeded in loosening a large morsel from the remains, and swooped up onto a shelf of rock with the gore in its beak; as it did so I felt a sudden weightlessness in my chest, which abated as the raven settled onto the ledge. Had I really felt that? Yes!!! I knew immediately that this was what Sonam had been nudging me toward. The sensations were subtle, but unmistakable. As if the bird outside me had somehow awakened an analogue of itself inside my own muscles. Or, rather, as if the raven were not only pulling apart that bit of blood and meat out there on the rock ledge, but was also doing so in here, within my own organism.



In truth, I was not sure whether I had induced, by my exertions, a new set of impressions within me, or whether I’d simply become awake to a range of visceral sensations that had already been present below the threshold of my consciousness. For I soon noticed such inward sensations accompanying most of my outer, visual experiences—whether I was watching trees flexing under the press of a strong wind or a boy bent low beneath a load of wood as he climbed barefoot up the trail, or water buffalo moving through the terraced fields, goaded along by a little girl with a branch twice as long as her own body. In every case, their outward movements coincided with faint sensations within me—dimly felt tugs, torsions, and twists within my sensorium echoing the visible tensions and loosenings in the bodies around me. A field of wildflowers, too, could be inwardly felt if they were moving in the breeze, and now even the small white cloud huddled atop a single peak across the valley was, whenever I glanced at it, a kind of coolness on the back of my neck. The next morning, that same cloud was blowing off to the eastern side of that peak, except that it never dissipated, billowing there all afternoon like a flag—the chill no longer centered on the back of my neck but rippling across my left shoulder.

Was this, then, the truth of perception—the body subtly blending itself with every phenomenon that it perceives? During those days, it began to seem as though my body was not, properly speaking, mine, but rather a piece of the sensuous world—and seeing was a steady trading of myself here with the things seen there, so that this sensitive flesh became a kind of distributed thing, and the visible terrain a field of feeling. And yet, as I noted—scribbling—in my journal, there was still distance and depth. The commingling of myself with things did not dissolve the distance between us, and so the sentience at large was hardly a homogeneous unity or bland “oneness,” but was articulated in various nodes and knots and flows that shifted as I moved within the broad landscape: that round rock overhanging the cliff’s edge feels like the right knee of the valley, as that jostling bunch of trees across the river far below seems an agitation within the groin of the world, and the ribbon of water way down there is now, yes, a thread of icy clarity winding up my spine.

Perception alters, and with it the earth. The magician’s body is a kind of cauldron brewing potions that alter their powers according to the precise blend of senses involved; he offers these in turn to his apprentice, whose creaturely body slowly awakens, loosening itself from societal, fear-induced constraints.

It was through Sonam’s tutoring that I came to recognize the astonishing malleability of my animal senses. During those weeks in his valley I discovered these simple truths about perception: that neither the eyes, nor the ears, nor the skin, tongue, or nostrils ever really operate on their own; that each sense is steadily informed by other senses; that as we explore the terrain around us, our separate senses flow together in ever-shifting ways.



Neuroscientists give the name “synaesthesia” to the blending or coalescence of different senses. Synaesthetic experience is often studied as a confusion of the nervous system, and has commonly been viewed as a kind of pathology. Synaesthetes—that is, persons beset by this supposed affliction—are liable to hear the sound of certain colors, or taste the flavor of certain sounds. Our civilization prizes analytic precision, breaking things down into their component parts; it becomes frightened when things refuse to stay separate, when a person’s senses flow together, so that her entire body begins to function as an interrelated organ of perception, as a single, complexly gifted sentience.

As a conjuror I had long been fascinated by the mutable character of perception. Back in college I had even written about the way the practice of sleight-of-hand purposely confounds the conventional segregation of the senses, making use of a synaesthetic propensity much more prevalent than science assumes. In the mountains of Nepal, however, I came to recognize that synaesthetic experience is not just commonplace; it is the very structure of perception. In our encounters with the world, our senses steadily intercommunicate and meld. Only by conjoining different sensory modalities can our organism garner insights into the specific otherness that confronts us at any moment.

Suppose that you are out strolling near your home, and a neighbor’s dog comes bounding up, eager to be scratched under his collar and to chase a stick that he hopes you will toss. In order to do so, you must wrestle the stick from his slobbering mouth, a matter that can be accomplished only with a great amount of tugging to one side and yanking to the other, with the mutt yanking back, growling in the back of his throat while keeping his teeth locked upon the wood. Soon he will probably let you have the stick, but for now the gusto of grappling with you is irresistible, and the hound is putting up a good fight.

At such a moment, you do not have distinct experiences of a visible dog, an auditory dog, and a tactile, furry, saliva-dripping dog. On the contrary, the dog is precisely the place where those divergent senses link up and dissolve into one another, merging as well with the dusky odor ghosting around him like a cloud. Perception is this very commingling of different senses in the beings we perceive.

To simplify matters for a moment, let’s consider only the sense of sight. Even here, within a single sense, we have not one but two eyes—two organs, each with its own angle of vision. Yet we don’t commonly experience our left eye’s perspective on, say, a clump of moss as distinct from our right eye’s perspective on that moss. No, rather, that clump draws the two gazes together; the separate perspectives of our two eyes converge and merge in that emerald softness, and by virtue of their collaboration we glean a sense of the thickness and depth of the moss. Hence, the simplest act of seeing is already a kind of synaesthesia, folding two gazes (from two discrete eyes) into a single vision.

Now, just as a phenomenon seen by only one eye lacks apparent depth, so an object that impinges upon only a single sense—provoking neither the participation nor even the imagination of the other senses—remains a vague and insubstantial presence for us. It will gain in substance and reality to the degree that it tempts the involvement of one or several of our other senses. The faint, high-pitched hum of a mosquito near our ears may be sufficient to set our arms swatting at the air, yet this is because the sound already provokes a tactile association that distresses us. If we manage to catch a glimpse of that whirring sprite as it weaves through the space around us, then the mosquito will acquire a more vivid and precise reality, and if it succeeds in drawing a bit of blood from our ankle or buttock, then the tangible sting will combine with that sound and that blurred motion, yielding a still stronger sense of this tiny being as a keen and willful adversary—as another shape of intentful life.

Strolling through Manhattan in the winter, listening to Marvin Gaye on my MP3 player, I stop to watch a graceful figure skater cutting sinuous patterns at the outdoor rink. With my headphones on, the skater seems a pretty piece of the scenery, nice to notice but basically just part of the view. When I slip off the headphones, however, the audible scrape of her blades fuses perfectly with the visible spray of fine powder as she swerves and whirls, and so I’m tugged into visceral relation with the skater. The conjunction of my listening ears with my gazing eyes induces a subtle collaboration of my body with hers. So when the tip of one blade catches unexpectedly on the ice and she teeters, her limbs akimbo, before her shoulder slams down against that rock-hard surface, I feel the abrupt disequilibrium and then cringe as the ice seems to collide with my own bony shoulder, sending waves of excruciating sensation radiating across my torso before they subside into the sight of the skater climbing to her feet.

The empathic propensity of our body is in large part a consequence of the differentiation and divergence of our several senses. For it’s only by turning our bodily attention toward another that we experience the convergence and reassembly of our separate senses into a dynamic unity. Only by entering into relation with others do we effect our own integration and coherence. Such others might be people, or they might be wetlands, or works of art, or snakes slithering through the stubbled grass. Each thing, attentively pondered, gathers our senses together in a unique way. This juncture, this conjoining of divergent senses over there, in the other, leads us to experience that other as a center of experience in its own right, and hence as another subject, another source of powers.

Incomplete on its own, the body is precisely our capacity for metamorphosis. Each being that we perceive enacts a subtle integration within us, even as it alters our prior organization. The sensing body is like an open circuit that completes itself only in things, in others, in the surrounding earth.



The bird walks forward, swaying from side to side with each step, then stops, cocking its thickly feathered head to watch another raven flapping by. It tilts its head the other way, caught by the rasping sound as Jangmu begins grinding chili peppers between two stones, then turns its whole body to peer, it seems, at me. I am gazing intently, not at those dark eyes but at that point just beneath the ruffled neck feathers. The raven knows I am watching, and perhaps can even feel the grip of my gaze within its chest. Soon, however, its neck feathers smooth back down and I sense it relax. It can hardly be very agitated, for it has not ventured beyond this small patch of ground since alighting here over half an hour ago.

Sonam had pointed out this bird to me when it swerved above the house. “It will happen today,” he said.

We had just carried a long piece of deadwood from the main path down to the stone house, to be carved into a thin bench. “What will happen?” I asked.

“That is the one you must watch this morning,” he said. “Wait until he finds a spot on the ground. Don’t sit too close.” He gave me one or two other instructions while the raven made a wide circle above the boulders. Then the bird, with its wing feathers splayed, banked into a landing on the bare ground close to the edge of the gorge.

I wandered over quietly, slipping past the clustered boulders and crouching down about six yards from the bird, facing it, with the edge of the canyon off to my right. My right leg was folded beneath me, my right buttock pressed into its heel, while my left knee was upright before me with my left forearm resting crosswise upon it. I keenly remember this asymmetrical posture, for it has become, since that day, my preferred position for grounding myself and drawing clarity to meet the contortions of the world.

Sonam had warned me not to look directly at the bird’s eyes, but to sink my visual focus into that place within its breast, and to hold it there. I had been doing this for a long time without altering my position, my eyes fixed steadily upon the raven as it walked and as it rested, peering this way and that. Now it leaned to peck at the dirt—seeds, I thought at first, although when it straightened up I saw that a large beetle was in the beak, which quickly opened and snapped shut around it.

“You can taste what he is tasting?”

Sonam’s voice was soft beside me; he’d come up without my noticing. He spoke again: “You can taste that bug as he swallows it?”

“No, I can’t,” I said.

“Yes, you can,” he replied. “Try.”

There was a gritty bitterness to the saliva in the back of my mouth as I shifted my attention there. I tried to sense what the raven might be tasting, letting my eyes close a bit as I did so.

“No! Keep your eyes open!” whispered Sonam. “Let them meet inside the bird. Hold them there.”

“Okay, yes.”

Sonam was now on both his knees beside me, his torso leaning forward, staring—like me—at the night-black creature.

“Now bring your touching to where your eyes meet.”

“Like before,” I whispered.

“Yes. Move all your feelings into the bird.”

Once again, I tried to marshal my tactile and visceral sensations into that place, over there, where my eyes were focused. This was tougher now, for I was aware of Sonam next to me and felt very self-conscious. But then I noticed Sonam’s hand on my left shoulder, his fingers pressing into my flesh.

“Move into the bird,” he said, and I heard his voice as if at a distance. “Keep your eyes open. Eyes open. Watch.”

The bird is now hopping, not walking, toward the edge of the gorge, and I feel each hop as a slight jolt. Its shoulders expand as wings spread and lift, and then with a lunge we are aloft … The rim passes under us and the ground falls away into a terrifying emptiness, as the whole canyon opens beneath us. The cliffs just below are glinting silver and pink in the sunlight; they descend in ledges and shelves that expand as we swerve toward them and then tilt away from us into the sky. The horizon angles up sharply and a series of vertical crevasses open and close like pages of a book as we glide past, and then the immensity of the canyon yawns around us with the rush of the rapids far below. A vertigo rises from my belly into my throat and I’m falling, I’m Falling, Gonna Die For Sure, but suddenly hear this voice—“Eyes Open!”—and feel Sonam’s fingers pressing harder into my left shoulder, and I stretch open my eyes to see more. Now we’re following the blue ribbon of water as it gets bigger and wider and louder, its many voices swelling as a freshness fills the whooshing air. I’m gulping for breath as I watch water charging over rocks and spilling around boulders, splitting and rejoining itself over and again, but now we’re swooping faster than the river’s flow; the green of a few leaves and then whole trees heaving and sighing just beneath us as we turn (can this be that thicket of rhododendron trees way downriver?) and it feels like we’re gonna land here yes oh please yes please please yes but we tilt away and now two other black birds are flapping up outa those trees, calling back and forth. Then cliffs are slanting past and the river’s falling away, and then the cliffs close by again, then the river, then the cliffs, then that abyss, and I finally realize we’re spiraling up the side of the canyon, riding one of the warm updrafts like I’ve watched ravens do so many times. Soon we’re above the main gorge, rowing up through air’s thickness into a small valley without trees, then tilting out of the valley, flapping hard to rise above a ridge, the air humming around us as we stroke toward the shadowed face of a pyramid that grows rapidly larger and larger, ice fields in its furrows and dark deltas of tumbled rock as this black wall fills our sight, its upmost angles blurred by mist, until I recognize by some detail the same banner of cloud that I look at every day from far across the canyon, streaming off the top of this peak. We’re banking in a wide arc toward the right, and then the vision that opens beneath us shudders through the breast and backbone: glacier-hung mountains upon mountains spreading off into the white distance. A gleaming, glistening world without people …

And I’m balancing, floating, utterly at ease in the blue air. As though we’re not moving but held, gentle and fast, in the cupped hands of the sky. Stillness. Through a tangle of terrors I catch a first sense of the sheer joy that is flight. Falling, yet perfectly safe. Floating. Floating at the heart of the feathered thickness that is space. Aloft at the center of the world mandala, turning it beneath us, the whole planet rolling this way or that at the whim of our muscles.

The cliffs at the far side of the gorge now rising to meet us as we dive. Among the rocks scattered near the chasm’s edge there’s a rectangular boulder we’re falling toward. A wisp of smoke is rising from that boulder, evident only as we bank above it. The thought comes that that rock is maybe a house. And there, off past the other rocks toward the edge of the precipice is an odd creature—no, two creatures, two clothed people crouched together on the ground. Their faces are upturned, staring steadily at us even as we glide downward, their heads turning together as they track us perfectly with their gaze. The eyes of one are especially compelling, achingly so, staring straight toward, straight up into …

me.





THE REAL IN ITS WONDER

(Language III)


We know what the animals do, what are the needs of the beaver, the bear, the salmon, and other creatures, because long ago men married them and acquired this knowledge from their animal wives. Today the priests say we lie, but we know better. The white man has been only a short time in this country and knows very little about the animals; we have lived here thousands of years and were taught long ago by the animals themselves. The white man writes everything down in a book so that it will not be forgotten; but our ancestors married animals, learned all their ways, and passed on this knowledge from one generation to another.

— A CARRIER INDIAN, FROM BRITISH COLUMBIA





For how many hours have I been stumbling through this folded terrain? Pink spires leer down at my tiny form as I walk along the edges of gullies, slipping into and out of fractaled ravines. Stratified bands of pink and gray snake along the escarpments, maintaining their respective thicknesses as they round the folds and the fissures. No real shadows in this striated cosmos—no trees to speak of, only a few shrubs dotting the landscape in those spots where scant rainwater swerves into rivulets when a rare thunderstorm bursts through the monotonous heat, cracking the skin of the earth. The French trappers called this realm les mauvaises terres à traverser, “the bad lands to cross through,” while the Oglala Sioux called it simply mako sica, “bad lands.” Yet for eleven thousand years Indians came to spend time in this place, most often to hunt the various creatures that took refuge here, and now and then to lure their enemies into these furrowed labyrinths and so to confound their wits. Arrowheads and other hunting tools are steadily eroding out of these old cliffs, along with charcoal from countless campfires. Deeper strata give up fossils of ancient mammals, fossilized turtle shells, and sea shells. The Indians, coming upon these traces from the Eocene and Oligocene epochs, rightly assumed that this land was once covered by ocean. The old oral traditions of the Sioux and the Arikara peoples show their understanding that those ancient waters, and the land around them, were once populated by large creatures that no longer existed, beings whose bones were nonetheless left in the layered rock of those parched gullies.

I’ve seen no trace of humankind, however, just a jackrabbit darting between the bushes, and what I think was a kestrel hovering against the cliffs.

I left the car by the side of the highway this morning, drawn out of the vehicle by fascination with what my eyes were seeing. I slung a strip of cloth dangling a bottle of water over my shoulder and wandered out into this impossible landscape. The longer I wandered (my legs following the directives of the riven ground), the wider the scape seemed to grow. By noon I was thoroughly, blissfully lost in the sculpted immensity of this place—a small two-legged insect making its way between the toes of giants. Each corner that I peered into seemed a world in itself, and if I ventured in to explore further, that nook would expand around me and I’d find myself enveloped within its intimate expanse, held within the hugeness of a realm composed of worlds within worlds within worlds.

How hopelessly insignificant the human is—a speck lost and blundering through the limitless depths of the macrocosm, drinking from the voluminous air, dazzled by reflected rays and drawn upright by a hundred flesh-toned cliffs and slopes.

Such encounters with the outrageous scale of the larger Body we inhabit bring a shuddering humility, yet they can also release an unexpected intuition of safety, a sense of being held and sustained by powers far larger than anything we can comprehend. A safety that comes from being merely an anonymous part of What Is, from feeling oneself as a clutch of sodden soil and hollow bones with the same wind blowing through them that gusts the high ridges. From being in intimate alliance with the bedrock. It’s the weird security of realizing that one is a part of something so damned huge.

And so I’m in the grip of this strange, skin-tingling sensation of my own insignificance as I climb the steep slope of a butte, a peninsula of sorts jutting out from a larger escarpment into the desert air. My legs negotiate the gradient by following a crevasse upward until it branches into several smaller ravines. I choose one and follow it to a still smaller tributary, these various creases affording the footholds that finally bring me up near the crest of the scarp. As my eyes rise above that crest, a white shape juts into view, close by, too perfect in its right angles and hence completely incongruous in this place. It takes me two more steps to recognize, startled, that I’m gazing at a metal sign set atop a wooden post. Below and to the right of that white rectangle there’s a larger metal cylinder, blocking much of the sign from my low vantage. I climb onto the ridge and these letters emerge from behind what I now see is a metal garbage pail:





PLEASE DEPOSIT

WASTE HERE


As soon as I see these black words on the white rectangle, the weirdest thing happens. The entire landscape deflates, like a pricked balloon (not with a pop, yet with an almost audible whoosh), shrinking abruptly down to about a fourth of the size it just had.

The castled buttes and ridges all around me abruptly forfeit their daunting height. They now seem only slightly taller than where I stand, and that deep, purgatorial valley I’ve just been stumbling through now appears not so deep after all, indeed a fairly shallow affair. I can easily discern, down over there, some individual shrubs and tumbled rocks I was exploring a while ago, but now somehow they are oddly near at hand—just a hop, skip, and a jump away. This forbidding land, whose immensity had been sending shudders through my spine, now reveals itself as an interesting but very human-scale terrain, and it’s almost impossible to believe that I’ve been wandering lost in this place for much of the day.

I toss into the garbage pail a scrap of paper scavenged while hiking, and follow the asphalt path toward whatever restroom or information booth or parking lot waits to receive me.



There is something eerie about the ability of the written word to shrink the elemental power of a place. Something bizarre about the power of printed letters, even a few painted words on a metal sign, to domesticate the bursting-at-the-seams agency of the wild. It is a uniquely efficacious magic, this alchemic ability of printed words to gather in the expansive mana or wakan of a place, concentrating it within themselves so that they now speak with the very energy that was a moment ago radiating from the ocher-pink cliffs and shimmering the edge where those ridges meet the indigo sky. The rock escarpments have now shed their stark vitality. The shadows spreading along those folded cliffs no longer exchange secrets with my muscles, for this other influence grips my attention, drawing me back to my civilized senses.

It is the influence of the verbal mind in ceaseless conversation with itself, dialoguing with its own symbols. The scattered bushes and the shadowed cliffs have no real part in this conversation. They take up their accustomed position, subdued, as the pretty but mostly passive backdrop against which my cogitations now unfold. Given the garbage pail and the paved path, I suppose the highway must be nearby, and so I’ll likely be able to hitch a ride, soon, back to wherever my car’s waiting. If I’m lucky I’ll be able to find a diner still open in some nearby town.

The afternoon’s wordless silence, and the edge of danger that had nudged my skin into such an acute and animal alertness, have now dissipated, replaced by the comforting security of a completely human-made world.



Today our relation to the enfolding earth is filtered through a dense panoply of technologies—from air conditioners that mask the heat, to electric lights that hide the night, from capsuled automobiles that hustle us hither and yon to earbuds and headsets whose self-enclosed sounds eclipse the layered silence of the land, blotting out the hum of bees and the whooshing wind whose voice swells and subsides into the belly of that silence. And then there’s the ever-expanding array of screens that we daily stare at, summoning images and information up onto their gleaming surface with a few clicks of the keys—this smooth and scintillating surface that’s so much more accommodating of our desires than the irregular ground that supports our bodies, so much more responsive to our impatient cravings than the slow reticence whereby seedlings and weeds emerge from the dark depths to become visible against the surface of the soil. Meanwhile, the “nature programming” on television offers such compelling nonstop escapades to our ready gaze—elephants amorously mating, two bull elk locking antlers with a loud clatter, a raptor carrying a hapless young squirrel aloft—that when we walk outside during a commercial we can’t help but wonder, seeing how placid things are in our backyard, just where all the action is. The eventful “nature” on the TV seems far more real, somehow, than this slow and rather boring substitute going about its business outside the window.

It is a commonplace to observe that today the perceived world is everywhere filtered and transformed by technology, altered by the countless tools that interpose themselves between our senses and the earthly sensuous. It is less common to suggest that there’s a wildness that still reigns underneath all these mediations—that our animal senses, coevolved with the animate landscape, are still tuned to the many-voiced earth. Our creaturely body, shaped in ongoing interaction with the other bodies that compose the biosphere, remains poised and thirsting for contact with otherness. Cocooned in a clutch of technologies, the nervous system that seethes within our skin still thirsts for a relatively unmediated exchange with reality in all its more-than-human multiplicity and weirdness.

Of course, there can be no complete abolishment of mediation, no pure and unadulterated access to the real. Like other social species, we two-leggeds communicate intensely among ourselves, and the various languages we’ve evolved to do so are themselves a kind of filter that mediates our experience. Still, some ways of speaking are more abstract than others, and some are more permeable to the hooved or scaly shapes that flex and slither through the sensible surroundings. Certainly civilization has many highfalutin forms of speech that hold us aloof from our animal bodies and from the material ground underfoot. And the pervasive digitized forms of discourse that today bring instant communication with persons on the far side of the planet regularly interrupt any remaining rapport between our flesh and the sensuous locale. Yet there are other, older human discourses whose sounds still carry the lilt of the local songbirds, languages whose meanings are less removed from the intimacy of antler and seed and leaf. Such languages live more on the tongue than on the page or screen. They thrive in societies that have not until recently been greatly influenced by the printed word—cultures where human meaning has not yet become wholly ensconced in a static set of visible signs.

While every human language intercedes between the human animal and the animate earth, writing greatly densifies the verbal medium, rendering it more opaque to the many non-human shapes that dwell out beyond all our words. Non-written, oral languages are far more transparent, allowing the things and beings of the world to shine through the skein of terms and to touch us more directly. Since the phrases of an oral culture are not fixed on the page, the sounding of those phrases readily alters from season to season—as the shifting pulse of the crickets may alter the rhythm of our speaking, and even the calm solidity of a boulder we lean against can influence the weight of our spoken words. In such cultures, humans converse less with their written-down signs than with the other speaking powers that stutter and swerve through the soundscape (with the syncopated chanting of toads, and the magpie whose rough soliloquy tumbles down from the upper branches). For here everything is expressive, a thunderstorm no less than a hummingbird. To the animistic, oral sensibility, a cedar tree’s hushed and whispered phrasings may be as eloquent as a spider’s fine-spun patternings, or the collective polyphony of a pack of wolves.

Such elemental, oral languages are rapidly vanishing today, along with the diverse ecosystems that once held them. While linguists estimate that around 6,000 oral languages are currently in use around the world, fully half of them are no longer being taught to children. Which is to say that 3,000 such languages are already effectively lost. Of roughly 175 native languages currently spoken in the United States, 55 are today spoken by fewer than ten people, and only twenty are still being spoken by mothers to their young children. It is hardly a coincidence that so many native languages are unraveling at the very same historical moment when innumerable local ecosystems on every continent are fragmenting and falling apart. The conjunction makes evident how deeply the internal coherence of an oral language is entwined with the vitality and coherence of the land itself.

For the peoples who speak such languages are those who steadily engage the land with their muscled limbs and their dreaming senses, those who draw their sustenance—their food and their clothing and the materials for tools and shelter—not from supermarkets or shopping centers but directly from the animate earth. Yet these lifeways, too, are vanishing—as such peoples are displaced from ancestral lands and forced to forfeit traditional livelihoods. Some are indigenous horticulturists, and have been so for centuries, even millennia, like the Mesoamericans who carefully cultivated the earliest forms of maize, or corn, some six thousand years ago. Others are traditional fishermen who work the rivers and the coastal waters with woven nets, or with boats fashioned from hollowed-out trees. For countless generations, such tribal peoples foraged widely for rooted foods, often scattering seeds in particular places as they wandered. Some followed the animals in their migrations, apprenticing themselves to particular creatures. They learned by steady observation how to mimic the calls of those animals and to mime their intricate movements, honoring the creatures in dance and song so those animals might honor them in turn by granting success in the hunt. Others apprenticed themselves to particular plants—smelling, sometimes tasting, slowly ingesting the teachings taught directly by the wild-flowering intelligence of the soil.

The oral languages spoken by such peoples held them close to the speaking earth. As diverse in their lifeways as the contrasting landscapes of the planet, few of these peoples would ever describe or define themselves in isolation from the living land that sustained them.

Thus it is that some of the experiential concepts articulated in this work have less in common with literate styles of reflection than with various states of mind common to indigenous, oral peoples. Although such states may feel peculiar to the modern intellect, it is worth recalling that we all have our indigenous ancestry, and indeed that our hunter-gatherer heritage is by far the largest part of our human inheritance. Human culture was itself born in a thoroughly oral context, informed by songs and spoken stories for many tens of thousands of years before any such stories were preserved in a formal writing system. So while the intensely participatory, or animistic, frame of mind common to oral cultures may seem odd to us, it is hardly alien: it is the very form of awareness that shaped all human communication for better than 95 percent of our cultured presence within the biosphere. It is that modality of experience to which the human organism is most closely adapted, the mode of consciousness that has most deeply defined our imagination and our intelligence. We could never have survived, as a species, without our propensity for animistic engagement with every aspect of our earthly habitat. And yet this highly adaptive style of experience has lain mostly dormant in the modern era.Ω



While indigenous, oral cultures tend to be exceedingly different from one another, it is nonetheless possible to discern several intuitions, and qualities, that they hold in common. Such generalizations are always problematic, and prone to be misread. But if we rigorously remember and affirm that any such common intuitions necessarily express themselves differently—very differently—for each specific people, then perhaps we may dare to list a few of the qualities endemic to the oral frame of mind:

FIRST: Oral awareness is intensely local in its orientation. Without the many communication technologies recently spawned by the printed word (without the ability such media have to bring us into contact with far-off places), indigenous, oral awareness is much more deeply informed by the immediately surrounding locale than most modern folks can even imagine. In the absence of intervening technologies, our senses—coevolved for millions of years with the textures, colors, and sounds of surrounding nature—spontaneously couple themselves to shapes and dynamic patterns in the living landscape, tracking those patterns as they metamorphose through the seasons. The leafing time of the local trees, the rhythms of bud and blossom and fruit, the reticence of various animals in certain months and their antic exuberance in others—all these unfoldings in the immediate environs provide a set of sensuous metaphors for the complex pulse of our own emotions, and a basic template for our cogitations. The human animal is a creature of imagination, to be sure, yet our imagination is first provoked and infused by the earthly place where we dwell, or by the wider terrain wherein we circulate. Indigenous, oral intelligence is place-based intelligence, an awareness infused by the local terrain.

SECOND: The simple act of perception is experienced as an interchange between oneself and that which one perceives—as a meeting, a participation, a communion between beings. For each thing that we sense is assumed to be sensitive in its own right, able to feel and respond to the beings around it, and to us.

THIRD: Each perceived presence is felt to have its own dynamism, its own pulse, its own active agency in the world. Each phenomenon has the ability to affect and influence the space around it, and the other beings in its vicinity. Every perceived thing, in other words, is felt to be animate—to be (at least potentially) alive. Death itself is more a transformation than a state; a dying organism becomes part of the wider life that surrounds it, as the hollowed-out trunk of a fallen tree feeds back into the broader metabolism of the forest. There is thus no clear divide between that which is animate and that which is inanimate. Rather, to the oral awareness, everything is animate, everything moves. It’s just that some things (like granite boulders) move much slower than other things (like crows or crickets). There are only these different speeds and styles of movement, these divergent rhythms and rates of pulsation, these many different ways of being alive.

The surrounding world, then, is experienced less as a collection of objects than as a community of active agents, or subjects. Indeed, every human community would seem to be nested within a wider, more-than-human community of beings.

FOURTH: The ability of each thing or entity to influence the space around it may be viewed as the expressive power of that being. All things, in this sense, are potentially expressive; all things have the power of speech. Most, of course, do not speak in words. But this is also true of ourselves: our own verbal eloquence is but one form of human expression among many others. For our body, in its silence, is already expressive. The body, itself, speaks.

FIFTH: Since our own sensitive and sensuous bodies are entirely a part of the world that we perceive—since we are carnally embedded within the sensuous field—then we can experience things only from our own limited angle and place among them. Hence we have only a partial view of each entity or situation that we encounter; there is no aspect of this world that can be fathomed or figured out by us in its entirety. There are always aspects that are hidden from view, dimensions that we cannot perceive directly. The depth of the world, and indeed of any part of the world, is therefore inexhaustible. Every certainty, every instance of clear knowledge, is necessarily surrounded by a horizon of uncertainty shading into mystery.

SIXTH: To an oral culture, the world is articulated as story. The surrounding cosmos is not experienced as a set of fixed and finished facts, but as a story in which we (along with the moon sliding in and out of the clouds, and the trout leaping for a fly) are all participant.

For the relation of a tale to its characters is much the same as the relation of this earthly cosmos to its inhabitants. Just as there is an interiority to the perceived world (carnally enfolded as we are by the round expanse of the terrain and the curving vault of the sky), so the characters in a well-told tale live and breathe within the voluminous interiority of the story itself.

In other words, we find ourselves situated in the land, with its transformations and cycles of change, much as protagonists are situated in a story. To a deeply oral culture, the earthly world is felt as a vast, ever-unfolding Story in which we—along with the other animals, plants, and landforms—are all characters.

SEVENTH: In such a breathing cosmos, time is not a rectilinear movement from a distant past to a wholly different future. Rather, time has an enveloping roundness, like the encircling horizon. It is a mystery marked by the slide of the sun into the ground every evening and its rebirth every dawn, by the incessant cycling of the moon and the round dance of the seasons. The curvature of time is here inseparable from the apparent curvature of space; and indeed both remain rooted in the round primacy of place. For each place has its particular pulse. Each realm has its rhythms, its unique ways of sprouting and unfurling and giving birth to itself again and again—as the world itself turns and returns, and as indeed the best stories are told over and over again.

EIGHTH: A world made of story is an earth permeated by dreams, a terrain filled with imagination. Yet this is not so much our imagination, but rather the world’s imagination, in which our are participant. As players within an expansive, ever-unfolding story, our lives are embedded within a psyche that is not primarily ours.

The dreamy, emotional atmosphere that permeates a story is much like the fluid atmosphere that enfolds our breathing bodies, with its storms and its calms. Awareness itself is here inseparable from the air—from this invisible medium, infused with sunlight, which circulates both within and all around us, binding our life together with that of the tempest and the swaying pines …

So mind is not experienced as an exclusively human property, much less as a private possession that resides within one’s head. While there may indeed be an interior quality to the mind, for a deeply oral culture this interiority derives not from a belief that the mind is located within us, but from a felt sense that we are located within it, carnally immersed in an awareness that is not ours, but is rather the Eairth’s.

NINTH: Each entity participates in this enveloping awareness from its own angle and orientation, according to the proclivities of its own flesh. We inhale the awakened atmosphere through our skin or our flaring nostrils or the stomata in our leaves, circulating it within ourselves, lending something of our unique chemistry to the collective medium as we exhale, each of us thus animated by the wider intelligence even as we tweak and transform that intelligence. The rooted beings among us twist and flex in the invisible surge; other creatures are carried aloft by the whirling currents. The denser life of rock may seem impervious to those winds, yet the crevassed contours of the mountains have been carved over eons by the creativity of wind and weather, as those mountains now carve the wind in turn, coaxing spores out of the breeze and conjuring clouds out of the fathomless blue.

The wild mind of the planet blows through us all, ensconced as we are in the depths of this elusive medium. However, although it is our common element, every one of us experiences it differently. No two bodies or beings ever inhabit this big awareness from precisely the same angle, or with the same sensory organization and style. Since the body is precisely our interface and exchange with the field of awareness, a praying mantis’s experience of mind is as weirdly different from mine as its spindly body is different from mine; and the dreaming of an aspen grove is as different from both mine and the mantis’s as its own fleshly interchange with the medium is different from ours. It is our bodies that participate in awareness. Hence no one can feel, much less know, precisely how the big mystery reveals itself to another.

Here’s another way this might be said: each of us by our actions is composing our part of the story in concert with the other bodies or beings around us. Yet since we are situated within the story, dreaming our way through its voluminous depths according to the unique ways of our flesh, no one of us can discern precisely how the story can best be articulated by another. No human individual can fathom just how the encompassing imagination is experienced by any other person—much less by a turtle, or a thundercloud, or by a car door patiently rusting at the junkyard, its viridian paint flaking off in the desert heat.

Our carnal immersion in the depths of the Mysterious thus ensures an inherent and inescapable pluralism. And yet—and yet: although there is no single way to tell it, it is the same Tale that is unfurling itself through our gazillion and one gestures. It remains the same Eairth whose life-giving breath we all inhabit, the very same mystery that we each experience from our own place within its depths.



You may be dismayed, kind reader, when reading that last point just above—flummoxed by my use of so many different terms to speak of the common earthly sentience in which our various sensitive bodies are situated. I write of it as a huge “imagination,” as “psyche” and as “mind,” as the breath of the planet, as an encompassing story, the big “dreaming” in which we’re corporeally immersed. But please recognize this: that I vary my terms entirely on purpose, in order to indicate that it is not a mere word that I speak of, but the enigmatic experience toward which these words point, a palpable but unseen medium that lies beyond all our concepts.

For it IS palpable, a dimension as tangible as the rushing air, although like the air it can neither be grasped by our hands nor rendered visible to our eyes. But again, you protest: Am I not pushing this simile much too far? By likening the psyche, or mind, or indeed awareness itself to the encompassing air (to this taken-for-granted element that is even now sliding in and out of your throat), do I not risk falsifying the psyche, rendering a manifestly immaterial power as a mundane material substance, inducing people to take literally what is merely an extravagant metaphor?

I think not. For there is something much more than a metaphor here—an ancient and elemental kinship between air and awareness, between the mind and the wind. It is a kinship demonstrated, as we have noted, by the Aeolian etymology of such words as “psyche,” “spirit,” and “anima” (itself the Latin word for soul, derived from the ancient Greek anemos, meaning “wind”), and by the Indo-European etymology of the word “atmosphere” (which shares the same origin as the Sanskrit word atman, meaning “soul”). In truth the modern, civilized understanding of mind as a purely immaterial power has been born by a process of subtraction, slowly and by increments, from the ancestral experience of the invisible atmosphere as a thick, meaning-filled plenum in which we’re immersed—as a living field of intelligence in which we participate. To our oral, indigenous ancestors, the animating air was the very place of the spirits, the very medium of awareness.

Such a sensuous articulation of mind is very far from the conventional way of saying things in the modern and postmodern world. Indeed, every one of the nine qualities enumerated above is alien to the abstract style of thought common to our broadly literate, technologically informed, steadily globalizing civilization. Yet the chapter-by-chapter investigations in this book—the patient analyses of depth, shadow, house, gravity, and ground as experienced by our animal bodies, the careful questioning of the felt meanings conveyed in birdsong and the gestures of boulders, the descriptive investigations of shapeshifting and interspecies rapport—have shown that many of the oral traits just enumerated remain active just below the surface of our civilized consciousness. The many explorations of sensory experience in this work—the experiential studies of mind and mood and weather, disclosing ways in which the human organism tacitly dialogues with its changing surroundings—all indicate that such oral, animistic proclivities remain fiercely operative within even our most taken-for-granted encounters with the world.

To the extent that conventional discourse hides this primary dimension of experience (to the extent that our everyday ways of speaking steadily deny such felt participations), our tongues enact a massive split between our minds and our bodies, effectively severing our verbal, speaking selves from our corporeal, animal experience.



Of course, the modern, technologically literate self—sophisticated, cosmopolitan, abstractly interested in almost anything yet coolly detached from earthly reality—is not the only possible constitution of the self. Oral, storytelling cultures, with their heterogeneous, place-based economies rooted in barter and gift exchange, engender a very different kind of self than literate culture, with its cosmopolitan market economy, or than digital culture, with its homogenizing global monetary systems. Indigenous, oral culture not only constitutes the original and longest-standing form of human society, it also gives rise to, and remains correlative with, the most elemental layer of the human self or subject.

The oral self, in other words, was the first formation of the human subject as a speaking being, as a creature of culture. Archaeological and ethnological evidence from every inhabited continent attests that this primordial form of the cultured human animal was not an abstract or intellectual self, but an embodied, viscerally felt identity informed by, and entangled with, the perceptual surroundings. Communal, deeply animistic, yet keenly awake to the elemental practicalities of water and food and shelter, our ancestral and somewhat collective sense of self remained inseparable from both the body and the terrain. For the human body was here experienced not as a determinate object but as a volatile and metamorphic presence, sometimes concentrated and sometimes dispersed, a conjunction of material powers slipping in and out of itself with the breath. Intertwined with the other bodies that surround—not only with other persons but also with other animals and plants and landforms—this corporeal self was hardly mute. It was, rather, storied: a tangible yet shifting identity that expressed itself in narrative and song, in spontaneous, rhythmic chants (composed often of vocables—expressive sounds without determinate meaning), and in whispered prayers offered on the breath to capricious powers in the enfolding field.

Something of this ancestral self stirs and awakens whenever we tell, with the whole of our body, a story that’s rooted in the local land, or whenever we listen to such a tale being told, not by some personage on a screen or a disembodied voice on the radio, but by a palpable person who stands before us, inhaling the same air that fills our own lungs as she gestures toward the gleaming crescent rising like an elephant’s tusk above the trees. It stirs in us when we wander down to sit with our child on the stones by the river, dangling a line below the surface while recounting a tale, first heard from our grandfather, about a talking fish who once granted him a simple wish in return for its watery life. Or here, in the high desert, when one comes upon a ropelike bit of scat, woven from crunched bones and mouse fur, judiciously placed like an indignant sign right in the middle of the path. For the ready recognition of that sign’s author sparks the memory of one or another story wherein that same Coyote, like a holy fool, accidentally upends the world.

But tricksters come in many forms. There are certain late nights, driving through the empty streets of the nearby city, when every green light turns to red just as I approach the intersection. Upon skidding to a stop at the sixth or seventh such insult, I suddenly recall how—in so many of the old tales—the spirits tend to linger and congregate at the crossroads. Aha! So those spirits are still here, drawn by the electric hum of the wires, flipping the traffic lights to red whenever they sense my approach, feeding gaily on the sparking rage of my resultant frustration: I’ll use the bicycle next time.

Whether in the heart of the city or the thick of the wilderness, our indigenous soul stirs and comes awake whenever we find ourselves thinking in storied form, and so the buildings lean toward us and the trees in the backyard begin to speak in low, groaning tones as the trunks rub against one another. If we are thinking in literate, logical terms then these tones are not voices, but when we’re thinking in stories then they are indeed a kind of speaking, for to the oral imagination every entity has its eloquence, and so our muscled flesh can’t avoid the sense that those sounds are filled with expressive meaning, as even the few clouds and the clustered rocks are alive with felt meanings, though we can hardly translate that meaning into words. The breeze is an elixir carrying the green chemistry of the needles up through the double arch of our nostrils to burst as a steady tang on the moist membranes inside, while the autumn blue of the sky, as it filters through the branches, is itself a kind of wine casting a giddy charm upon our limbs, making us crouch and leap with pleasure. This whole terrain is talking to our animal body; our actions are the steady reply.

That such participatory experiences remain accessible for many of us even in the midst of the technologized world—that they have not been eradicated by our more sophisticated ways of seeing and thinking—indicates that here there is something basic to the very constitution of the human creature, something necessary to our ongoing vitality as a species. That such animistic inclinations remain active underneath all our literate logics does not invalidate those more recent and refined logics—not at all! But it does suggest that our abstract forms of reflection remain dependent, in some manner, upon this older and more full-bodied mode of experience. The stubborn persistence of participation suggests that this ancestral form of experience is the hidden ground in which reason remains rooted, the secret soil from whence all later forms of reflection draw their sustenance.

The primordial impulse to animate and participate with our terrestrial surroundings has long been channeled by sedentary civilization into a more focused participation with a Source presumed to dwell beyond the perceivable cosmos. We have already seen how formal religion, by concentrating our age-old animist proclivities upon a single, omnipotent agency located outside the apparent world, loosened our respectful relation to the sensuous surroundings. The religions of the Book freed civilization to manipulate those surroundings with a more utilitarian abandon, unleashing a steadily rising tide of invention and innovation. With our relational yearnings focused on a transcendent power now hidden entirely beyond the natural world, we were free to delve more boldly into the depths of earthly nature without heed of apparent impropriety, following our curiosity into every nook and cranny, ultimately extending our manipulations into the nucleus of the atom, and into the nucleus of the living cell.

Yet our impulse toward participation, our yearning for engagement with a more-than-human otherness, has never been eradicated. The mass turn toward formal religion by citizens of industrialized nations in the last half century, the swelling membership in fundamentalist creeds of every kind, the myriad new shapes of belief that adorn the spiritual marketplace, all give evidence that the human craving for relation with that which exceeds us is as strong as ever. Nonetheless, given the ancestral impulse toward otherness at the core of this craving, it is not likely to be finally sated by any God made in our image, any more than it can be satisfied by our human-made technologies. A much older and deeper accord is at stake here, an alliance as intimate as the breath, and one as easily overlooked by the intellect.

When we speak of the human animal’s spontaneous interchange with the animate landscape, we acknowledge a felt relation to the mysterious that was active long before any formal or priestly religions. The instinctive rapport with an enigmatic cosmos at once both nourishing and dangerous lies at the ancient heart of all that we have come to call “the sacred.” Temporarily forgotten, paved over yet never eradicated, this old reciprocity with the breathing earth was here long before all our formal religions, and it will likely outlast all our formal religions. For it has always been operative underneath our various religions, nourishing them from below like a subterranean river.

There is no disdain for religion in such a statement. We can honor the awesome eloquence of each religion while acknowledging the precarious nature of church-based faiths in today’s crowded and crisis-ridden world, where people of divergent scriptures must somehow learn to get along. Our greatest hope for the future rests not in the triumph of any single set of beliefs, but in the acknowledgment of a felt mystery that underlies all our doctrines. It rests in the remembering of that corporeal faith that flows underneath all mere beliefs: the human body’s implicit faith in the steady sustenance of the air and the renewal of light every dawn, its faith in mountains and rivers and the enduring support of the ground, in the silent germination of seeds and the cyclical return of the salmon. There are no priests needed in such a faith, no intermediaries or experts necessary to effect our contact with the sacred, since—carnally immersed as we are in the thick of this breathing planet—we each have our own intimate access to the big mystery.

Each of us must finally enact this rapport in our own unique manner, discerning and learning to trust the particular gifts of our flesh even as we draw insight from the ways of others. Slowly we come to follow the promptings of our heart as it responds to the larger pulse of this earthly cosmos, listening inward even as we listen outward. And thus our voice, tentative at first, finds its own improvisational place in the broader polyphony—informed by, yet subtly altering, the texture of that wider music. Our rapport is ours alone, and yet the quality of our listening, and the depth of our response, can transform the collective texture of the real.



While exploring, some years ago, the bustling streets of a large Canadian city, I passed by some store windows displaying an unusually broad array of sacred texts translated from the world’s great spiritual traditions. I opened the door and stepped inside. The ribbon of incense unfurling in the air indicated that I had entered one of the new-age bookstores that sprang up in various cities during the latter half of the twentieth century in response to a deepening thirst for things spiritual. This store was far larger than any I’d yet encountered. Tibetan thangkas hung on the walls of the several rooms, and plush meditation cushions were scattered about, while the accumulated wisdom of all the ages seemed to be resting upon the crowded shelves. Entire aisles were dedicated to different Christian traditions and sects (from the Gnostics to the Quakers), each with their respective mystics. Another corridor was lined with Islamic and Sufi tracts in translation (including multiple shelves filled with the poetry of Rumi and other ecstatics), and still another overflowed with books on the Jewish mystical tradition or Kabbalah (translations of the Sefer Yetzirah and the Zohar, compilations of Hasidic folklore, various contemporary neo-Hasidic texts). Each of the primary Buddhist traditions had its own aisle—Theravada Buddhism (and Vipassana meditation); Vajrayana or Tibetan Buddhism (including translations of the Tibetan Book of the Dead, and many tracts written by or about the current Dalai Lama); and Zen (with its abundant lineages and contemporary exemplars). In the smaller Taoism section, contrasting translations of the Tao Te Ching jostled with one another (selflessly) for space.

Hindu teachings took up another aisle and a half; I saw translations of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata and numerous commentaries on the part of the latter called the Bhagavad Gita, large tomes on Vedantic philosophy, as well as many small, self-published books containing the sayings of particular yogins. Celtic folklore took up many shelves. Diverse and divergent Native American traditions had their own corner of the store, including creation stories and folklore from different tribes, along with anthropological studies, books by indigenous activists, and the transcribed teachings of revered elders and medicine persons from many parts of the Americas. Several shelves were devoted to Aboriginal Australian art and mythology, and a large aisle was given over to the great African mythologies and cosmologies both on the continent and in diaspora.

Wandering from room to room among all these colorful and carefully ordered tomes soon made me dizzy, overwhelmed by the discovery that such an abundance of wisdom could be gathered in one place. I came to a halt, finally, in the middle of the largest room, trying to take it all in. Here were the deepest insights of humankind, instructions of incalculable value garnered from every era and every region of the earth. I simply had not realized that the sacred teachings from many of these esoteric traditions were even open to the gaze of outsiders—much less that they had been translated into various contemporary languages, and so rendered accessible and available to so many contemporary persons. But it was not this accessibility, alone, that stunned me.

It was also the strange incongruity of realizing that, while such an inexhaustible plenitude of ethical intelligence was today open and available (was being read, integrated, and disseminated within contemporary culture, was being taught in college classrooms while also being pored over and pondered by countless private individuals), still, the heedless desecration and ruination of the more-than-human natural world was accelerating all around us. The last of the great forests were being laid waste, more and more wetlands were being paved over, oceanic dead zones (born of the chemical runoff from our industries) were expanding and multiplying across the globe. Greater numbers of our fellow creatures were losing their habitual haunts every year, their migratory routes severed by new highways and subdivisions, their bodies choking on our toxins and contorted by never-before-seen climatic conditions; more and more species were being squeezed out of existence by our current ways of life.

How to make sense of this juxtaposition? How could the open abundance of moral wisdom that was now accessible to any and all seekers within contemporary society be reconciled with the utter callousness of that same society, with the steady collusion of its citizens in the destruction of so much wonder? How could a culture as educated and spiritually curious as ours—a culture exemplified by the persons around me drawing assorted volumes from the shelves, cruising their pages with raised or furrowed eyebrows while standing in the aisles—how could such a culture be so oblivious, so reckless, in its relation to the animate earth?

I turned and walked, once again, past bookcases thick with teaching stories from indigenous tribes of the Americas, touching the spines of various volumes, absentmindedly sliding out a text on the animal folklore of the Pueblo Indians. How remarkable, I thought, to be able to find teachings so specific to the southwest desert way up here in a Canadian bookstore …

And then it hit me, clear as the whack of a wooden mallet on a bronze meditation gong. No wonder! No wonder that our sophisticated civilization, brimming with the accumulated knowledge of so many traditions, continues to flatten and dismember every part of the breathing earth. No wonder that, despite all we may have learned of the ethical intelligence of the ages, we remain so oblivious, so impervious, to the rest of nature!

For we have written all of these wisdoms down on the page, effectively divorcing these many teachings from the living land that once held and embodied these teachings.

Once inscribed on the page, all this wisdom seemed to have an exclusively human provenance. Illumination once offered by the moon’s dance in and out of the clouds, or by the dazzle of sunlight on the wind-rippled surface of a mountain tarn, was now set down in an unchanging form. Guidance that once came from the complex interplay of elemental forces in the dank heat of the rain forest, visionary insights that arose among peoples hunkered in the endless twilight of an Arctic winter, could now be carried elsewhere, read in distant towns or on distant continents by readers at far remove from the actual textures and tastes that once informed all these insights. And so the place-specific intelligence that originally infused all these many teachings would be forgotten. By writing all this relational knowledge down on the page, we tore these teachings from the actual earth that once taught them to us, detaching them from the particular climates and seasons that first provoked such insights. We severed all this intelligence from the dense mountain forests and the migrations of game, from the frozen winters and the sweltering deserts that had forced our lives into new patterns, from the watering holes thick with animals where these dangerous insights swam up from the depths or alighted on our shoulders or otherwise revealed themselves to us and became a part of our knowing.

So many of the teaching tales in these books—like the sacred stories of the Haida or the Iroquois or the Lakota, like the holy legends of Tibet or the wisdom tales of Ireland—were once embodied in particular landscapes, in the meandering abundance of a particular river and the uncanny shape of that mountain crag, in the healing medicine of this sacred spring bubbling out of the ground. To glimpse the mouth of a sheltering cave in the distance, or to reach the edge of a muddy lake, was to remember the mythic story about how that cave came to be there, and which old ancestor’s blood, gushing from a fatal wound, formed the ruddy color of that lake. The local earth, in effect, was the primary mnemonic, or memory trigger, for remembering the oral tales.

The stories were carried, as well, by the seasonal nourishments and poisons of particular plants—by the stamina afforded by certain well-chewed leaves, and the transformative power held by certain mushrooms, or the curative medicine of specific strangely shaped roots. Many other stories held within them the dangerous grace of particular predators—some of whom, it was told, had married into our human lineages.

A young woman, out picking berries, comes upon a mound of bear shit; rather than detour around the trace of this powerful being, she playfully leaps back and forth over the pile, and kicks some of the dried dung along the path as she walks. Soon she’s lost. A strange man, large and handsome, approaches from out of the woods, offering to help her find her way. Following him back to his solitary camp, falling in love, only much later does she realize that she’s wedded herself to a large grizzly; even as she notices the new fur growing on her arms, she’s now pregnant with their cubs—half human and half bear.

Similarly, a young fisherman finds and hides the dark, oily cloak of a naked woman he spies sleeping on the beach. Beautiful and taciturn (and unable to find her clothes), she comes home with him, and soon becomes pregnant with his children. Years later, when she discovers her old, forgotten cloak and disappears into the waves, a recognition dawns within the fisherman that the woman he married was really a seal; he now knows that their dark-eyed children will be intermediaries between the human world and the finned peoples of the sea.

Other stories drew their power from the feathered vitality of the wren, and from the glistening wisdom of the salmon. Indeed, many tales were known to be under the influence of the winged or scaled or antlered beings that moved within them, and of the particular places where those storied events once happened and might happen again. And hence those stories were told or sung only in the shadow of those cliffs, or when setting the fishing nets, or to honor the wild spirit of Old Honey-Paws immediately after a successful bear hunt.

Various teaching tales were acted out during the migrations of certain animals, while others were told only when harvesting specific herbs. Each valley had its stories, which were echoed in the diverse place-names carried by the boulders and the meadows and the riverbends of that realm. The stories, in turn, had their particular seasons for the telling. For the living land was felt to be the primary author of these tales! The earthly cosmos, flowing its life-giving waters through different regions, was the primary mystery articulating itself through these many teachings. Human life was obviously a part of this wider life; if the land fell sick, if other animals were vanishing or the forest trees began dying, it was obvious that the human community would soon falter as well.

By writing oral traditions down, we thought simply to preserve them, and to render their teachings more accessible. We did not realize that in order to plant them on the page we were uprooting these deep teachings from the soils that gave them their specific vitality. We didn’t suspect that by transcribing them on the page we were stealing away the expressive power of each place, usurping the manifold eloquence of the land and translating it into a purely human tongue. We didn’t realize that we were divesting the ground of its voice.

Transcribing previously oral teachings did not force the bards and the griots to stop recounting these tales in relation to the animate earth, did not compel the “wicasa wakan” to cease instructing us in the specific medicines that flourish in particular places. The recording of traditional knowledge in printed books, however, suggested that such face-to-face tellings out in the land were no longer entirely necessary, that the gesturing body of the storyteller—like the palpable presence of those mountains or the tumbling exuberance of the river—was no longer really needed for the remembrance of the storied knowledge, or the preservation of the culture. Indeed, the arrival of writing and written books seemed to render the storytellers superfluous, and the land as well. Now the paper leaves of the book, rather than the chattering leaves of oak and beech and birch, seemed to hold the ancestral knowledge. Slowly the landscape fell mute, as though the many powers lurking within it simply withdrew from human contact, receding back into the heartwood and the density of the bedrock.



So the spread of literacy brought a new detachment from the elemental immediacy of the local earth. We no longer needed to see those actual cliffs, coastlines, or creekbeds in order to recall the countless stories (and the layered information stored in those stories). The book, rather than the sensible landscape, became the primary mnemonic for remembering the ancient tales. And again: once written down, the originally oral tales became far more portable. Although I’ve here been describing some of the losses that this entailed, it’s time to acknowledge that this portability is also one of the greatest gifts of the written word. Books have enabled us to partake of stories from vastly different places, ingesting insights originally rooted in other traditions and other eras. By exposing us to ideas drawn from many divergent cultures, literate society has in truth brought an abundance of blessings—instilling what is often a useful distance, and detachment, from our immediate environment. The culture of the book, we might say, is inherently cosmopolitan.

In our own era, a very new kind of literacy has been conjured forth by the advent of the personal computer. In the prosperous parts of the world, the digital literacy of the World Wide Web already provokes far greater engagement than the sphere of books, newspapers, and magazines. Our involvement with the Internet—with e-mail and blogs and social-networking websites—brings us almost instantaneous information from around the planet, empowering virtual interactions with persons and groups in other places.

This new, digital dimension of human interchange is much less embodied than even that of the printed page. Books are relatively easy for our bodies to relate to. Quiescent denizens of the so-called analog world that we carnally inhabit, books can be hefted and smelled, their pages bent or bitten and tasted. But the digital letters and images dancing across the screen are envoys of a far more abstract technology—luminous phantoms, effervescences at the surface of a vast and ever-shifting ocean of largely disembodied data. The person composing a blog on her laptop commonly knows very little about how all that hardware and software functions; she simply trusts herself to the technology. Synapsing herself to the terminal, she navigates as a weightless mind in the fathomless sea of information, sometimes interacting with other bodiless minds that have logged on in other locations around the globe. If literate culture is inherently cosmopolitan, digital culture, it would seem, is inherently global and globalizing.

There is an immense amount to value about both of these more abstract and mediated forms of communication, commerce, and culture. The literary exchange of written stories has enabled the heady cosmopolitan buzz of our cities, and has enlivened our respect for traditions curiously different from our own. Good books deepen our interiority, and they complexify our individuality. Who I am, even to myself, has been informed and amplified by the many other selves—from Huck Finn to Hans Castorp, from Anna Karenina to Mr. Palomar and Burley Coulter—who first entered and took possession of me through the medium of the printed page.

The emergence of the Internet, meanwhile, offers a remarkable new autonomy to the individual (providing easy, personalized access to much of the world’s information) even as it blurs the apparent boundaries of the self, entwining its users into a complex and ever-ramifying amalgam of circuitry and gregarious sociality. Just as important, it empowers rapid affiliations and alliances between persons who may never meet, enabling activists to mobilize on a moment’s notice to block disastrous developments, or to catalyze necessary changes.

Such gifts are useful and worthy adjuncts to our more full-bodied participation in the ongoing life of our community. Yet these lucid gifts can hardly substitute for that community. They cannot supplant the necessary nourishment of real, face-to-face engagements with other persons, and other beings, in the actual terrain where we find ourselves. The abundant blessings of the book, like the more recent, pragmatic boons of the computer and the handheld screen, transform into poisons when they occupy the bulk of our waking attention—when our ceaseless interchange with the printed page or the digital screen short-circuits the old, instinctive reciprocity between our senses and the sensuous earth.

Oral culture—the face-to-face sharing of living stories that are not written down—is the form of human society that goes hand in hand with such reciprocity. If digital culture is inherently globalizing, and if the culture of the book is inherently cosmopolitan, oral culture is inherently local in its orientation. Since the tales that compose a deeply oral culture are not written down, they do not easily travel far from the broad bioregion where they originate, or from the particular landforms and creatures that figure as prominent powers in the tales. There exists a palpable intimacy between language and the land in any deeply oral culture, an eros that binds both together and feeds the vitality of each. For the surrounding earth is aquiver with stories that seem to sprout from every field and forested ridge! The spoken tongue carries the textures and tones of the local topography; the rhythms of the language, in turn, are preserved in the living landscape.

What should be obvious, now, is this: the global culture of the Internet and the cosmopolitan culture of the book both depend, for their integrity, upon the place-based conviviality of a thriving oral culture.

Oral, storytelling culture—and the vernacular intimacy with the local land that coincides with such culture—is the forgotten ground that still supports those more abstract layers of culture. It is the neglected but necessary soil from whence civilization still draws its sustenance, the nourishing humus in which our humanity remains rooted.

When oral culture degrades, the mediated mind loses its bearings, forgetting its ongoing debt to the body and the breathing earth. Left to itself the literate intellect, adrift in the play of signs, comes to view nature as a sign, or a complex of signs. It forgets that the land is not first and foremost an arcane text to be read, but a community of living, speaking beings to whom we are beholden. Adept at representing the world verbally, the literate intellect forgets how to orient in the midst of the world’s presence, how to hear those many voices that do not speak in words.

Similarly, the computerized mind, when left to its own devices, all too easily overlooks the solid things of the earth. Skilled in the rapid manipulation of symbols, it neglects the stones and the grasses that symbolize nothing other than themselves. Dazzled by its own virtual creations, the digital self forgets its dependence upon a world that it did not create, overlooking its carnal emplacement in the very world that created it.

When oral stories are no longer being told in the woods, or along the banks of gushing streams—when the land is no longer being honored ALOUD as an animate, expressive power—then the human senses lose their attunement to the more-than-human terrain. Fewer and fewer people are able to feel the particular pulse of their place; many no longer notice, much less respond to, the fluent articulations of the land. Increasingly blind, increasingly deaf—increasingly impervious to the sensuous world—the technological mind progressively lays waste to the animate earth.

Today our vaunted civilization pours its by-products into the winds and into the waters. The weather tilts toward catastrophe; ice caps melt; the snowpack evaporates; water fit for human consumption hides in smaller and smaller oases within the desert of the real. Ever more creatures wane and vanish from this nonvirtual reality, unable to adapt to the wrenching changes we’ve wrought. Massive animals and small animals, hoofed ones and clawed ones, antlered and quilled and bright-feathered ones, finned and tentacled and barnacled ones, all steadily dwindling down to a few members before they dissolve entirely into the fever dreams of memory.



How, then, to renew our visceral experience of a world that exceeds us—of a world that is wider than ourselves and our own creations? Does a revitalization of oral culture mean that we must renounce reading and writing? Must we empty our bookcases? Must we unplug our computers and drag them down to the dump?

Hardly. The renewal of oral culture entails no renunciation of books, and no rejection of technology. It entails only that we leave abundant space in our days for an interchange with one another and with our surroundings that is not mediated by technology: neither by television nor the cell phone, neither by the handheld computer nor the GPS satellite (nor any of the newer digital allurements that promise to arrive in the coming years). Nor even the printed page.

Among writers, for example, it entails a recognition (even an anticipation) that there are certain stories we may stumble upon that ought not to be written down—stories that we might instead begin to tell with our tongue in the particular topography where those stories live! Among parents it requires that we set aside, now and then, the books that we read to our children in order to recount a vital story with the whole of our gesturing body—or better yet, that we draw our kids out of doors in order to improvise a tale about how the nearby river feels when the fish return to its waters, or about the wild wind that’s even now blustering its way through the city streets, plucking the hats off people’s heads …

Among educators, it requires that we begin to rejuvenate the arts of telling, and of listening, in relation to the geographic place where our lessons actually happen. For too long we have incarcerated the potent magic of linguistic meaning within an exclusively human space of signs. Hence an American youth may attend a high school in New England or California, or perhaps a small boarding school at the edge of the Rockies—yet this will make little difference, since she’ll be taught largely the same things in each location. Since truth has come, over the centuries, to reside on the printed page, knowledge (it now seems) floats entirely free of place. Even if we research our facts via the latest search engine, surfing from webpage to webpage as we assemble our assignment, still this knowledge has little to do with the animate terrain hollering outside the window. The wildness of where we are remains muzzled, the local earth still mostly a mute and passive backdrop against which human happenings unfold.

Can we renew in ourselves an implicit sense of the land’s meaning, of its own many-voiced eloquence? Not without renewing the sensory craft of listening, and the sensuous art of storytelling. Can we help our students to carefully translate the quantified abstractions of science into the qualitative language of direct experience, so that those necessary insights begin to come alive in their felt encounters with cumulus clouds and bleaching corals, with owls and deformed dragonflies and the intricate tangle of mycelial mats? So that the potent evidences steadily emerging from the sciences are no longer employed mostly by profiteering corporations for whom the land is strictly a set of numbers, but by people, young and old, mobilizing to halt such reckless developments? Most important: Can we begin to restore the health and integrity of the local earth? Not without restorying the local earth.

The replenishment of oral culture would thus bring a new realization of the primacy of place and proximity, a recognition that genuine community is not, first and foremost, something we create online with those who share our specific values, but something that must be practiced on the ground with our actual neighbors. This would be a tall order for many modern persons, given the contemporary passion for insularity, for tall fences and electronic gates. And yet the payoff would be a dramatic increase in real security. For as is already becoming evident in North America, neither insurance companies nor federal disaster-relief agencies are up to the task of providing relief for a steadily rising tide of climate-related catastrophes. Our most dependable insurance against calamity resides in the fellow feeling and generosity of those who live near us, in the impulse to look out for each other’s children or to look in on an elderly neighbor when the electricity’s been out for a day. Our truest security lies where it always has, in community solidarity and neighborliness.

Regenerating oral culture would entail beginning to resuscitate local festivals, organizing celebrations to honor the cyclical return of the salmon in dance and song and spoken story, festivals to honor the becoming-fruitful of the trees and the long sleep of the sun at the winter solstice. Telling the tale of the cranes as they wing their way north over our upturned faces, enacting in rituals the wondrous return of each species from the brink of extinction—while marking in story, and ceremony, the demise of those species we let slip from the real, so that we’ll remember, collectively, the awesome cost of our hubris. These are ancient and elemental ways to awaken our own animal senses, binding the imagination of our bodies back into the wider life of the animate earth.

Of course, shortening the long and complex trajectory that food takes from the soil to our mouths—backing off from buying so many fruits imported from elsewhere, while learning to savor the tastes of what grows in our region—this is another, obvious way of bringing our body’s imagination back to the living land where we dwell. Growing some food ourselves provides a fuller grounding, and a steady opening of the senses. The swelling number and scale of farmers’ markets (and the steady surge of participation in community-supported agriculture cooperatives, or CSAs), indicates that a renewal of place-based intelligence is already under way. Farmers’ markets are even now seeding a resurgence of oral culture, for unlike supermarkets, where customers barrel down the aisles enclosed in a solipsistic exchange with their own shopping lists, at farmers’ markets most people stroll and linger, bumping into old friends and new, catching up on the gossip even as they compare turnips and exchange recipes. Slowing down, checking out which fruits are finally ripening in the region, tapping our toes to the lilt of a fiddle or an accordion, offering a bag of apples from the backyard in exchange for a braid of garlic and a fistful of cilantro: the convivial ethos of the farmers’ market loosens our cynical armor, opening our organism onto the tones and textures of an evolving local vernacular.

We replenish that vernacular by listening deeply and replying in kind. Cultivating oral culture means that we take a new pleasure in simple conversation, becoming gradually more aware of the sonorous qualities of our voice and the audible sound-spell of our speaking. Can we converse with one another less as abstract minds, and more as corporeal, earthly beings engaging other denizens of the earth? A new (and yet in some sense, a very old) attention to the visceral resonance of one’s talking, to the rhythm of words and the music of particular phrases, is an obvious way by which to speak in accordance with one’s senses, a way to talk without splitting oneself into a speaking intelligence up here and a mute body down there.

Such attunement to the melodic quality of spoken language also draws our interlocutors into alignment with their own senses, and it has this curious correlate: it opens our ears to the expressive intelligence of other sonorous creatures, who generally don’t speak in words.

Even as the written word and its conventions came to dominate all our discourse, our anarchic oral eloquence quietly kept itself alive through various means, including the careful and patient craft of literary poets. A renewal of oral culture in the coming era may mean that poetry increasingly frees itself from the printed page and the digital screen, to become a spontaneous part of every person’s practice. Poetics, in this sense, would become the practice of alert, animal attention to the broader conversation that surrounds—to the utterances of sunlight and water and the thrumming reply of the bees, or the staccato response of a woodpecker to the hollow creaking of an old trunk—and the attempt not to violate this wider conversation every time that we speak, but to allow it, to acknowledge it, and sometimes to join it.

Renewing oral culture is thus not at all a matter of “turning back the clock,” but rather of stepping, now and then, out of clock time entirely. It is not a matter of “going back” to an earlier way of life, but of aligning ourselves with the full depth of the present, expanding awareness beyond the gleaming veneer of our mass-produced artifacts, dropping our attention beneath the recently sedimented strata of commercial civilization (beneath the inert, plastic layers of tossed-out toys and discarded water bottles) to make conscious contact with the darker humus in which our humanity is still rooted. The soil at that depth is made of dances, and songs, and the hushed cadence of spoken stories. By remembering ourselves at that depth, by tapping the nutrients in that timeless soil, we draw fresh water on up into the stems and leaves of the open present. We re-create civilization by tapping the primordial wellsprings of culture, replenishing the practice of wonder that lies at the indigenous heart of all culture.

All our tools of communication will undoubtedly undergo dramatic transformations in the course of the coming decades. Whether printed words such as these will exist at the end of this century is anyone’s guess. For the moment, we can be ardent readers (and writers) of books, while recognizing that this abstract and almost exclusively human layer of culture will never be sufficient unto itself. Without rejecting this rich form of interchange, we can nonetheless discern, today, that the rejuvenation of oral culture is an ecological imperative.


Ω There are many intellectuals today who feel that any respectful reference to indigenous beliefs smacks of romanticism, and a kind of backward-looking nostalgia. Oddly, these same persons often have no problem “looking backward” toward ancient Rome or ancient Greece for philosophical insight and guidance in the present day. What upsets these self-styled “defenders of civilization” is the implication that civilization might have something to learn from cultures that operate according to an entirely different set of assumptions, cultures that stand outside of historical time and the thrust of progress. Many persons steeped in Western science tend to assume that native notions are superstitious or simply naïve, unaware that indigenous thought stems from a radically different view of what language is, and what thinking is for.

There is simply no way to comprehend indigenous notions without stepping aside from commercial assumptions that are broadly taken for granted today (including the basic equation of land with property—with a commodity that can be bought, sold, or owned). Indigenous insights cannot be understood without slowing down, without taking time to notice the upward press of the ground and the earthen silence that surrounds all our words. Often at home in such silence, oral peoples tend toward reticence, reluctant to broadcast their experience very loudly. Hence, while indigenous traditions are vigorously unfolding today, the philosophical intensity and practical wisdom of native peoples all too often remains invisible and unheard amid the bustle and blare of contemporary commerce, conveniently ignored by those who most have need of such intelligence.





CONCLUSION

At the Heart of the Heart of the World


According to a tale once heard in variant forms among numerous placed-based peoples—among Aboriginal elders in Australia and native storytellers in North America, among the old Mayans of Mesoamerica and the ancient Egyptians along the Nile—the fiery sun journeys, every night, through the dark earth underfoot. At dawn we see the sun surface from the ground far to the east, to begin its long, arcing voyage across the vault of sky, lighting the world and feeding the land with its warmth. At evening’s approach we watch the sun slide down into the western earth (or slowly immerse itself in the western ocean). Throughout the night, then, the luminous sun walks through the thick darkness that undergirds our lives, firing the material depths with its radiance, pausing in the middle of the night to rest and replenish itself at the center of the earth, before making its way toward the eastern place of its eventual emergence. During the summer, with its drawn-out days, the sun has little chance to tarry in the ground, but in the autumn it hastens more swiftly across the firmament, yielding further time to rest in the rocky density below. Then, at last, during the long nights of winter, and especially at the winter solstice, the sun lingers and sleeps in at the heart of the earth, nourishing the dark ground with its lustrous dreams, infusing the depths with the manifold life that will soon, after several moons of gestation, blossom forth upon earth’s surface.

It is a story born of a way of thinking very different from the ways most of us think today. A story that has, we might say, very little to do with “the facts” of the matter. Yet the tale of the sun’s journey within the earth holds a curious resonance for many of us who hear it, despite our awareness that the events it describes are not literally true. For the story brings us close to our senses, and to our direct, bodily awareness of the earthly cosmos.

In many versions of the tale, the sun is male; in others, the sun is female. In some tellings, the sun is carried on a boat through the underworld. In others, the sun almost dies during the transit through the gloom, fading to a gaunt skeleton; every dawn it must be clothed anew with flesh and blood in order to make the trek across the heavens. In some stories the setting sun is swallowed into the belly of a huge fish, who then swims with it far to the east, vomiting out the sun at dawn like Jonah from the belly of the whale. Among one tribe of Paiute Indians, the sun who sleeps deep within the earth is a great lizard who eats the stars for nourishment; that is why the stars flee whenever he climbs back into the sky. The sun can’t help it: he must swallow some gleaming stars in order to live, and it is they who provide his radiance. The moon, meanwhile, is the wife of that lizard sun, and the mother of those stars. She, too, journeys into the ground to sleep in the house at the heart of the earth. But when her husband arrives home, the moon will sometimes depart—since if the sun has not been able to catch any stars, he will likely be in a lousy mood. The stars are at ease when their mother the moon is in the sky; they sparkle and dance as she passes by. Nonetheless, every twenty-nine days the sun does manage to eat a clutch of those stars. Then the moon slowly puts black pitch on her face, in mourning—much as Paiute women darken their faces with pitch when a child dies. After some time the pitch wears off, and the face of the moon becomes visible in its fullness—slightly smudged, perhaps, but as brilliant as we’re likely to see her before her husband swallows some further stars and sends her back into mourning.

We can be fairly certain that such oral stories were not taken literally by those who told them, or even by those who heard them. For literal truth is a very recent invention, brought into being by alphabetic literacy. The word “literal,” after all, derives from the Latin word for letter. To understand something literally originally meant to understand that it happened exactly as written in scripture. However, the stories proper to most indigenous cultures—like the diverse creation stories told among tribal peoples throughout the world, or the various tales of the sun’s night journey beneath the ground—were commonly told and retold without ever being written down.

Once inscribed on the page, language—as we’ve learned—takes on a detached fixity very different from the way language is experienced in a deeply oral culture. To our unaided, animal senses, everything speaks. But with the spread of phonetic writing, the capacity for meaningful speech seemed to withdraw from the surrounding landscape; language increasingly came to seem a purely human prerogative. Words and phrases began to be used less as invocational and creative powers, and more as representational functions—as labels by which to demarcate and define a mute cosmos that had previously appeared animate, and expressive, in its own right. Material things seemed to become more stable and determinate.

Only after the advent of written letters, and the dissemination of alphabetic texts, did there arise a clear distinction between “literal” and “metaphoric” uses of language (between literal truth and figurative, or poetic, truth). For this simple reason, the many indigenous tales of the sun’s night journey through the ground could hardly have been understood literally by those who heard them in their original ambiance.

We would be similarly mistaken if we concluded that such stories carried a purely metaphoric meaning for those who originally told and heard them. For again, these tales were being told long before that writing-induced rift in felt meaning that forged the notion of literal speech, on the one hand, and metaphoric speech, on the other. We must try to imagine ourselves into a mode of listening prior to any such split if we wish to hear the old, ancestral stories in anything like their original meaning.

When we say that a statement is “purely metaphoric,” we often mean that it is an imaginative formulation that has little direct bearing upon the tangible world. Yet the old stories were the primary linguistic form by which to convey practical information regarding the tangible cosmos; it’s clear that oral peoples understood these stories to be about the actually experienced world. If the stories referred to the underworld, this could not have been a “merely metaphorical” realm. If the underworld was hidden from us humans, it was nonetheless a hidden aspect of this very palpable terrain. It was concealed from our awareness by the opacity of the solid ground beneath our feet—by this very ground crisscrossed by the tracks of moose and wolf and bear, into which we dug for specific roots and upon which we laid down to sleep. The underworld, in other words, was precisely under the ground.

And yet, again, this selfsame sensuous terrain could not have been experienced as a literal reality: it could not have been a world of determinate and stable facts. Neither entirely literal nor entirely metaphoric, the world that articulated itself through our oral stories was rather, at every point, metamorphic. The land was alive: each place had its pulse, each palpable presence seemed crouched in readiness to become something else.

Such is the realm opened to us, still, by our animal senses. Our most immediate perceptual experience discloses a world in continual metamorphosis. Even the most allegedly stable landforms alter around us as we move among them, their hues transforming as the sun glides behind the clouds. The tonalities of each region modulate with the turning seasons. Two weeks ago, when my partner and I were gathering wild herbs in the mountains north of our home—digging osha roots and plucking nettles—I heard the very faint but unmistakable call, somewhat like the rusty hinge of an old screen door, of a sandhill crane. I glanced up into the cloudless, clarion blue of the autumn sky, but could see no bird. I scanned the surrounding valley and the cliffs looming above us. Nothing. Then again I heard it—that rusty but evocative bugling, seeming to come from several directions at once, as if there were several cranes, and it occurred to me that it was echoing off the tall cliffs. I stared back up into the sky, and suddenly far, far up there a glimmering white pattern crystallized out of the blue. It was a perfect V-shaped arrowhead, made of thirty or thirty-four cranes, visible only as the sun reflected off their flapping wings, a ripple of white spreading from the point backward along each slanted edge as the arrow advanced across the heavens. I stared and stared until the apparition was directly overhead, then took a moment to glance at Carmen; she looked back at me, grinning, and we swiveled our faces back toward the sky. Except … where were they? I poured my gaze into every part of the sky’s expanse, but could not find that slow-motion arrow. The cranes had dissolved back into the blue depths.

I heard Carmen’s voice, somewhat anxious: “Can you see them?”

“No.”

“Did they just disappear, or what?!”

Two or three times, a bugling cry stuttered down out of the heights, but our eyes were unable to overcome the sky’s witchery, and we finally gave up.

The morning after that apparition and odd vanishing, I was searching for more roots when I was spooked by a brazen animal who chased me, leaping and crashing, down the wooded slope—my adrenaline gushing—until the predator abruptly resolved into a large, dislodged rock that tumbled on past. Relieved and shaken, I stopped to catch my breath. As my pulse eased back down, I noticed an abundance of dazzling cerulean blossoms on a nearby bush. Unable to identify them, I stepped closer to better inhale their color with my eyes, yet at my approach the blossoms seemed to quiver and undulate, then all at once they flapped skyward, morphing into a flock of blue butterflies.

Reality shapeshifts. Underneath our definitions, prior to all our ready explanations, the world disclosed by our bodily senses is a breathing cosmos—tranced, animate, and trickster-struck.

The oral stories, then, bring us close to our animal senses. They recall us to our bodily participation in the metamorphic depths of the sensuous. The tale of the sun’s journey through the ground stirs and resonates within us because it cuts through our easy abstractions, and calls us back to our most direct, creaturely encounter with the space around us. Our spontaneous, sensory awareness of the sun is of a fiery presence that rises and sets. Despite all we may have learned about the stability of the sun relative to the earth, no matter how thoroughly we’ve convinced our intellects that it is the earth that is really turning while the sun basically holds its place, our animal eyes still perceive the sun mounting up from the distant earth every morning, and sinking beneath the far-off ground every evening. Whether we are farmers or physicists, we all speak of the “rising” and the “setting” of the sun, for this remains our primary experience of the matter.

The story follows a kind of perceptual logic very different from the abstract logic we learned at school. It attends closely to the sensuous play of the world, allowing the unfolding pattern of that display to carry us into a place of dark wonder and possibility: that at night the sun replenishes itself in the material depths of the ground. There is a vivid imagination at work in the tale, although it’s an imagination steadily nourished by our senses, and one that nourishes them in turn. The story does not ask us to forsake the evidence of our eyes, but invites us to look deeper, and to listen ever closer, feeling our way into participation with a palpable cosmos at least as alive and aware as we are. The jostling elemental powers that compose this animate cosmos are sometimes lucid and sometimes dazed—like us, they must give themselves over to sleep, and the magic of dreams, if they wish to renew themselves.

Informed by the logic of our creaturely senses, the story gestures toward a great secret: that there’s a blazing luminosity that resides at the heart of the earth. The tale suggests that the salutary goodness of light makes its primary home within the density and darkness of matter. That the transcendent, life-giving radiance that daily reaches down to us from the celestial heights also reaches up to us from far below the ground. That there’s a Holiness that dwells and dreams at the very center of the earth.

That which transcends the sensuous world also secretly makes its home deep within this world. However blasphemous such an affirmation may sound to persons of a theistic bent, the aboriginal intuition of a resplendence immanent in matter accords well with a new sense of the sacred now striving to be born.

Our age-old disparagement of corporeal reality has in our time brought not just our kind but the whole biosphere to a horrific impasse. The aspiration for a bodiless purity that led so many to demean earthly nature as a fallen, sinful realm (and the related will-to-control that’s led us to ceaselessly mine and manipulate nature for our own, exclusively human, purposes) has made a mangled wreckage of this elegantly interlaced world. Yet a new vision of our planet has been gathering, quietly, even as the old, armored ways of seeing stumble and joust for ascendancy, their metallic joints creaking and crumbling with rust. Beneath the clamor of ideologies and the clashing of civilizations, a fresh perception is slowly shaping itself—a clarified encounter between the human animal and its elemental habitat.

It is a perception that honors the immeasurable otherness of things, the way that any earthborn presence exceeds the calculations we perform upon it—the manner in which each stone, each gust of wind, each termite-ridden log or gliding sea turtle harbors and bodies forth a creativity that resists all definition. As though there’s a subtle fire burning within each sensible presence, a heartbeat unique to each being—not only to persons, then, and individual woodpeckers, but also bulrushes and granite slabs, gashes burned into trees by lightning, pollen grains, katydids, coral reefs, and shed snakeskins. This unique creativity ensures that we don’t really perceive the beings around us unless we suspend our already-settled certainties, opening ourselves toward whatever pulse rides within each thing we meet. The expectation of a basic enigma at the heart of every ostensible “object” kindles a new humility within ourselves, engendering an empathic attunement to our surroundings and a compassionate resolve to do least harm.

Despite our inherited conceptions, sensible things are not fixed and finished objects able to be fathomed all at once. Their incomplete quality opens them to the influence of other things, ensuring that each entity—earthworm, musk ox, thundercloud, cactus flower—is held within an interdependent lattice of relationships, a matrix of exchanges and reciprocities that is not settled within itself but remains fluid and adaptable, able to respond to perturbations from afar, yielding a biosphere that is not, finally, a clutch of determinate mechanisms but a living sphere, breathing …

If much natural science of the last two centuries held itself aloof from the nature it studied, pondering the material world as though that world were a huge aggregate of inert objects and mechanical events, many new-age spiritualities simply abandon material nature entirely, inviting their adherents to focus their intuitions upon non-material energies and disincarnate beings assumed to operate in an a-physical dimension, pulling the strings of our apparent reality and arranging earthly events according to an order that lies elsewhere, behind the scenes. Commonly reckoned to be at odds with one another, conventional over-reductive science and most new-age spiritualities actually fortify one another in their detachment from the earth, one of them reducing sensible nature to an object with scant room for sentience and creativity, the other projecting all creativity into a supernatural dimension beyond all bodily ken.

A similar alliance, unsuspected by those most caught within it, may be found in the contemporary ideological battle between the advocates of creationism (or, as many currently frame themselves, the proponents of “intelligent design”) and the neo-Darwinian dogmatists of the “new atheism.” The intelligent design theorists insist that many aspects of present-day organisms are too complex, and too perfectly adapted for the particular functions that they serve, to have arisen only as a result of the undirected or “blind” evolutionary process of natural selection acting upon purely random mutations. Such instances of irreducible complexity, they maintain, can only have been designed by an external intelligent designer—by a God exerting His will upon the material cosmos from outside.

It is true that countless attributes of organisms are exquisitely tuned for the roles they currently play (the eye of the raptor, the lungs of a sperm whale, the insect-mimicking parts of certain orchids, the human capacity to compose love poems), so much so that a purely haphazard process of mutation, blindly sorted over the millennia by an indifferent environment, seems almost absurd as a description of how such arrangements came into being. Nonetheless, many natural scientists, more doctrinaire than Darwin himself, insist that evolution must be interpreted in this curiously cramped manner, as a thoroughly oblivious process whereby, in the competition for limited resources, a strictly indifferent and insentient nature exerts selective pressure upon purely random genetic mutations. Never mind that many of the beings that compose the environment exhibit obvious signs of sensitivity and sentience: whenever we reflect upon the evolutionary process we are constrained to consider the apparent agent of selection—the earthly environment, or biosphere—as a purely objective, quantifiable set of conditions without any subjectivity or creativity. In order to do so, however, we must subtract our own sentience (and that of many other beings) from the earthly surroundings. Since it is our own sentience or subjectivity that is engaged in pondering the evolutionary process, we must somehow locate our pondering selves elsewhere, must situate our sentience outside the biosphere, looking upon earthly nature from a disinterested position radically apart from that nature. In this we are aided, immeasurably, by our civilization’s age-old faith in an all-seeing God, a divinity that ponders the material world from a position wholly external to that world. The scientific intellect, which sometimes prides itself on having vanquished the belief in God from much of the rational populace, regularly situates its gaze in the very place (or rather, the very same non-place) recently vacated by that God. For it affects the same external, all-seeing perspective, the same view from nowhere enjoyed by that divinity. The most assertive new atheists unwittingly rely, in this sense, upon the very same monotheistic assumptions that they ostensibly oppose.

The hyper-rational objectivity behind a great deal of contemporary techno-science could only have arisen in a civilization steeped in a dogmatic and other-worldly monotheism, for it is largely a continuation of the very same detached and derogatory relation to sensuous nature. If in an earlier era we spoke of the earthly world as fallen, sinful, and demonic, we now speak of it as mostly inert, mechanical, and determinate. In both instances nature is stripped of its generosity and prodigious creativity. Similarly, the utopian technological dreaming that would have us bioengineer our way into a new and “more perfected” nature (or would have us download human consciousness into “better hardware”), like the new-age wish to spiritually transcend the “physical plane” entirely, seems calculated to help us hide from the shadowed wonder and wildness of earthly existence.

All of these dodges, all of these ways of disparaging material nature or of aiming ourselves elsewhere, enable us to avoid the vulnerability of real relationship with other persons and places in the depths of this unmasterable world. Despite the several pleasures we might draw from life in this world, there remains something about earthly reality that frightens us, and especially unnerves most of us born into civilization. Not just the decay to which our earthborn bodies are prone, and the death that patiently awaits us, but also our steady subjection to what exceeds us, to the otherness of other persons and other beings, and to an anarchic array of elemental forces over which we have little control. To exist as a body is to be constrained from being everything, and so to be exposed and susceptible to all that is not oneself—able to be tripped up at any moment by the inscrutability of a pattern one cannot fathom.

Whether sustained by a desire for spiritual transcendence or by the contrary wish for technological control and mastery, most of our contemporary convictions carefully shirk and shy away from the way the biosphere is directly experienced from our creaturely position in the thick of its unfolding. They deflect our attention away from a mystery that gleams and glints in the depths of the sensuous world itself, shining forth from within each presence that we see or hear or touch. They divert us from a felt sense that this wild-flowering earth is the primary source of itself, the very wellspring of its own ongoing regenesis. From a recognition that nature, as the word itself suggests, is self-born. And hence that matter is not just created but also creative, not a passive blend of chance happenings and mechanically determined events, but an unfolding creativity ever coming into being, ever bringing itself forth …

Why is this simple and rather obvious intuition—this recognition of matter as generative and animate—so disturbing to civilized thought? It’s as though there’s an ancient dread of what is palpably dense, an old and unspoken taboo against acknowledging the creativity of matter—as if by such a recognition we risk waking a slumbering power that intends us harm. An ancestral sense that whatever is genuinely good in this world must have its ultimate source in what is above and ethereal, while whatever is dense, dark, and downward must be avoided at all costs. As though the damp soil underfoot was solely a medium of death and decay and not, as well, the very source and fundament of new life. As though what is deeper down below is best not pondered at all, lest we fall under its infernal influence. For (and let us hope that we don’t provoke its wrath by such speaking) is not that deep-down place the terrible locus of Hell, the very dwelling of Satan and the fiery source of all that’s evil?

Is this, then, why we feel compelled to distinguish our reflective selves from our material bodies, and strive to hold ourselves aloof from the density of earth? Is not this civilization, in both its religious and its secular variants, still beholden to an old topological aversion layered deep within our languages and tightly held within our muscles? An inherited, habitual dichotomy between an absolute Good that summons us from on high and a perfect Evil that drags us down?

Whenever the wild diversity of experience is twisted into a simple opposition between what’s good and what’s bad, whenever the heterogeneous multiplicity of life is polarized into a battle between a pure Good and a pure Evil, then the earth itself is bound to suffer at our hands. When the sacred is conceptually stripped of its various shadows and idealized as a pure light, or Goodness, without any taint of the dark, then those stripped-away shadows inevitably seem to gather into a concentrated and implacable gloom, or Badness. The unsullied light can only be located above and beyond this ambiguous world with its shadowed woodlands and its swamps, its cycles of growth and decay. The unadulterated darkness, meanwhile, must be located in a realm utterly inaccessible to that light, and is therefore assumed to dwell far underground, at the center of the earth. And earthly nature, for all its abundance, comes to seem a tainted place, all too much under the abysmal influence of what lies below. Sure, this world is illuminated by the sun’s radiance, by that light that draws new shoots from the soil and beckons our spirits to ascend. But the weight and density of our material bodies render us vulnerable to the pull of what lies below. Our thick physicality holds us to the ground, drawing us down toward that place of sheer dread, without light, at the dense center of this world. There’s no escaping this downward drag while we’re alive. No wonder a civilization steeped in the polarization of Good versus Evil wreaks such havoc on the rest of nature. No wonder so many creatures are dwindling and disappearing, their homes ravaged with toxins, their forests transformed to stumps …

Was this inevitable? The old oral stories about the sun’s night journey through the ground give evidence that the simple opposition between an infinite light and a concentrated dark—between a perfect goodness and a pure malevolence—is not instinctive for the human animal, and indeed is of very recent vintage relative to the enormous depth of our indigenous ancestry. The stories suggest, on the contrary, that there is a secret identity between the resplendent sun overhead—whose face we dare not gaze upon directly—and the wild power that resides at the center of the earth. The tales draw their evocative strength, as we’ve noticed, from the way the solar fire has always been experienced by our unaided, animal senses. Our bodies observe the sun’s trajectory as it arcs through the heavens and slides down into the western earth at sunset; they observe the sun climbing out from the eastern lands—with a commotion of color, and much fanfare of birdsong—every dawn. How simple, then, for our sensory imagination to conclude that the sun is traveling through the ground at night, and taking its rest at the center of the earth! How plain and obvious the primordial intuition that the sun dwells, and sleeps, at the heart of the earth!

The intuition, however, appears antithetical to our contemporary understanding of things. It seems especially absurd in light of the Copernican basis of modern science. But it is not absurd. Although couched in a storied way of speaking very different from the cool detachment often promoted by our sciences, the inward sun holds a meaning uniquely resonant with today’s insights. Consider: according to our current understanding, the mass of the sun—now recognized as our local star, an outrageously immense ball of flaring gas roughly a million times the size of the earth—holds our planet in distant orbit around itself through the power of gravitational attraction. Yet while the sun exerts its gravitational pull upon the entirety of our planet, that force is not felt equally by every part of the earth. For the mass of the sun focuses its grip upon earth’s center of gravity. And that center is located deep within the white-hot core of the earth, far beneath the ground on which we stand. The sun’s mass, in other words, holds the earth most tightly at earth’s center; the rest of our planet spins, like a slowly wobbling top, around that stable center.

Hence, while the sun’s extravagant radiance reaches us daily from above, filtering down through earth’s atmosphere, the sun’s most incessant influence upon our world and upon our lives reaches us from below. It is an influence so visceral and direct that we can hardly bring it into our awareness. It is a connection as constant by day as it is by night, a relationship that does not vary as the cool of morning gives way to the warmth of noontime, or as the glare of midday is muted by the lengthening shadows of dusk. After Newton’s discoveries regarding the universal mutual attraction (or eros) we now call gravity, we know that our most direct material engagement with the sun is through the gravitational center of our planet. For our muscled, animal bodies, that blazing star makes itself felt not only as it moves across the daytime sky, but more deeply and constantly through the very heart of the earth.

To recount a tale suggesting that the sun that soars exalted through our skies also dwells deep within the earth—that the same round fire that lights our days secretly makes its home far beneath the ground on which we sleep—is hardly, then, to promote an ancient fiction. For the story is a simple and elegant way of translating a founding insight of modern science into the corporeal immediacy of felt experience. By carefully honing and telling such tales as this, we begin to complete the Copernican revolution—bringing its insights, at long last, back down to earth.

If the discoveries of Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo loosened the earth from the center of the universe, they also opened a profound rift between our sensing bodies and our thinking minds—between our direct, sensory experience of the world, in which the sun moved across the sky of a stable earth, and our new intellectual apprehension of the world, in which the sun remained stable while the earth itself moved. If the sun was really motionless, then everything our senses showed us was untrustworthy. As Copernican and Newtonian insights took hold, sensory perception was increasingly derided as deceptive; only that which could be measured and analyzed mathematically could be taken as true. The spreading cultural detachment from bodily experience enabled a new audacity in our human researches, empowering a wondrous range of discoveries and technological innovations. But it also left us curiously adrift, bereft of our most immediate source of contact and rapport with the surrounding terrain. Dismissing our felt experience, we sacrificed much of our animal empathy with the animate earth, forfeiting the implicit sustenance we’d always drawn from that empathy. While amassing our analytic truths and deploying our technologies, we became more and more impervious to the needs of the living land, oddly inured to the suffering of other animals and to the fate of the more-than-human world.

The preceding chapters have tried to delineate some of the dimensions of our perceptual oblivion, exploring an array of ways to recover our attunement without abandoning intellectual rigor. Corporeal sensations, feelings, our animal propensity to blend with our surroundings and be altered by them, our bedazzlement by birdsong and our susceptibility to the moon: none of these ought to be viewed as antithetical to clear thought. Our animal senses are neither deceptive nor untrustworthy; they are our access to the cosmos. Bodily perception provides our most intimate entry into a primary order of reality that can be disparaged or dismissed only at our peril. Far from offering an untrustworthy account of things, our senses disclose an ever-shifting reality that is not amenable to any finished account, an enigmatic and encompassing field of relationships to which we can only apprentice ourselves. This ambiguous order cannot be superseded by reason and the careful practice of our sciences, since it provides the experiential substance without which reason becomes rudderless. As the very substance of the real, it cannot be supplanted—but it can be augmented, elaborated, clarified, and complexified by those sciences. And our participation within it can be honed and deepened by our discoveries.

One such discovery was the recognition by the astronomer William Herschel some two hundred years ago that, contrary to the assertions of Copernicus, the sun itself was not stable but in motion, drawing the Earth and other planets with it as it whirls around the center of the Milky Way galaxy. Subsequent discoveries have confirmed that that same galactic center—like the center of every other galaxy—is itself in motion through space. However, when we say that something is in motion, we generally mean that it is moving relative to some stable point, some unmoving ground or medium. In a cosmos where every presence is motion, what shall we choose as that still point? Shall we designate our own sun as the stable reference? Or perhaps the center of some other solar system? Shall we choose the center of our galaxy, or the gravitational center of the great cluster of galaxies in which our Milky Way resides? But that center, too, is in motion relative to other clusters. In truth, any cluster or galaxy or star may be chosen as the stable reference, in relation to which every other body is seen to be in slow or rapid motion. In such an unbounded and dizzying pluriverse as ours, teeming with uncountable galaxies, every sphere enacts a center around which all the rest arrays itself. Why not, then, our own sphere, our own wild-flowering Earth?

Everything that we animals understand of movement and stillness was first acquired from our bodily experience of being in motion or at rest relative to the ground of this Earth, learned from crawling and walking upon it, and curling to sleep on its ample expanse. If we are told, for example, that some location at the center of the Milky Way is basically at rest while the remainder of our galaxy whirls around it, we conceptualize that center only by transferring our felt, bodily experience of the stable ground over into that presumed place of stillness. Without such an associative transfer, the so-called stability of that center could have no meaning for us. We cannot feel the relative rest or repose of any other cosmic location without first assimilating Earth’s ground (our body’s inescapable frame of reference) to that other location.

Even if we choose to say, with Copernicus, that it is not the Earth but rather the sun that is really at rest, we cannot help but approach that stable sun through the abiding, earthly ground beneath our feet.



Tonight is the winter solstice, the dark of the year. This book is completed. Too many species have slid into extinction during the writing, too many forests felled and wetlands filled; so much beauty’s fled the world. Life’s become cheap: with more and more of us piling in, humans keep bashing each other in ever more creative ways—car bombs bursting bodies and missiles dropped from unmanned drones splintering families, searing the land and spattering it with blood. An addled and anesthetized numbness is spreading rapidly throughout our species.

There are those, however, who are not frightened of grief; dropping deep into the sorrow, they find therein a necessary elixir to the numbness. When they encounter one another, when they press their foreheads against the bark of a centuries-old tree, or their palms into the hand of yet another child who has tasted prematurely of wrenching loss, their eyes well with tears that fall easily to the ground. The soil needs this water. Grief is but a gate, and our tears a kind of key opening a place of wonder that’s been locked away. Suddenly we notice the sustaining resonance between the drumming heart within our chest and the pulse rising from under the ground.

The stars glimmer in the solstice dark, their faint light mirrored in glints off the crusted snow. Far below these blanketed fields, deep beneath the bedrock, a lustrous power slumbers, fitfully, like a bear in its cave. The resplendence it carries by day is now subdued and smoldering—a slow burn, crackling within its hearth at the heart of the Eairth. As this power sleeps, it dreams. The dreams roil and flicker and seethe, curling back upon themselves and sometimes flaring, scorching the walls and scattering sparks. A few sparks embed themselves like seeds in the enfolding dark, others wink out and vanish. Meanwhile, the power sleeps, pulsing like a muscle, its vigor radiating outward in waves through the viscosity of molten metal and the slow solidity of rock (firing huge convection currents within these depths that move the continents far above), percolating outward as magma or propagating upward through the density of basalt and granite, rising later through thickets of feldspar and quartzite and the stratified soils near the surface, channeled outward through stems of dandelions and trunks of sequoias, through cattails and sugar maples and the upright backbones of smooth-skinned primates, finally fountaining into the open biosphere through blossoms and budded leaves and through the craft of our fingers, through the gleam in your lover’s eye and the fluted music upwelling now from the beak of a blackbird...
                                              Introduction




Trouble is an interesting word. It derives from a thirteenth-century
French verb meaning “to stir up,” “to make cloudy,” “to disturb.” We—all
of us on Terra—live in disturbing times, mixed-up times, troubling and
turbid times. The task is to become capable, with each other in all of
our bumptious kinds, of response. Mixed-up times are overflowing with
both pain and joy—with vastly unjust patterns of pain and joy, with
unnecessary killing of ongoingness but also with necessary resurgence.
The task is to make kin in lines of inventive connection as a practice of
learning to live and die well with each other in a thick present. Our task
is to make trouble, to stir up potent response to devastating events,
as well as to settle troubled waters and rebuild quiet places. In urgent
times, many of us are tempted to address trouble in terms of making
an imagined future safe, of stopping something from happening that
looms in the future, of clearing away the present and the past in order
to make futures for coming generations. Staying with the trouble does
not require such a relationship to times called the future. In fact, staying
with the trouble requires learning to be truly present, not as a vanishing
pivot between awful or edenic pasts and apocalyptic or salvific futures,
but as mortal critters entwined in myriad unfinished configurations of
places, times, matters, meanings.1
    Chthulucene is a simple word.2 It is a compound of two Greek roots
(khthôn and kainos) that together name a kind of timeplace for learn-
ing to stay with the trouble of living and dying in response-ability on a
damaged earth. Kainos means now, a time of beginnings, a time for on-
going, for freshness. Nothing in kainos must mean conventional pasts,
presents, or futures. There is nothing in times of beginnings that insists
on wiping out what has come before, or, indeed, wiping out what comes
after. Kainos can be full of inheritances, of remembering, and full of
comings, of nurturing what might still be. I hear kainos in the sense of
thick, ongoing presence, with hyphae infusing all sorts of temporalities
and materialities.
    Chthonic ones are beings of the earth, both ancient and up-to-the-
minute. I imagine chthonic ones as replete with tentacles, feelers, dig-
its, cords, whiptails, spider legs, and very unruly hair. Chthonic ones
romp in multicritter humus but have no truck with sky-gazing Homo.
Chthonic ones are monsters in the best sense; they demonstrate and
perform the material meaningfulness of earth processes and critters.
They also demonstrate and perform consequences. Chthonic ones are
not safe; they have no truck with ideologues; they belong to no one;
they writhe and luxuriate in manifold forms and manifold names in
all the airs, waters, and places of earth. They make and unmake; they
are made and unmade. They are who are. No wonder the world’s great
monotheisms in both religious and secular guises have tried again and
again to exterminate the chthonic ones. The scandals of times called the
Anthropocene and the Capitalocene are the latest and most dangerous
of these exterminating forces. Living-with and dying-with each other
potently in the Chthulucene can be a fierce reply to the dictates of both
Anthropos and Capital.
    Kin is a wild category that all sorts of people do their best to domesti-
cate. Making kin as oddkin rather than, or at least in addition to, godkin
and genealogical and biogenetic family troubles important matters, like
to whom one is actually responsible. Who lives and who dies, and how, in
this kinship rather than that one? What shape is this kinship, where and
whom do its lines connect and disconnect, and so what? What must be
cut and what must be tied if multispecies flourishing on earth, including
human and other-than-human beings in kinship, are to have a chance?
    An ubiquitous figure in this book is sf: science fiction, speculative
fabulation, string figures, speculative feminism, science fact, so far. This
reiterated list whirls and loops throughout the coming pages, in words

2 Introduction
and in visual pictures, braiding me and my readers into beings and pat-
terns at stake. Science fact and speculative fabulation need each other,
and both need speculative feminism. I think of sf and string figures in a
triple sense of figuring. First, promiscuously plucking out fibers in clot-
ted and dense events and practices, I try to follow the threads where they
lead in order to track them and find their tangles and patterns crucial
for staying with the trouble in real and particular places and times. In
that sense, sf is a method of tracing, of following a thread in the dark,
in a dangerous true tale of adventure, where who lives and who dies and
how might become clearer for the cultivating of multispecies justice.
Second, the string figure is not the tracking, but rather the actual thing,
the pattern and assembly that solicits response, the thing that is not
oneself but with which one must go on. Third, string figuring is passing
on and receiving, making and unmaking, picking up threads and drop-
ping them. sf is practice and process; it is becoming-with each other in
surprising relays; it is a figure for ongoingness in the Chthulucene.
    The book and the idea of “staying with the trouble” are especially im-
patient with two responses that I hear all too frequently to the horrors of
the Anthropocene and the Capitalocene. The first is easy to describe and,
I think, dismiss, namely, a comic faith in technofixes, whether secular or
religious: technology will somehow come to the rescue of its naughty but
very clever children, or what amounts to the same thing, God will come
to the rescue of his disobedient but ever hopeful children. In the face
of such touching silliness about technofixes (or techno-apocalypses),
sometimes it is hard to remember that it remains important to embrace
situated technical projects and their people. They are not the enemy;
they can do many important things for staying with the trouble and for
making generative oddkin.
    The second response, harder to dismiss, is probably even more de-
structive: namely, a position that the game is over, it’s too late, there’s no
sense trying to make anything any better, or at least no sense having any
active trust in each other in working and playing for a resurgent world.
Some scientists I know express this kind of bitter cynicism, even as they
actually work very hard to make a positive difference for both people and
other critters. Some people who describe themselves as critical cultural
theorists or political progressives express these ideas too. I think the
odd coupling of actually working and playing for multispecies flourish-
ing with tenacious energy and skill, while expressing an explicit “game
over” attitude that can and does discourage others, including students,

                                                        Introduction        3
is facilitated by various kinds of futurisms. One kind seems to imagine
that only if things work do they matter—or, worse, only if what I and
my fellow experts do works to fix things does anything matter. More
generously, sometimes scientists and others who think, read, study, agi-
tate, and care know too much, and it is too heavy. Or, at least we think
we know enough to reach the conclusion that life on earth that includes
human people in any tolerable way really is over, that the apocalypse
really is nigh.
    That attitude makes a great deal of sense in the midst of the earth’s
sixth great extinction event and in the midst of engulfing wars, ex-
tractions, and immiserations of billions of people and other critters for
something called “profit” or “power”—or, for that matter, called “God.”
A game-over attitude imposes itself in the gale-force winds of feeling,
not just knowing, that human numbers are almost certain to reach more
than 11 billion people by 2100. This figure represents a 9-billion-person
increase over 150 years from 1950 to 2100, with vastly unequal con-
sequences for the poor and the rich—not to mention vastly unequal
burdens imposed on the earth by the rich compared to the poor—and
even worse consequences for nonhumans almost everywhere. There are
many other examples of dire realities; the Great Accelerations of the
post–World War II era gouge their marks in earth’s rocks, waters, airs,
and critters. There is a fine line between acknowledging the extent and
seriousness of the troubles and succumbing to abstract futurism and its
affects of sublime despair and its politics of sublime indifference.
    This book argues and tries to perform that, eschewing futurism, stay-
ing with the trouble is both more serious and more lively. Staying with
the trouble requires making oddkin; that is, we require each other in
unexpected collaborations and combinations, in hot compost piles. We
become-with each other or not at all. That kind of material semiotics
is always situated, someplace and not noplace, entangled and worldly.
Alone, in our separate kinds of expertise and experience, we know both
too much and too little, and so we succumb to despair or to hope, and
neither is a sensible attitude. Neither despair nor hope is tuned to the
senses, to mindful matter, to material semiotics, to mortal earthlings
in thick copresence. Neither hope nor despair knows how to teach us to
“play string figures with companion species,” the title of the first chapter
of this book.
    Three long chapters open Staying with the Trouble. Each chapter tracks
stories and figures for making kin in the Chthulucene in order to cut

4 Introduction
the bonds of the Anthropocene and Capitalocene. Pigeons in all their
worldly diversity—from creatures of empire, to working men’s racing
birds, to spies in war, to scientific research partners, to collaborators in
art activisms on three continents, to urban companions and pests—are
the guides in chapter 1.
   In their homely histories, pigeons lead into a practice of “tentacular
thinking,” the title of the second chapter. Here, I expand the argument
that bounded individualism in its many flavors in science, politics, and
philosophy has finally become unavailable to think with, truly no longer
thinkable, technically or any other way. Sympoiesis—making-with—is a
keyword throughout the chapter, as I explore the gifts for needed think-
ing offered by theorists and storytellers. My partners in science studies,
anthropology, and storytelling—Isabelle Stengers, Bruno Latour, Thom
van Dooren, Anna Tsing, Marilyn Strathern, Hannah Arendt, Ursula Le
Guin, and others—are my companions throughout tentacular think-
ing. With their help, I introduce the three timescapes of the book: the
Anthropocene, the Capitalocene, and the Chthulucene. Allied with the
Pacific day octopus, Medusa, the only mortal Gorgon, figured as the Mis-
tress of the Animals, saves the day and ends the chapter.
   “Symbiogenesis and the Lively Arts of Staying with the Trouble,”
chapter 3, spins out the threads of sympoiesis in ecological evolutionary
developmental biology and in art/science activisms committed to four
iconic troubled places: coral reef holobiomes, Black Mesa coal country
in Navajo and Hopi lands and other fossil fuel extraction zones impact-
ing especially ferociously on indigenous peoples, complex lemur forest
habitats in Madagascar, and North American circumpolar lands and
seas subject to new and old colonialisms in the grip of rapidly melting
ice. This chapter makes string figures with the threads of reciprocating
energies of biologies, arts, and activisms for multispecies resurgence.
Navajo-Churro sheep, orchids, extinct bees, lemurs, jellyfish, coral pol-
yps, seals, and microbes play leading roles with their artists, biologists,
and activists throughout the chapter. Here and throughout the book,
the sustaining creativity of people who care and act animates the ac-
tion. Not surprisingly, contemporary indigenous people and peoples, in
conflict and collaboration with many sorts of partners, make a sensible
difference. Biologists, beginning with the incomparable Lynn Margulis,
infuse the thinking and playing of this chapter.
   “Making Kin,” chapter 4, is both a reprise of the timescapes of An-
thropocene, Capitalocene, and Chthulucene, and a plea to “Make Kin

                                                       Introduction       5
Not Babies.” Antiracist, anticolonial, anticapitalist, proqueer feminists
of every color and from every people have long been leaders in the move-
ment for sexual and reproductive freedom and rights, with particular
attention to the violence of reproductive and sexual orders for poor
and marginalized people. Feminists have been leaders in arguing that
sexual and reproductive freedom means being able to bring children,
whether one’s own or those of others, to robust adulthood in health
and safety in intact communities. Feminists have also been historically
unique in insisting on the power and right of every woman, young or
old, to choose not to have a child. Cognizant of how easily such a posi-
tion repeats the arrogances of imperialism, feminists of my persuasion
insist that motherhood is not the telos of women and that a woman’s
reproductive freedom trumps the demands of patriarchy or any other
system. Food, jobs, housing, education, the possibility of travel, com-
munity, peace, control of one’s body and one’s intimacies, health care,
usable and woman-friendly contraception, the last word on whether or
not a child will be born, joy: these and more are sexual and reproductive
rights. Their absence around the world is stunning. For excellent rea-
sons, the feminists I know have resisted the languages and policies of
population control because they demonstrably often have the interests
of biopolitical states more in view than the well-being of women and
their people, old and young. Resulting scandals in population control
practices are not hard to find. But, in my experience, feminists, includ-
ing science studies and anthropological feminists, have not been willing
seriously to address the Great Acceleration of human numbers, fearing
that to do so would be to slide once again into the muck of racism, clas-
sism, nationalism, modernism, and imperialism.
   But that fear is not good enough. Avoidance of the urgency of almost
incomprehensible increases in human numbers since 1950 can slip into
something akin to the way some Christians avoid the urgency of cli-
mate change because it touches too closely on the marrow of one’s faith.
How to address the urgency is the question that must burn for staying
with the trouble. What is decolonial feminist reproductive freedom in a
dangerously troubled multispecies world? It cannot be just a humanist
affair, no matter how anti-imperialist, antiracist, anticlassist, and pro-
woman. It also cannot be a “futurist” affair, attending mainly to abstract
numbers and big data, but not to the differentiated and layered lives
and deaths of actual people. Still, a 9 billion increase of human beings
over 150 years, to a level of 11 billion by 2100 if we are lucky, is not just

6 Introduction
a number; and it cannot be explained away by blaming Capitalism or
any other word starting with a capital letter. The need is stark to think
together anew across differences of historical position and of kinds of
knowledge and expertise.
   “Awash in Urine,” chapter 5, begins with personal and intimate rela-
tions, luxuriating in the consequences of following estrogens that con-
nect an aging woman and her elder dog, specifically, me and my com-
panion and research associate Cayenne. Before the threads of the string
figure have been tracked far, remembering their cyborg littermates,
woman and dog find themselves in histories of veterinary research, Big
Pharma, horse farming for estrogen, zoos, des feminist activism, in-
terrelated animal rights and women’s health actions, and much more.
Intensely inhabiting specific bodies and places as the means to cultivate
the capacity to respond to worldly urgencies with each other is the core
theme.
   Ursula K. Le Guin, Octavia Butler, and ants and acacia seeds populate
chapter 6, “Sowing Worlds.” The task is to tell an sf adventure story
with acacias and their associates as the protagonists. It turns out that
Le Guin’s carrier bag theory of narrative comes to the rescue, along with
biologist Deborah Gordon’s theories about ant interactions and colony
behavior, to elaborate the possibilities of ecological evolutionary devel-
opmental biology and nonhierarchical systems theories for shaping the
best stories. Science fiction and science fact cohabit happily in this tale.
With Le Guin as their scribe, the prose of acacia seeds and the lyrics of
lichens give way to the mute poetics of rocks in the final passages.
   “A Curious Practice,” chapter 7, draws close to the philosopher, psy-
chologist, animal-human student, and cultural theorist Vinciane De-
spret because of her incomparable ability to think-with other beings,
human or not. Despret’s work on attunement and on critters rendering
each other capable of unexpected feats in actual encounters is necessary
to staying with the trouble. She attends not to what critters are sup-
posed to be able to do, by nature or education, but to what beings evoke
from and with each other that was truly not there before, in nature or
culture. Her kind of thinking enlarges the capacities of all the players;
that is her worlding practice. The urgencies of the Anthropocene, Capita-
locene, and Chthulucene demand that kind of thinking beyond inherited
categories and capacities, in homely and concrete ways, like the sorts
of things Arabian babblers and their scientists get up to in the Negev
desert. Despret teaches how to be curious, as well as how to mourn by

                                                       Introduction       7
bringing the dead into active presence; and I needed her touch before
writing the concluding stories of Staying with the Trouble. Her curious
practice prepared me to write about the Communities of Compost and
the tasks of speakers for the dead, as they work for earthly multispecies
recuperation and resurgence.
   “The Camille Stories: Children of Compost” closes this book. This in-
vitation to a collective speculative fabulation follows five generations of
a symbiogenetic join of a human child and monarch butterflies along the
many lines and nodes of these insects’ migrations between Mexico and
the United States and Canada. These lines trace socialities and materiali-
ties crucial to living and dying with critters on the edge of disappearance
so that they might go on. Committed to nurturing capacities to respond,
cultivating ways to render each other capable, the Communities of Com-
post appeared all over the world in the early twenty-first century on
ruined lands and waters. These communities committed to help radi-
cally reduce human numbers over a few hundred years while developing
practices of multispecies environmental justice of myriad kinds. Every
new child had at least three human parents; and the pregnant parent
exercised reproductive freedom in the choice of an animal symbiont for
the child, a choice that ramified across the generations of all the species.
The relations of symbiogenetic people and unjoined humans brought
many surprises, some of them deadly, but perhaps the deepest surprises
emerged from the relations of the living and the dead, in symanimagenic
complexity, across the holobiomes of earth.
   Lots of trouble, lots of kin to be going on with.




8 Introduction
                                                                   CHAPTER 1




                    Playing String Figures
        with Companion Species
                                  In honor of G. Evelyn Hutchinson (1903–91)
                                              and Beatriz da Costa (1974–2012).
                            Hutchinson, my PhD adviser, wrote a biographical
                         memoir called The Kindly Fruits of the Earth, a title that
                            enfolds all the “reliable voyageurs” of this chapter.




1.1. Multispecies Cat’s Cradle. Drawing by Nasser Mufti, 2011.
Multispecies Storytelling and the
Practices of Companions
String figures are like stories; they propose and enact patterns for par-
ticipants to inhabit, somehow, on a vulnerable and wounded earth.1 My
multispecies storytelling is about recuperation in complex histories that
are as full of dying as living, as full of endings, even genocides, as begin-
nings. In the face of unrelenting historically specific surplus suffering
in companion species knottings, I am not interested in reconciliation or
restoration, but I am deeply committed to the more modest possibilities
of partial recuperation and getting on together. Call that staying with
the trouble. And so I look for real stories that are also speculative fabu-
lations and speculative realisms. These are stories in which multispe-
cies players, who are enmeshed in partial and flawed translations across
difference, redo ways of living and dying attuned to still possible finite
flourishing, still possible recuperation.
    sf is a sign for science fiction, speculative feminism, science fantasy,
speculative fabulation, science fact, and also, string figures. Playing
games of string figures is about giving and receiving patterns, dropping
threads and failing but sometimes finding something that works, some-
thing consequential and maybe even beautiful, that wasn’t there before,
of relaying connections that matter, of telling stories in hand upon hand,
digit upon digit, attachment site upon attachment site, to craft condi-
tions for finite flourishing on terra, on earth. String figures require hold-
ing still in order to receive and pass on. String figures can be played
by many, on all sorts of limbs, as long as the rhythm of accepting and
giving is sustained. Scholarship and politics are like that too—passing
on in twists and skeins that require passion and action, holding still and
moving, anchoring and launching.
    Racing pigeons in Southern California, along with their diverse peo-
ple, geographies, other critters, technologies, and knowledges, shape
practices of living and dying in rich worldings that I think of as string
figure games. This chapter, enabled by diverse actual pigeons and their
rich tracings, is the opening pattern of a cluster of knots. The critters
of all my stories inhabit an n-dimensional niche space called Terrapo-
lis. My fabulated multiple integral equation for Terrapolis is at once
a story, a speculative fabulation, and a string figure for multispecies
worlding.


10 c h a p t e r o n e
   Ω
   ∫ Terra[x]n = ∫∫∫∫ . . . ∫∫Terra(x1,x2,x3,x4, . . . ,xn,t) dx1 dx2 dx3 dx4 . . . dxndt = Terrapolis
   _

  x1 = stuff/physis, x2 = capacity, x3 = sociality, x4 = materiality, xn =
      dimensions-yet-to-come
  _ (alpha) = EcologicalEvolutionaryDevelopmental Biology’s multi-
      species epigenesis
  Ω (omega) = recuperating terra’s pluriverse
  t = worlding time, not container time, entangled times of past/present/
      yet to come

   Terrapolis is a fictional integral equation, a speculative fabulation.
   Terrapolis is n-dimensional niche space for multispecies becoming-
with.
   Terrapolis is open, worldly, indeterminate, and polytemporal.
   Terrapolis is a chimera of materials, languages, histories.
   Terrapolis is for companion species, cum panis, with bread, at table
together—not “posthuman” but “com-post.”
   Terrapolis is in place; Terrapolis makes space for unexpected companions.
   Terrapolis is an equation for guman, for humus, for soil, for ongoing
risky infection, for epidemics of promising trouble, for permaculture.
   Terrapolis is the sf game of response-ability.2
   Companion species are engaged in the old art of terraforming; they
are the players in the sf equation that describes Terrapolis. Finished
once and for all with Kantian globalizing cosmopolitics and grumpy
human-exceptionalist Heideggerian worlding, Terrapolis is a mongrel
word composted with a mycorrhiza of Greek and Latin rootlets and
their symbionts. Never poor in world, Terrapolis exists in the sf web of
always-too-much connection, where response-ability must be cobbled
together, not in the existentialist and bond-less, lonely, Man-making gap
theorized by Heidegger and his followers. Terrapolis is rich in world, in-
oculated against posthumanism but rich in com-post, inoculated against
human exceptionalism but rich in humus, ripe for multispecies story-
telling. This Terrapolis is not the home world for the human as Homo,
that ever parabolic, re- and de-tumescing, phallic self-image of the same;
but for the human that is transmogrified in etymological Indo-European
sleight of tongue into guman, that worker of and in the soil.3 My sf crit-
ters are beings of the mud more than the sky, but the stars too shine in


                                    P l ay i n g S F w i t h C o m pa n i o n S p e c i e s        11
Terrapolis. In Terrapolis, shed of masculinist universals and their politics
of inclusion, guman are full of indeterminate genders and genres, full of
kinds-in-the-making, full of significant otherness. My scholar-friends in
linguistics and ancient civilizations tell me that this guman is adama/
adam, composted from all available genders and genres and competent
to make a home world for staying with the trouble. This Terrapolis has
kin-making, string figure, sf relations with Isabelle Stengers’s kind of
fleshy cosmopolitics and sf writers’ practices of worlding.
    The British social anthropologist Marilyn Strathern, who wrote The
Gender of the Gift based on her ethnographic work in highland Papua
New Guinea (Mt. Hagen), taught me that “it matters what ideas we use
to think other ideas (with).”4 Strathern is an ethnographer of thinking
practices. She embodies for me the arts of feminist speculative fabula-
tion in the scholarly mode. It matters what matters we use to think other
matters with; it matters what stories we tell to tell other stories with;
it matters what knots knot knots, what thoughts think thoughts, what
descriptions describe descriptions, what ties tie ties. It matters what
stories make worlds, what worlds make stories. Strathern wrote about
accepting the risk of relentless contingency; she thinks about anthro-
pology as the knowledge practice that studies relations with relations,
that puts relations at risk with other relations, from unexpected other
worlds. In 1933, Alfred North Whitehead, the American mathemati-
cian and process philosopher who infuses my sense of worlding, wrote
The Adventures of Ideas.5 sf is precisely full of such adventures. Isabelle
Stengers, a chemist, scholar of Whitehead and Gilles Deleuze, radical
thinker about materiality in sciences, and an unruly feminist philos-
opher, gives me “speculative thinking” in abundance. With Isabelle
Stengers we cannot denounce the world in the name of an ideal world.
In the spirit of feminist communitarian anarchism and the idiom of
Whitehead’s philosophy, she maintains that decisions must take place
somehow in the presence of those who will bear their consequences.
That is what she means by cosmopolitics.6
    In relay and return, sf morphs in my writing and research into
speculative fabulation and string figures. Relays, string figures, pass-
ing patterns back and forth, giving and receiving, patterning, holding
the unasked-for pattern in one’s hands, response-ability; that is core to
what I mean by staying with the trouble in serious multispecies worlds.
Becoming-with, not becoming, is the name of the game; becoming-with
is how partners are, in Vinciane Despret’s terms, rendered capable.7 On-

12 c h a p t e r o n e
tologically heterogeneous partners become who and what they are in
relational material-semiotic worlding. Natures, cultures, subjects, and
objects do not preexist their intertwined worldings.
   Companion species are relentlessly becoming-with. The category
companion species helps me refuse human exceptionalism without
invoking posthumanism. Companion species play string figure games
where who is/are to be in/of the world is constituted in intra-and inter-
action.8 The partners do not precede the knotting; species of all kinds are
consequent upon worldly subject- and object-shaping entanglements.
In human-animal worlds, companion species are ordinary beings-in-
encounter in the house, lab, field, zoo, park, truck, office, prison, ranch,
arena, village, human hospital, forest, slaughterhouse, estuary, vet clinic,
lake, stadium, barn, wildlife preserve, farm, ocean canyon, city streets,
factory, and more.
   Although they are among humanity’s oldest games, string figures are
not everywhere the same game. Like all offspring of colonizing and im-
perial histories, I—we—have to relearn how to conjugate worlds with
partial connections and not universals and particulars. In the late nine-
teenth and early twentieth centuries, European and Euro-American
ethnologists collected string figure games from all over the world; these
discipline-making travelers were surprised that when they showed the
string figure games they had learned as children at home, their hosts al-
ready knew such games and often in greater variety. String figure games
came late to Europe, probably from Asian trade routes. All of the episte-
mological desires and fables of this period of the history of comparative
anthropology were ignited by the similarities and differences, with their
undecidably independent inventions or cultural diffusions, tied together
by the threads of hand and brain, making and thinking, in the relays of
patterning in “Native” and “Western” string figure games.9 In compara-
tive tension, the figures were both the same and not the same at all; sf is
still a risky game of worlding and storying; it is staying with the trouble.
   Figure 1.2 shows the hands of the science writer and natural history
radio producer Rusten Hogness10 learning a Navajo string figure called
Ma’ii Ats’áá’ Yílwoí (in English “Coyotes Running Opposite Ways”). Coy-
ote is the trickster who constantly scatters the dust of disorder into the
orderly star patterns made by the Fire God, setting up the noninnocent
world-making performances of disorder and order that shape the lives of
terran critters. In the Navajo language, string games are called na’atl’o’.
Navajo string games will reappear in my multispecies storytelling about

                            P l ay i n g S F w i t h C o m pa n i o n S p e c i e s   13
1.2. Ma’ii Ats’áá’ Yílwoí (Coyotes Running Opposite Ways).
Photograph by Donna Haraway.


Navajo-Churro sheep and the women and men who wove and weave
lives with and from them, but these games are needed in this chapter
too, for thinking with pigeons in Los Angeles and beyond. Cat’s cradle
and jeux de ficelle are not enough; the knots must ramify and double
back in many attachment sites in Terrapolis. Navajo string games are
one form of “continuous weaving,” practices for telling the stories of the
constellations, of the emergence of the People, of the Diné.11
   These string figures are thinking as well as making practices, peda-
gogical practices and cosmological performances. Some Navajo thinkers
describe string games as one kind of patterning for restoring hózhó, a
term imperfectly translated into English as “harmony,” “beauty,” “order,”
and “right relations of the world,” including right relations of humans
and nonhumans. Not in the world, but of the world; that crucial differ-
ence in English prepositions is what leads me to weave Navajo string
figures, na’atl’o’, into the web of sf worlding. The worlds of sf are not
containers; they are patternings, risky comakings, speculative fabula-
tions. In sf on Terrapolis, recuperation is in partial connection to hózhó.
It matters which ideas we think other ideas with; my thinking or mak-
ing cat’s cradle with na’atl’o’ is not an innocent universal gesture, but

14 c h a p t e r o n e
a risky proposition in relentless historical relational contingency. And
these contingencies include abundant histories of conquest, resistance,
recuperation, and resurgence. Telling stories together with historically
situated critters is fraught with the risks and joys of composing a more
livable cosmopolitics.
   Pigeons will be my first guides. Citizens of Terrapolis, pigeons are
members of opportunistic social species who can and do live in a myr-
iad of times and places. Highly diverse, they occupy many categories in
many languages, sorted in English terms into wild and domestic worlds,
but those particular oppositions are not general or universal, even in
the so-called West. The varied and proliferating specificities of pigeons
are astonishing. Codomesticated with their people, these other-than-
human critters nurture the kind of trouble important to me. Pigeons
have very old histories of becoming-with human beings. These birds tie
their people into knots of class, gender, race, nation, colony, postcolony,
and—just maybe—recuperating terra-yet-to-come.
   Pigeons are also “creatures of empire”—that is, animals who went
with European colonists and conquerors all over the world, including
places where other varieties of their kind were already well established,
transforming ecologies and politics for everybody in ways that still
ramify through multispecies flesh and contested landscapes.12 Hardly
always colonists, pigeons belong to kinds and breeds indigenous to many
places, in uncounted configurations of living and dying. Building nat-
uralcultural economies and lives for thousands of years, these critters
are also infamous for ecological damage and biosocial upheaval. They
are treasured kin and despised pests, subjects of rescue and of invec-
tive, bearers of rights and components of the animal-machine, food and
neighbor, targets of extermination and of biotechnological breeding and
multiplication, companions in work and play and carriers of disease,
contested subjects and objects of “modern progress” and “backward tra-
dition.” Besides all that, kinds of pigeons vary, and vary, and then vary
some more, with kinds for nearly every spot on terra.
   Becoming-with people for several thousand years, domestic pigeons
(Columba livia domestica) emerged from birds native to western and
southern Europe, North Africa, and western and southern Asia. Rock
doves came with Europeans to the Americas, entering North America
through Port Royal in Nova Scotia in 1606. Everywhere they have gone,
these cosmopolitical pigeons occupy cities with gusto, where they in-
cite human love and hatred in extravagant measure. Called “rats with

                           P l ay i n g S F w i t h C o m pa n i o n S p e c i e s   15
wings,” feral pigeons are subjects of vituperation and extermination, but
they also become cherished opportunistic companions who are fed and
watched avidly all over the world. Domestic rock doves have worked as
spies carrying messages, racing birds, fancy pigeons at fairs and bird
markets, food for working families, psychological test subjects, Dar-
win’s interlocutors on the power of artificial selection, and more. Feral
pigeons are a favorite food for urban raptors, like peregrine falcons, who,
after recovering from near extermination from ddt-thinned eggshells,
have taken up life on bridges and ledges of city skyscrapers.
   Pigeons are competent agents—in the double sense of both dele-
gates and actors—who render each other and human beings capable
of situated social, ecological, behavioral, and cognitive practices. Their
worlding is expansive, and the sf games in this chapter do not touch
very many, much less all, of the threads tied with and by these birds.13
My sf game tracks modest, daring, contemporary, risk-filled projects
for recuperation, in which people and animals tangle together in inno-
vative ways that might, just barely possibly, render each other capable
of a finite flourishing—now and yet to come. The collaborations among
differently situated people—and peoples—are as crucial as, and enabled
by, those between the humans and animals. Pigeons fly us not into col-
laborations in general, but into specific crossings from familiar worlds
into uncomfortable and unfamiliar ones to weave something that might
come unraveled, but might also nurture living and dying in beauty in the
n-dimensional niche space of Terrapolis. My hope is that these knots
propose promising patterns for multispecies response-ability inside on-
going trouble.


California Racing Pigeons and Their People:
Collaborating Arts for Worldly Flourishing
Becoming-With; Rendering-Capable
The capabilities of pigeons surprise and impress human beings, who
often forget how they themselves are rendered capable by and with both
things and living beings. Shaping response-abilities, things and living
beings can be inside and outside human and nonhuman bodies, at dif-
ferent scales of time and space. All together the players evoke, trigger,
and call forth what—and who—exists. Together, becoming-with and
rendering-capable invent n-dimensional niche space and its inhabitants.

16 c h a p t e r o n e
1.3. Bird Man of the Mission, mural of a homeless mentally ill man called Lone Star
Swan and some of the urban pigeons who have been his friends and companions
on the street in San Francisco’s Mission District. Painted by Daniel Doherty in
2006 within the Clarion Alley Mural Project, this work was heavily tagged and
finally painted over in 2013. Written for the Street Art SF team by Jane Bregman
and posted on October 7, 2014, the story of The Bird Man of the Mission is on the
website of Street Art SF. Photograph by James Clifford, ©2009. Courtesy of Daniel
Doherty and the Clarion Alley Mural Project.
What results is often called nature. Pigeon natures in these coproduced
senses matter to my sf story.
   Pigeons released in unfamiliar places find their way back to their home
lofts from thousands of kilometers away even on cloudy days.14 Pigeons
have the map sense and compass sense that have endeared them to pi-
geon fanciers who race them for sport, scientists who study them for the
behavioral neurobiology of orientation and navigation, spies who wish
to send messages across enemy territory, and writers of mystery novels
who call on a good pigeon to carry secrets.15 Almost always men and
boys, racing enthusiasts around the world—with perhaps the hottest
spots of the sport on the rooftops of cities like Cairo and Istanbul and
of immigrant Muslim neighborhoods in European cities like Berlin—
selectively breed and elaborately nurture their talented birds to special-
ize in fast and accurate homing from release points. Ordinary feral pi-
geons are no slouches at getting home either.
   Pigeons will use familiar landmarks to find their way, and they are
very good at recognizing and discriminating objects and masses below
them during flight. In Project Sea Hunt in the 1970s and ’80s, the U.S.
Coast Guard worked with pigeons, who were better at spotting men and
equipment in open water than human beings.16 Indeed, pigeons were
accurate 93 percent of the time, compared to human accuracy in similar
problems of 38 percent. The pigeons perched in an observation bubble
on the underside of a helicopter, where they pecked keys to indicate
their finds. When they worked with their people instead of in isolation,
pigeons were nearly 100 percent accurate. Clearly, the pigeons and Coast
Guard personnel had to learn how to communicate with each other, and
the pigeons had to learn what their humans were interested in seeing.
In nonmimetic ways, people and birds had to invent pedagogical and
technological ways to render each other capable in problems novel to all
of them. The pigeons never graduated to jobs to save real shipwreck vic-
tims, however, because in 1983, after two helicopters crashed and federal
money was cut for the research, the project was ended.
   Not very many kinds of other-than-human critters have convinced hu-
man skeptics that the animals recognize themselves in a mirror—a talent
made known to scientists by such actions as picking at paint spots or
other marks on one’s body that are visible only in a mirror. Pigeons share
this capacity with, at least, human children over two years old, rhesus ma-
caques, chimpanzees, magpies, dolphins, and elephants.17 So-called self-
recognition carries great weight in Western-influenced psychology and

18 c h a p t e r o n e
philosophy, besotted by individualism in theory and method, as these
fields have been. Devising tests to show who can and can’t do it is some-
thing of a competitive epistemological sport. Pigeons passed their first
mirror tests in the laboratories of B. F. Skinner in 1981.18 In 2008, Science
News reported that Keio University researchers showed that, even with
five- to seven-second time delays, pigeons did better at self-recognition
tests with both mirrors and live video images of themselves than three-
year-old human children.19 Pigeons pick out different people in photo-
graphs very well too, and in Professor Shigeru Watanabe’s Laboratory of
Comparative Cognitive Neuroscience at Keio University, pigeons could
tell the difference between paintings by Monet or Picasso, and even gen-
eralize to discriminate unfamiliar paintings from different styles and
schools by various painters.20 It would be a mistake to start building the
predictable arguments along the lines of “my bird-brain cognition is bet-
ter than or equal to your ape-brain cognition.” What is happening seems
to me to be more interesting than that, and more pregnant with conse-
quences for getting on well with each other, for caring in both emergent
similarity and difference. Pigeons, people, and apparatus have teamed
up to make each other capable of something new in the world of multi-
species relationships.
    It is all very well to offer proof of becoming a self-recognizing self
in certain kinds of setups, but it is surely as critical to be able to recog-
nize one another and other beings in ways that make sense to the sorts
of lives the critters will lead, whether in racing-pigeon lofts or urban
squares. Scientists do very interesting research on these topics, but here
I want instead to tune in to the online Racing Pigeon Post essays by Tanya
Berokoff. A teacher in speech communication and lifelong companion
with other animals, she is a member of the Palomar Racing Pigeon Club
in California with her husband, John Berokoff, who races the birds with
mostly other men. Drawing on her social science knowledge and on
American popular culture, Tanya Berokoff explicitly uses psychologist
John Bowlby’s attachment theory and Tina Turner’s lyrics for “What’s
Love Got to Do with It?” to talk about how fanciers assist pigeon parents
to raise their youngsters and help them feel competent and safe as they
mature into calm, confident, reliable, socially competent, home-seeking
racers.21 She describes pigeon people’s obligation to put themselves in
the place of the pigeons to understand their ways of knowing and their
social practices, and the idiom Berokoff uses for knowledge is love, in-
cluding but not only instrumental love. The actors are both pigeons and

                            P l ay i n g S F w i t h C o m pa n i o n S p e c i e s   19
people, in inter- and intraspecies relatings. She describes the details
of the gestures and postures of pigeons with each other, the time they
spend with each other, and what they do to fill that time. She concludes,
“It would seem that our pigeons do quite a good job of exhibiting an
agape type of love toward each other . . . Our pigeons are actually doing
the work of real love.” For her, the “work of real love” is “not about an
emotional need to fall in love but to be genuinely loved by another.”22
Meeting that need for their columbine social partners, she says, is what
the pigeons seem to do, and that is also what their people owe the pi-
geons. Berokoff uses Bowlby’s attachment theory in detail to describe
the needs of young pigeons as they mature, and their partners are both
other pigeons and human beings response-able with them. The scene
she describes is not all rosy. Pigeon bullying, the taxing labor of racing
for birds and people, competition for attention and love—and recipes
for cooking some of the pigeons—are all in these posts. My point is not
that this discourse or this sport is innocent, but that here is a scene of
great relational complexity, a vigorous multispecies sf practice.

PigeonBlog
Recuperation and staying with the trouble are the themes of my sf
practice. It is all too possible to address these questions through human
brutality toward pigeons, or indeed through pigeon damage to other
species or to human-built structures. Instead, I want to turn to the dif-
ferential burdens of urban air pollution that contribute to different rates
of human (and other-than-human, but that is not rated) mortality and
illness, often distributed by race and class. Working pigeons will be our
companions in projects of environmental justice in California that seek
to repair both blighted neighborhoods and social relations. We will stay
with the trouble in the tissues of an art activism project called Pigeon-
Blog. This was a project by artist-researcher Beatriz da Costa with her
students Cina Hazegh and Kevin Ponto; they tied sf patterns with many
human, animal, and cyborg coshapers.
    In August 2006, racing pigeons flew as participants in three public
social experiments that intimately joined communication technolo-
gies with city people and urban sporting birds. The pigeons flew once
as part of a Seminar in Experimental Critical Theory at the University
of California at Irvine and twice for the festival called Seven Days of
Art and Interconnectivity of the Inter-Society for Electronic Arts in

20 c h a p t e r o n e
San Jose, California.23 PigeonBlog required extensive collaboration be-
tween “homing pigeons, artists, engineers, and pigeon fanciers engaged
in a grass-roots scientific data gathering initiative designed to collect
and distribute information about air quality conditions to the general
public.”24 Worldwide, racing pigeons are no strangers to alliances with
working-class people in relations of competitive masculine sport and
profound cross-species affection, and their historical capabilities in sur-
veillance and communication technologies and networks are very old
and very important. These pigeons have been workers and subjects in or-
nithology and psychology research labs for many decades. But sporting
homing pigeons had not, before PigeonBlog, been invited to join all of
that heritage together with another set of players, namely, art activists.
The project sought to join savvy, inexpensive, do-it-yourself electron-
ics with citizen science and interspecies coproduced art and knowledge
“in the pursuit of resistant action.”25 The data were intended to pro-
voke, motivate, amplify, inspire, and illustrate, not to substitute for or
surpass professional air pollution science and monitoring. These were
data produced to generate further imaginative and knowing action in
many domains of practice. Da Costa set out not to become an air pollu-
tion scientist, but to spark collaboration in something quite different:
multispecies art in action for mundane worlds in need of—and capable
of—recuperation across consequential differences.
   Air pollution is legendary in Southern California, especially Los An-
geles County, and it impacts the health of people and other critters es-
pecially fiercely near highways, power plants, and refineries. These sites
often cluster in and near the neighborhoods of working-class people,
people of color, and immigrants—hardly mutually exclusive categories.
Official government air pollution monitoring devices in Southern Cali-
fornia are placed at fixed points away from high-traffic areas and known
pollution sources and at altitudes higher than the zones in which people
and lots of other plants and animals breathe. Each monitoring device
costs many thousands of dollars and can only measure gases in its im-
mediate vicinity, relying on various models to extrapolate to the volume
of the air basin. Properly equipped racing pigeons can gather continuous
real-time air pollution data while moving through the air at key heights
not accessible to the official instruments, as well as from the ground
where they are released for their homing flights. These data could also
be streamed in real time to the public via the Internet. What would it
take to enlist the cooperation of such birds and their people, and what

                           P l ay i n g S F w i t h C o m pa n i o n S p e c i e s   21
kind of caring and response-ability could such a collaboration evoke?
Who would render whom capable of what?
    Da Costa explained the equipment: “The pigeon ‘backpack’ developed
for this project consisted of a combined gps (latitude, longitude, alti-
tude) / gsm (cell phone tower communication) unit and corresponding
antennas, a dual automotive co/nox pollution sensor, a temperature
sensor, a Subscriber Identity Module (sim) card interface, a micro-
controller and standard supporting electronic components. Designed
in this manner, we essentially ended up developing an open-platform
Short Message Service (sms) enabled cell phone, ready to be rebuilt and
repurposed by anyone who is interested in doing so.”26 The researcher-
artist-engineers took about three months to design the basic technol-
ogy, but making the pack small, comfortable, and safe enough for the
pigeons took almost a year of building hands-on multispecies trust and
knowledge essential to joining the birds, technology, and people. No one
wanted an overloaded homing pigeon plucked from the air by an oppor-
tunistic falcon that was not a member of the project! Nobody, least of
all the men who bred, raised, handled, and loved their racing pigeons,
would tolerate anxious and unhappy birds lumbering home under du-
ress. The artist-researchers and the pigeon fanciers had to render each
other capable of mutual trust so that they could ask the birds for their
confidence and skill. That meant lots of fitting sessions and pigeon bal-
ance training in lofts and lots of learning to learn with a generous and
knowledgeable pigeon fancier, Bob Matsuyama, who was also a middle
school shop and science teacher, and his talented and educated fliers.
The pigeons were not sim cards; they were living coproducers, and the
artist-researchers and pigeons had to learn to interact and to train to-
gether with the mentoring of the men of the pigeon fancy. All the players
rendered each other capable; they “became-with” each other in specula-
tive fabulation. Many trials and test flights later, the multispecies team
was ready to trace the air in string figure patterns of electronic tracks.27
    There were many press reports and reactions to the 2006 perfor-
mances and to the PigeonBlog website. Da Costa reported that an en-
gineer from Texas contacted her about coauthoring a grant proposal to
the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency to collaborate in
the development of small autonomous aerial surveillance vehicles de-
signed around the aerodynamics of birds. If only that had been a joke!
But the long military use of other-than-human animals as weapons and
spy systems has only become fancier and more “techy” in the twenty-

22 c h a p t e r o n e
1.4. The PigeonBlog team of human beings, pigeons, and
electronic technologies. Photograph by Deborah Forster for
PigeonBlog. Courtesy of Robert Niediffer, artistic executor
for Beatriz da Costa.

first century.28 In another vein, People for the Ethical Treatment of An-
imals (peta) tried to shut PigeonBlog down as abuse of animals. peta
issued a public statement calling on the administration of the University
of California at Irvine, where da Costa was a faculty member, to take
action. The rationale was fascinating: PigeonBlog was not justified in
its use of nonhuman animals because it was not even conducting sci-
entifically grounded experiments, to which peta might also object, but
less so because that at least would have teleological, functional reason
(cure disease, map genomes, etc.) on its side. Art was trivial, mere play
compared to the serious work of expanding subjects of rights or advanc-
ing science. Da Costa took seriously questions about the cosmopolitics
and material-semiotics of collaboration for animals in art, politics, or
science. Who renders whom capable of what, and at what price, borne by
whom? But, she asked, “Is human-animal work as part of political [and
art] action less legitimate than the same type of activity when framed
under the umbrella of science?”29 Perhaps it is precisely in the realm
of play, outside the dictates of teleology, settled categories, and func-

                               P l ay i n g S F w i t h C o m pa n i o n S p e c i e s   23
tion, that serious worldliness and recuperation become possible. That is
surely the premise of sf.
   Well before peta noticed da Costa’s art research, racing-pigeon men’s
fear of the kind of controversy and attack that some (not all) parts of
the animal rights movement bring to many organized working/playing
human-animal relationships, including becoming-with pigeons in com-
petitive sport, almost stopped PigeonBlog before it got started.30 In the
early stages of her project, da Costa contacted the American Racing Pi-
geon Union in an effort to meet pigeon fanciers to see if they and their
pigeons would participate. The first contact person was interested but
frankly afraid of animal rights people and tactics. He referred da Costa
to Bob Matsuyama, who worked with the project extensively and also
helped the art researchers meet pigeon fanciers in San Jose, relaying
earned trust. When PigeonBlog was finished, the American Racing Pi-
geon Union gave da Costa a formal “Certificate of Appreciation” for the
work she did for the birds and their people by showing a wider public the
accomplishments and capabilities of racing pigeons.
   There are lots of fans of PigeonBlog, including green and environ-
mental activists, but one response in particular made da Costa feel that
the racing pigeons of California had flown well, opening up something
promising in the world across species. The Cornell University Labora-
tory of Ornithology asked da Costa to serve on its board for “Urban Bird
Gardens” as part of the lab’s citizen science initiative. Data collected by
ordinary people, from elderly walkers to schoolchildren, could and did
become part of databases bringing together university research and the
affections and questions of citizens. Consider a closely related Cornell-
linked citizen science initiative, Project PigeonWatch, which surveys re-
gional differences in color types in different populations of common fe-
ral pigeons. One PigeonWatch project is in Washington, DC, and enlists
city school groups to observe and record urban pigeons. Many things
happen in this work in Terrapolis. City kids, overwhelmingly from “mi-
nority” groups, learn to see despised birds as valuable and interesting
city residents, as worth notice. Neither the kids nor the pigeons are
urban “wildlife”; both sets of beings are civic subjects and objects in
intra-action. But I cannot and will not forget that these pigeons and
black kids in DC both carry the marks of U.S. racist iconography as un-
ruly, dirty, out of place, feral. The actual kids move from seeing pigeons
as “rats with wings” to sociable birds with lives and deaths. The kids
transmute from bird hecklers and sometimes physical abusers to astute

24 c h a p t e r o n e
observers and advocates of beings whom they had not known how to
see or respect. The schoolchildren became response-able. Perhaps, be-
cause pigeons have long histories of affective and cognitive relations
with people, the pigeons looked back at the kids too, and at least the
birds were not heckled. I know this account is a story, an invitation as
much as an accomplishment, but the space for recuperation across de-
spised cross-species categories of city dwellers deserves to be widened,
not shut down.31
   Writing of another art project joining homing pigeons and their
people in collaboration in the face of the danger of the loss of the very
community of pigeon fanciers (colombophiles) that nurtures them both,
Vinciane Despret asked what the pigeon loft (pigeonnier) designed by
the artist Matali Crasset at Chaudry, France, in 2003 commemorates:
  But without the lover of pigeons (pigeon fancier), without the knowl-
  edge and know-how of men and birds, without selection, apprentice-
  ship, without transmission of practices, what then would remain
  would be pigeons, but not homing pigeons, not voyageurs. What is
  commemorated, then, is not the animal alone, nor the practice alone,
  but the activation of two “becomings-with” that are written explic-
  itly into the origin of the project. Otherwise said, what is brought
  into existence are the relations by which pigeons transform men into
  talented pigeon fanciers and by which the fanciers transform the pi-
  geons into reliable racing pigeons. This is how the work commemo-
  rates. It tasks itself with crafting a memory in the sense of prolonging
  the achievement into the present. This is a kind of “reprise.”32
To re-member, to com-memorate, is actively to reprise, revive, retake,
recuperate. Committed to the multispecies, sf, string figure worlding
of becoming-with, da Costa and Despret are companion species. They
remember; they entice and prolong into the fleshly present what would
disappear without the active reciprocity of partners. Homing or racing
pigeons and feral pigeons call both their emergent and traditional peo-
ples to response-ability, and vice versa. City dwellers and rural people of
different species and modes of living and dying make each other colom-
bophiles talentueux in company with voyageurs fiables.
   Despret and da Costa are playing string figure games with Matali
Crasset, relaying knotted patterns and possibilities in Terrapolis. Cras-
set is an industrial designer, a profession that requires listening to and
collaborating with partners in ways fine artists need not engage, but

                           P l ay i n g S F w i t h C o m pa n i o n S p e c i e s   25
1.5. Capsule, designed by Matali Crasset, 2003, for the project of La Fondation
de France. Les nouveaux commanditaires. Médiation-Production: artconnexion.
Lille, France. © André Morin.


which da Costa also practices in her work and play as artist researcher
and multispecies art activist. The pigeon loft Crasset proposed was com-
missioned by La Défense, the association of pigeon fanciers in Beauvois
en Cambresis, and by La Base de Loisirs de Caudry (the leisure park
of Caudry). The interior space of the capsule is functionally organized
like a tree, a kind of axis of the world, and the exterior shape echoes
old Egyptian designs for pigeon lofts. Historical, mythical, and material
worlds are in play here, in this home for birds commissioned by those
who breed, raise, fly, and become-with them.
   Another pigeon loft in the shape of a tower imposes itself on my
memory; another proposal for multispecies recuperation for creatures of
empire is held out to those of whatever species who might grasp it. This
time we are in Melbourne in Australia, in Batman Park along the Yarra
River, part of the Wurundjeri people’s territory prior to European settle-
ment. This colonized area along the Yarra became a wasteland, sewage
dump, and site for cargo and rail transport, destroying the wetlands (An-
glo scientific term) and destroying country (Anglo-Aboriginal term for
multidimensional and storied place). Wetlands and country are as alike
and as different as cat’s cradle, jeux de ficelle, na’atl’o’, and matjka-wuma;

26 c h a p t e r o n e
for staying with the trouble, the names and patterns are necessary to
each other, but they are not isomorphic.33 They inhabit linked, split, and
tangled histories.
   The small Batman Park was established in 1982 along a disused freight
train rail yard, and the pigeon loft was built in the 1990s to encourage
pigeons to roost away from city buildings and streets. The loft is a tower
structure built as part of the city’s management plan for feral pigeons.
These are not the beloved sporting pigeons of fanciers or colombophiles,
but the urban “rats of the sky” we met a few paragraphs ago in a Washing-
ton, DC, city parks program tied to the internationally eminent Cornell
University Laboratory of Ornithology. Melbourne’s pigeons came with
Europeans and thrived in the ecosystems and worlds that replaced the
Yarra River wetlands and dispossessed most of the Aboriginal traditional
owners of the land responsible for taking care of country. In 1985, the
Wurundjeri Tribe Land Compensation and Cultural Heritage Council was
established partly to develop awareness of Wurundjeri culture and his-
tory within contemporary Australia. I do not know if this council played
any role in the partial recuperation of the land of Batman Park; I do know
that sites along the Yarra River were places of significance to the Wurund-
jeri. In 1835, businessman and explorer John Batman signed a document
with a group of Wurundjeri elders for the purchase of land in the first and
only documented time that Europeans “negotiated their presence and oc-
cupation of Aboriginal lands directly with the traditional owners . . . For
600,000 acres of Melbourne, including most of the land now within the
suburban area, John Batman paid 40 pairs of blankets, 42 tomahawks,
130 knives, 62 pairs scissors, 40 looking glasses, 250 handkerchiefs,
18 shirts, 4 flannel jackets, 4 suits of clothes and 150 lb. of flour.”34 The
British governor of New South Wales repudiated this impudent treaty for
its trespass on the rights of the Crown. Somehow, this fraught history
must be inherited, must be re-membered, in that little park strip of re-
claimed urban land with its striking pigeon tower.
   Batman Park’s pigeon loft is not art research for citizen science or
industrial design commissioned by the racing-pigeon community, but
a birth control—or, better, hatching control—technology crucial to
multispecies urban flourishing. Feral pigeon fecundity is itself a mate-
rial urban force, and also a potent signifier of the overfilling of the land
with settlers and immigrants and depriving the land of endemic wet-
land birds and Aboriginal peoples. Staying with the trouble, the task is
multispecies recuperation and somehow, in that suggestive Australian

                            P l ay i n g S F w i t h C o m pa n i o n S p e c i e s   27
1.6. Pigeon loft in Batman Park, Melbourne. Photograph by Nick Carson, 2008.



idiom, “getting on together” with less denial and more experimental
justice. I want to see the pigeon loft as a small, practical enactment and
a reminder to further opening to the response-ability of staying with the
trouble. Response-ability is about both absence and presence, killing and
nurturing, living and dying—and remembering who lives and who dies
and how in the string figures of naturalcultural history. The loft has two
hundred nesting boxes for pigeons, inviting them to lay their eggs. Peo-
ple come from below and replace their eggs with artificial ones to brood.
People are allowed—encouraged—to feed pigeons near the loft but not
elsewhere. Pitchfork, a blog dedicated to writing about “projects to do
with permaculture, education, and growing food,” took note of the Bat-
man Park loft not just for its efforts to deal with pigeon-human conflict
in innovative ways, but also for a rich product of concentrated roosting
birds—compostable droppings. The blogger noted suggestively, “The
easiest way to get pigeon manure into your food system is to get the pi-
geons to fly it in for you.”35 In a park that was a sewage dump not so long
ago, this suggestion from the permaculture world has a definite charm.
This pigeon loft is not a prolife project; in my view, no serious animal-
human becoming-with can be a prolife project in the chilling American

28 c h a p t e r o n e
sense of that term. And the municipal pigeon tower certainly cannot
undo unequal treaties, conquest, and wetlands destruction; but it is
nonetheless a possible thread in a pattern for ongoing, noninnocent,
interrogative, multispecies getting on together.


Reliable Voyageurs
Companion species infect each other all the time. Pigeons are world
travelers, and such beings are vectors and carry many more, for good
and for ill. Bodily ethical and political obligations are infectious, or they
should be. Cum panis, companion species, at table together. Why tell sto-
ries like my pigeon tales, when there are only more and more openings
and no bottom lines? Because there are quite definite response-abilities
that are strengthened in such stories.
   The details matter. The details link actual beings to actual response-
abilities. As spies, racers, messengers, urban neighbors, iridescent sex-
ual exhibitionists, avian parents, gender assistants for people, scientific
subjects and objects, art-engineering environmental reporters, search-
and-rescue workers at sea, imperialist invaders, discriminators of paint-
ing styles, native species, pets, and more, around the earth pigeons and
their partners of many kinds, including people, make history. Each time
a story helps me remember what I thought I knew, or introduces me to
new knowledge, a muscle critical for caring about flourishing gets some
aerobic exercise. Such exercise enhances collective thinking and move-
ment in complexity. Each time I trace a tangle and add a few threads that
at first seemed whimsical but turned out to be essential to the fabric,
I get a bit straighter that staying with the trouble of complex world-
ing is the name of the game of living and dying well together on terra,
in Terrapolis. We are all responsible to and for shaping conditions for
multispecies flourishing in the face of terrible histories, and sometimes
joyful histories too, but we are not all response-able in the same ways.
The differences matter—in ecologies, economies, species, lives.
   If only we could all be so lucky as to have a savvy artist design our
lofts, our homes, our messaging packs! If only we all had the map sense
to navigate in the troubled times and places!




                            P l ay i n g S F w i t h C o m pa n i o n S p e c i e s   29
   CHAPTER 2




       Tentacular Thinking
               Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Chthulucene




We are all lichens.
—Scott Gilbert, “We Are All Lichens Now”
                                            Think we must. We must think.
                            —Stengers and Despret, Women Who Make a Fuss

What happens when human exceptionalism and bounded individualism,
those old saws of Western philosophy and political economics, become
unthinkable in the best sciences, whether natural or social? Seriously
unthinkable: not available to think with. Biological sciences have been
especially potent in fermenting notions about all the mortal inhabi-
tants of the earth since the imperializing eighteenth century. Homo
sapiens—the Human as species, the Anthropos as the human species,
Modern Man—was a chief product of these knowledge practices. What
happens when the best biologies of the twenty-first century cannot do
their job with bounded individuals plus contexts, when organisms plus
environments, or genes plus whatever they need, no longer sustain the
overflowing richness of biological knowledges, if they ever did? What
happens when organisms plus environments can hardly be remembered
for the same reasons that even Western-indebted people can no longer
figure themselves as individuals and societies of individuals in human-
only histories? Surely such a transformative time on earth must not be
named the Anthropocene!
    In this chapter, with all the unfaithful offspring of the sky gods, with
my littermates who find a rich wallow in multispecies muddles, I want
to make a critical and joyful fuss about these matters. I want to stay
with the trouble, and the only way I know to do that is in generative joy,
terror, and collective thinking.
    My first demon familiar in this task will be a spider, Pimoa cthulhu,
who lives under stumps in the redwood forests of Sonoma and Men-
docino Counties, near where I live in North Central California.1 Nobody
lives everywhere; everybody lives somewhere. Nothing is connected to
everything; everything is connected to something.2 This spider is in
place, has a place, and yet is named for intriguing travels elsewhere. This
spider will help me with returns, and with roots and routes.3 The eight-
legged tentacular arachnid that I appeal to gets her generic name from
the language of the Goshute people of Utah and her specific name from
denizens of the depths, from the abyssal and elemental entities, called
chthonic.4 The chthonic powers of Terra infuse its tissues everywhere,
despite the civilizing efforts of the agents of sky gods to astralize them
and set up chief Singletons and their tame committees of multiples or
subgods, the One and the Many. Making a small change in the biolo-
gist’s taxonomic spelling, from cthulhu to chthulu, with renamed Pimoa
chthulu I propose a name for an elsewhere and elsewhen that was, still is,
and might yet be: the Chthulucene. I remember that tentacle comes from
the Latin tentaculum, meaning “feeler,” and tentare, meaning “to feel”
and “to try”; and I know that my leggy spider has many-armed allies.
Myriad tentacles will be needed to tell the story of the Chthulucene.5
    The tentacular ones tangle me in sf. Their many appendages make
string figures; they entwine me in the poiesis—the making—of specula-
tive fabulation, science fiction, science fact, speculative feminism, soin de
ficelle, so far. The tentacular ones make attachments and detachments;
they ake cuts and knots; they make a difference; they weave paths and
consequences but not determinisms; they are both open and knotted
in some ways and not others.6 sf is storytelling and fact telling; it is
the patterning of possible worlds and possible times, material-semiotic
worlds, gone, here, and yet to come. I work with string figures as a theo-
retical trope, a way to think-with a host of companions in sympoietic
threading, felting, tangling, tracking, and sorting. I work with and in
sf as material-semiotic composting, as theory in the mud, as muddle.7

                                             Tentacular Thinking           31
2.1. Pimoa cthulhu. Photograph by Gustavo Hormiga.


The tentacular are not disembodied figures; they are cnidarians, spiders,
fingery beings like humans and raccoons, squid, jellyfish, neural extrava-
ganzas, fibrous entities, flagellated beings, myofibril braids, matted and
felted microbial and fungal tangles, probing creepers, swelling roots,
reaching and climbing tendrilled ones. The tentacular are also nets and
networks, it critters, in and out of clouds. Tentacularity is about life
lived along lines—and such a wealth of lines—not at points, not in
spheres. “The inhabitants of the world, creatures of all kinds, human
and non-human, are wayfarers”; generations are like “a series of inter-
laced trails.”8 String figures all.
    All the tentacular stringy ones have made me unhappy with post-
humanism, even as I am nourished by much generative work done un-
der that sign. My partner Rusten Hogness suggested compost instead
of posthuman(ism), as well as humusities instead of humanities, and
I jumped into that wormy pile.9 Human as humus has potential, if we
could chop and shred human as Homo, the detumescing project of a
self-making and planet-destroying ceo. Imagine a conference not on
the Future of the Humanities in the Capitalist Restructuring University,
but instead on the Power of the Humusities for a Habitable Multispecies
Muddle! Ecosexual artists Beth Stephens and Annie Sprinkle made a
bumper sticker for me, for us, for sf: “Composting is so hot!”10

32   chapter two
    The earth of the ongoing Chthulucene is sympoietic, not autopoietic.
Mortal Worlds (Terra, Earth, Gaia, Chthulu, the myriad names and pow-
ers that are not Greek, Latin, or Indo-European at all)11 do not make
themselves, no matter how complex and multileveled the systems, no
matter how much order out of disorder might be produced in generative
autopoietic system breakdowns and relaunchings at higher levels of or-
der. Autopoietic systems are hugely interesting—witness the history of
cybernetics and information sciences; but they are not good models for
living and dying worlds and their critters. Autopoietic systems are not
closed, spherical, deterministic, or teleological; but they are not quite
good enough models for the mortal sf world. Poiesis is symchthonic,
sympoietic, always partnered all the way down, with no starting and
subsequently interacting “units.”12 The Chthulucene does not close in
on itself; it does not round off; its contact zones are ubiquitous and
continuously spin out loopy tendrils. Spider is a much better figure for
sympoiesis than any inadequately leggy vertebrate of whatever pan-
theon. Tentacularity is symchthonic, wound with abyssal and dreadful
graspings, frayings, and weavings, passing relays again and again, in the
generative recursions that make up living and dying.
    After I used the term sympoiesis in a grasp for something other than
the lures of autopoiesis, Katie King told me about M. Beth Dempster’s
Master of Environmental Studies thesis written in 1998, in which she
suggested the term sympoiesis for “collectively-producing systems that
do not have self-defined spatial or temporal boundaries. Information
and control are distributed among components. The systems are evo-
lutionary and have the potential for surprising change.” By contrast,
autopoietic systems are “self-producing” autonomous units “with self
defined spatial or temporal boundaries that tend to be centrally con-
trolled, homeostatic, and predictable.”13 Dempster argued that many
systems are mistaken for autopoietic that are really sympoietic. I think
this point is important for thinking about rehabilitation (making liva-
ble again) and sustainability amid the porous tissues and open edges
of damaged but still ongoing living worlds, like the planet earth and its
denizens in current times being called the Anthropocene. If it is true
that neither biology nor philosophy any longer supports the notion
of independent organisms in environments, that is, interacting units
plus contexts/rules, then sympoiesis is the name of the game in spades.
Bounded (or neoliberal) individualism amended by autopoiesis is not
good enough figurally or scientifically; it misleads us down deadly paths.

                                            Tentacular Thinking         33
Barad’s agential realism and intra-action become common sense, and
perhaps a lifeline for Terran wayfarers.
   sf, string figuring, is sympoietic. Thinking-with my work on cat’s cra-
dle, as well as with the work of another of her companions in thinking,
Félix Guattari, Isabelle Stengers relayed back to me how players pass
back and forth to each other the patterns-at-stake, sometimes conserv-
ing, sometimes proposing and inventing.
     More precisely, com-menting, if it means thinking-with, that is
     becoming-with, is in itself a way of relaying . . . But knowing that what
     you take has been held out entails a particular thinking “between.”
     It does not demand fidelity, still less fealty, rather a particular kind
     of loyalty, the answer to the trust of the held out hand. Even if this
     trust is not in “you” but in “creative uncertainty,” even if the conse-
     quences and meaning of what has been done, thought or written, do
     not belong to you anymore than they belonged to the one you take
     the relay from, one way or another the relay is now in your hands,
     together with the demand that you do not proceed with “mechanical
     confidence.” [In cat’s cradling, at least] two pairs of hands are needed,
     and in each successive step, one is “passive,” offering the result of its
     previous operation, a string entanglement, for the other to operate,
     only to become active again at the next step, when the other presents
     the new entanglement. But it can also be said that each time the “pas-
     sive” pair is the one that holds, and is held by the entanglement, only
     to “let it go” when the other one takes the relay.14
   In passion and action, detachment and attachment, this is what I call
cultivating response-ability; that is also collective knowing and doing,
an ecology of practices. Whether we asked for it or not, the pattern is in
our hands. The answer to the trust of the held-out hand: think we must.
   Marilyn Strathern is an ethnographer of thinking practices. She de-
fines anthropology as studying relations with relations—a hugely con-
sequential, mind- and body-altering sort of commitment.15 Nourished
by her lifelong work in highland Papua New Guinea (Mt. Hagen), Strath-
ern writes about accepting the risk of relentless contingency, of putting
relations at risk with other relations, from unexpected worlds. Embody-
ing the practice of feminist speculative fabulation in the scholarly mode,
Strathern taught me—taught us—a simple but game-changing thing:
“It matters what ideas we use to think other ideas.”16 I compost my soul
in this hot pile. The worms are not human; their undulating bodies in-

34    chapter two
2.2. Cat’s Cradle / String Theory, Baila Goldenthal, 2008. Oil on canvas, 36 = 48 in.
Courtesy of Maurya Simon and Tamara Ambroson.


gest and reach, and their feces fertilize worlds. Their tentacles make
string figures.
   It matters what thoughts think thoughts. It matters what knowl-
edges know knowledges. It matters what relations relate relations. It
matters what worlds world worlds. It matters what stories tell stories.
Paintings by Baila Goldenthal are eloquent testimony to this mattering.17
   What is it to surrender the capacity to think? These times called the
Anthropocene are times of multispecies, including human, urgency: of
great mass death and extinction; of onrushing disasters, whose unpre-
dictable specificities are foolishly taken as unknowability itself; of refus-
ing to know and to cultivate the capacity of response-ability; of refusing
to be present in and to onrushing catastrophe in time; of unprecedented
looking away. Surely, to say “unprecedented” in view of the realities of
the last centuries is to say something almost unimaginable. How can we
think in times of urgencies without the self-indulgent and self-fulfilling
myths of apocalypse, when every fiber of our being is interlaced, even
complicit, in the webs of processes that must somehow be engaged and
repatterned? Recursively, whether we asked for it or not, the pattern

                                                   Tentacular Thinking              35
is in our hands. The answer to the trust of the held-out hand: think
we must.
    Instructed by Valerie Hartouni, I turn to Hannah Arendt’s analysis
of the Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann’s inability to think. In that
surrender of thinking lay the “banality of evil” of the particular sort
that could make the disaster of the Anthropocene, with its ramped-up
genocides and speciescides, come true.18 This outcome is still at stake;
think we must; we must think! In Hartouni’s reading, Arendt insisted
that thought was profoundly different from what we might call disci-
plinary knowledge or science rooted in evidence, or the sorting of truth
and belief or fact and opinion or good and bad. Thinking, in Arendt’s
sense, is not a process for evaluating information and argument, for
being right or wrong, for judging oneself or others to be in truth or error.
All of that is important, but not what Arendt had to say about the evil
of thoughtlessness that I want to bring into the question of the geohis-
torical conjuncture being called the Anthropocene.
    Arendt witnessed in Eichmann not an incomprehensible monster, but
something much more terrifying—she saw commonplace thoughtless-
ness. That is, here was a human being unable to make present to himself
what was absent, what was not himself, what the world in its sheer not-
one-selfness is and what claims-to-be inhere in not-oneself. Here was
someone who could not be a wayfarer, could not entangle, could not
track the lines of living and dying, could not cultivate response-ability,
could not make present to itself what it is doing, could not live in con-
sequences or with consequence, could not compost. Function mattered,
duty mattered, but the world did not matter for Eichmann. The world
does not matter in ordinary thoughtlessness. The hollowed-out spaces
are all filled with assessing information, determining friends and ene-
mies, and doing busy jobs; negativity, the hollowing out of such positiv-
ity, is missed, an astonishing abandonment of thinking.19 This quality
was not an emotional lack, a lack of compassion, although surely that
was true of Eichmann, but a deeper surrender to what I would call imma-
teriality, inconsequentiality, or, in Arendt’s and also my idiom, thought-
lessness. Eichmann was astralized right out of the muddle of thinking
into the practice of business as usual no matter what. There was no way
the world could become for Eichmann and his heirs—us?—a “matter of
care.”20 The result was active participation in genocide.
    The anthropologist, feminist, cultural theorist, storyteller, and con-
noisseur of the tissues of heterogeneous capitalism, globalism, travel-

36   chapter two
ing worlds, and local places Anna Tsing examines the “arts of living on
a damaged planet,”21 or, in the subtitle of her book, “the possibility of
life in Capitalist ruins.” She performs thinking of a kind that must be
cultivated in the all-too-ordinary urgencies of onrushing multispecies
extinctions, genocides, immiserations, and exterminations. I name these
things urgencies rather than emergencies because the latter word con-
notes something approaching apocalypse and its mythologies. Urgen-
cies have other temporalities, and these times are ours. These are the
times we must think; these are the times of urgencies that need stories.
    Following matsutake mushrooms in their fulminating assemblages of
Japanese, Americans, Chinese, Koreans, Hmong, Lao, Mexicans, fungal
spores and mats, oak and pine trees, mycorrhizal symbioses, pickers,
buyers, shippers, restaurateurs, diners, businessmen, scientists, forest-
ers, dna sequencers and their changing species, and much more, Tsing
practices sympoietics in edgy times. Refusing either to look away or to
reduce the earth’s urgency to an abstract system of causative destruction,
such as a Human Species Act or undifferentiated Capitalism, Tsing ar-
gues that precarity—failure of the lying promises of Modern Progress—
characterizes the lives and deaths of all terran critters in these times.
She looks for the eruptions of unexpected liveliness and the contami-
nated and nondeterministic, unfinished, ongoing practices of living in
the ruins. She performs the force of stories; she shows in the flesh how
it matters which stories tell stories as a practice of caring and thinking.
“If a rush of troubled stories is the best way to tell contaminated diver-
sity, then it’s time to make that rush part of our knowledge practices . . .
Matsutake’s willingness to emerge in blasted landscapes allows us to
explore the ruins that have become our collective home. To follow mat-
sutake guides us to possibilities of coexistence within environmental
disturbance. This is not an excuse for further human damage. Still, mat-
sutake show one kind of collaborative survival.”
    Driven by radical curiosity, Tsing does the ethnography of “salvage ac-
cumulation” and “patchy capitalism,” the kind that can no longer prom-
ise progress but can and does extend devastation and make precarity
the name of our systematicity. There is no simple ethical, political, or
theoretical point to take from Tsing’s work; there is instead the force
of engaging the world in the kind of thinking practices impossible for
Eichmann’s heirs. “Matsutake tell us about surviving collaboratively
in disturbance and contamination. We need this skill for living in ru-
ins.”22 This is not a longing for salvation or some other sort of optimistic

                                             Tentacular Thinking          37
politics; neither is it a cynical quietism in the face of the depth of the
trouble. Rather, Tsing proposes a commitment to living and dying with
response-ability in unexpected company. Such living and dying have the
best chance of cultivating conditions for ongoingness.
   The ecological philosopher and multispecies ethnographer Thom van
Dooren also inhabits the layered complexities of living in times of ex-
tinction, extermination, and partial recuperation; he deepens our con-
sideration of what thinking means, of what not becoming thoughtless
exacts from all of us. In his extraordinary book Flight Ways, van Dooren
accompanies situated bird species living on the extended edge of extinc-
tion, asking what it means to hold open space for another.23 Such hold-
ing open is far from an innocent or obvious material or ethical practice;
even when successful, it exacts tolls of suffering as well as surviving
as individuals and as kinds. In his examination of the practices of the
North American whooping crane species survival plan, for example, van
Dooren details multiple kinds of hard multispecies captivities and labors,
forced life, surrogate reproductive labor, and substitute dying—none
of which should be forgotten, especially in successful projects. Holding
open space might—or might not—delay extinction in ways that make
possible composing or recomposing flourishing naturalcultural assem-
blages. Flight Ways shows how extinction is not a point, not a single
event, but more like an extended edge or a widened ledge. Extinction is
a protracted slow death that unravels great tissues of ways of going on
in the world for many species, including historically situated people.24
   Van Dooren proposes that mourning is intrinsic to cultivating
response-ability. In his chapter on conservation efforts for Hawaiian
crows (‘Alalā for Hawaiians, Corvus hawaiiensis for Linneans), whose
forest homes and foods as well as friends, chicks, and mates have largely
disappeared, van Dooren argues that it is not just human people who
mourn the loss of loved ones, of place, of lifeways; other beings mourn
as well. Corvids grieve loss. The point rests on biobehavioral studies as
well as intimate natural history; neither the capacity nor the practice of
mourning is a human specialty. Outside the dubious privileges of human
exceptionalism, thinking people must learn to grieve-with.
     Mourning is about dwelling with a loss and so coming to appreciate
     what it means, how the world has changed, and how we must ourselves
     change and renew our relationships if we are to move forward from
     here. In this context, genuine mourning should open us into an aware-

38    chapter two
  ness of our dependence on and relationships with those countless oth-
  ers being driven over the edge of extinction . . . The reality, however, is
  that there is no avoiding the necessity of the difficult cultural work of
  reflection and mourning. This work is not opposed to practical action,
  rather it is the foundation of any sustainable and informed response.
   Grief is a path to understanding entangled shared living and dying;
human beings must grieve with, because we are in and of this fabric of
undoing. Without sustained remembrance, we cannot learn to live with
ghosts and so cannot think. Like the crows and with the crows, living
and dead “we are at stake in each other’s company.”25
   At least one more sf thread is crucial to the practice of thinking, which
must be thinking-with: storytelling. It matters what thoughts think
thoughts; it matters what stories tell stories. “Urban Penguins: Stories
for Lost Places,” van Dooren’s chapter on Sydney Harbor’s Little Penguins
(Eudyptula minor), succeeds in crafting a nonanthropomorphic, nonan-
thropocentric sense of storied place. In their resolutely “philopatric”
(home loving) nesting and other life practices, these urban penguins—
real, particular birds—story place, this place, not just any place. Es-
tablishing the reality and vivid specificity of penguin-storied place is a
major material-semiotic accomplishment. Storying cannot any longer
be put into the box of human exceptionalism. Without deserting the
terrain of behavioral ecology and natural history, this writing achieves
powerful attunement to storying in penguin multimodal semiotics.26
   Ursula Le Guin taught me the carrier bag theory of storytelling and
of naturalcultural history. Her theories, her stories, are capacious bags
for collecting, carrying, and telling the stuff of living. “A leaf a gourd a
shell a net a bag a sling a sack a bottle a pot a box a container. A holder.
A recipient.”27 So much of earth history has been told in the thrall of the
fantasy of the first beautiful words and weapons, of the first beautiful
weapons as words and vice versa. Tool, weapon, word: that is the word
made flesh in the image of the sky god; that is the Anthropos. In a tragic
story with only one real actor, one real world-maker, the hero, this is
the Man-making tale of the hunter on a quest to kill and bring back the
terrible bounty. This is the cutting, sharp, combative tale of action that
defers the suffering of glutinous, earth-rotted passivity beyond bearing.
All others in the prick tale are props, ground, plot space, or prey. They
don’t matter; their job is to be in the way, to be overcome, to be the
road, the conduit, but not the traveler, not the begetter. The last thing

                                             Tentacular Thinking          39
the hero wants to know is that his beautiful words and weapons will be
worthless without a bag, a container, a net.
    Nonetheless, no adventurer should leave home without a sack. How
did a sling, a pot, a bottle suddenly get in the story? How do such lowly
things keep the story going? Or maybe even worse for the hero, how
do those concave, hollowed-out things, those holes in Being, from the
get-go generate richer, quirkier, fuller, unfitting, ongoing stories, stories
with room for the hunter but which weren’t and aren’t about him, the
self-making human, the human-making machine of history? The slight
curve of the shell that holds just a little water, just a few seeds to give
away and to receive, suggests stories of becoming-with, of reciprocal
induction, of companion species whose job in living and dying is not
to end the storying, the worlding. With a shell and a net, becoming hu-
man, becoming humus, becoming terran, has another shape—that is,
the side-winding, snaky shape of becoming-with. To think-with is to
stay with the naturalcultural multispecies trouble on earth. There are no
guarantees, no arrow of time, no Law of History or Science or Nature in
such struggles. There is only the relentlessly contingent sf worlding of
living and dying, of becoming-with and unbecoming-with, of sympoie-
sis, and so, just possibly, of multispecies flourishing on earth.
    Like Le Guin, Bruno Latour passionately understands the need to
change the story, to learn somehow to narrate—to think—outside the
prick tale of Humans in History, when the knowledge of how to murder
each other—and along with each other, uncountable multitudes of the
living earth—is not scarce. Think we must; we must think. That means,
simply, we must change the story; the story must change. Le Guin writes,
“Hence it is with a certain feeling of urgency that I seek the nature, sub-
ject, words of the other story, the untold one, the life story.”28 In this
terrible time called the Anthropocene, Latour argues that the funda-
mentals of geopolitics have been blasted open. None of the parties in
crisis can call on Providence, History, Science, Progress, or any other
god trick outside the common fray to resolve the troubles.29 A common
livable world must be composed, bit by bit, or not at all. What used to
be called nature has erupted into ordinary human affairs, and vice versa,
in such a way and with such permanence as to change fundamentally
means and prospects for going on, including going on at all. Searching
for compositionist practices capable of building effective new collectives,
Latour argues that we must learn to tell “Gaïa stories.” If that word is
too hard, then we can call our narrations “geostories,” in which “all the

40   chapter two
former props and passive agents have become active without, for that,
being part of a giant plot written by some overseeing entity.”30 Those
who tell Gaia stories or geostories are the “Earthbound,” those who es-
chew the dubious pleasures of transcendent plots of modernity and the
purifying division of society and nature. Latour argues that we face a
stark divide: “Some are readying themselves to live as Earthbound in the
Anthropocene; others decided to remain as Humans in the Holocene.”31
   In much of his writing, Latour develops the language and imagery of
trials of strength; and in thinking about the Anthropocene and the Earth-
bound, he extends that metaphor to develop the difference between a
police action, where peace is restored by an already existing order, and
war or politics, where real enemies must be overcome to establish what
will be. Latour is determined to avoid the idols of a ready-to-hand fix,
such as Laws of History, Modernity, the State, God, Progress, Reason,
Decadence, Nature, Technology, or Science, as well as the debilitating
disrespect for difference and shared finitude inherent in those who al-
ready know the answers toward those who only need to learn them—by
force, faith, or self-certain pedagogy. Those who “believe” they have the
answers to the present urgencies are terribly dangerous. Those who re-
fuse to be for some ways of living and dying and not others are equally
dangerous. Matters of fact, matters of concern,32 and matters of care are
knotted in string figures, in sf.
   Latour embraces sciences, not Science. In geopolitics, “the important
point here is to realize that the facts of the matter cannot be delegated to
a higher unified authority that would have done the choice in our stead.
Controversies—no matter how spurious they might be—are no excuse
to delay the decision about which side represents our world better.”33 La-
tour aligns himself with the reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (ipcc); he does not believe its assessments and reports;
he decides what is strong and trustworthy and what is not. He casts his
lot with some worlds and worldings and not others. One need not hear
Latour’s “decision” discourse with an individualist ear; he is a composi-
tionist intent on understanding how a common world, how collectives,
are built-with each other, where all the builders are not human beings.
This is neither relativism nor rationalism; it is sf, which Latour would
call both sciences and scientifiction and I would call both sciences and
speculative fabulation—all of which are political sciences, in our aligned
approaches.
   “Alignment” is a rich metaphor for wayfarers, for the Earthbound,

                                             Tentacular Thinking         41
and does not as easily as “decision” carry the tones of modernist liberal
choice discourse, at least in the United States. Further, the refusal of the
modernist category of belief is also crucial to my effort to persuade us
to take up the Chthulucene and its tentacular tasks.34 Like Stengers and
like myself, Latour is a thoroughgoing materialist committed to an ecol-
ogy of practices, to the mundane articulating of assemblages through
situated work and play in the muddle of messy living and dying. Actual
players, articulating with varied allies of all ontological sorts (molecules,
colleagues, and much more), must compose and sustain what is and will
be. Alignment in tentacular worlding must be a seriously tangled affair!
    Intent on the crucial refusal of self-certainty and preexisting god
tricks, which I passionately share, Latour turns to a resource—relentless
reliance on the material-semiotic trope of trials of strength—that, I
think, makes it unnecessarily hard to tell his and our needed new story.
He defines war as the absence of a referee so that trials of strength must
determine the legitimate authority. Humans in History and the Earth-
bound in the Anthropocene are engaged in trials of strength where there
is no Referee who/which can establish what is/was/will be. History ver-
sus Gaia stories are at stake. Those trials—the war of the Earthbound
with the Humans—would not be conducted with rockets and bombs;
they would be conducted with every other imaginable resource and with
no god trick from above to decide life and death, truth and error. But
still, we are in the story of the hero and the first beautiful words and
weapons, not in the story of the carrier bag. Anything not decided in the
presence of the Authority is war; Science (singular and capitalized) is the
Authority; the Authority conducts police actions. In contrast, sciences
(always rooted in practices) are war. Therefore, in Latour’s passionate
speculative fabulation, such war is our only hope for real politics. The
past is as much the contested zone as the present or future.
    Latour’s thinking and stories need a specific kind of enemies. He
draws on Carl Schmitt’s “political theology,” which is a theory of peace
through war, with the enemy as hostis, with all its tones of host, hos-
tage, guest, and worthy enemy. Only with such an enemy, Schmitt and
Latour hold, is there respect and a chance to be less, not more, deadly
in conflict. Those who operate within the categories of Authority and of
belief are notoriously prone to exterminationist and genocidal combat
(it’s hard to deny that!). They are lost without a pre-established Ref-
eree. The hostis demands much better. But all the action remains within
the narrative vise of trials of strength, of mortal combat, within which

42   chapter two
the knowledge of how to murder each other remains well entrenched.
Latour makes clear that he does not want this story, but he does not
propose another. The only real possibility for peace lies in the tale of
the respected enemy, the hostis, and trials of strength. “But when you
are at war, it is only through the throes of the encounters that the au-
thority you have or don’t have will be decided depending whether you win
or lose.”35
    Schmitt’s enemies do not allow the story to change in its marrow; the
Earthbound need a more tentacular, less binary life story. Latour’s Gaia
stories deserve better companions in storytelling than Schmitt. The
question of whom to think-with is immensely material. I do not think
Latour’s dilemma can be resolved in the terms of the Anthropocene. His
Earthbound will have to trek into the Chthulucene to entangle with the
ongoing, snaky, unheroic, tentacular, dreadful ones, the ones which/who
craft material-semiotic netbags of little use in trials of strength but of
great use in bringing home and sharing the means of living and dying
well, perhaps even the means of ecological recuperation for human and
more-than-human critters alike.
    Shaping her thinking about the times called Anthropocene and
“multi-faced Gaïa” (Stengers’s term) in companionable friction with
Latour, Isabelle Stengers does not ask that we recompose ourselves to
become able, perhaps, to “face Gaïa.” But like Latour and even more like
Le Guin, one of her most generative sf writers, Stengers is adamant
about changing the story. Focusing on intrusion rather than composi-
tion, Stengers calls Gaia a fearful and devastating power that intrudes on
our categories of thought, that intrudes on thinking itself.36 Earth/Gaia
is maker and destroyer, not resource to be exploited or ward to be pro-
tected or nursing mother promising nourishment. Gaia is not a person
but complex systemic phenomena that compose a living planet. Gaia’s
intrusion into our affairs is a radically materialist event that collects up
multitudes. This intrusion threatens not life on earth itself—microbes
will adapt, to put it mildly—but threatens the livability of earth for vast
kinds, species, assemblages, and individuals in an “event” already under
way called the Sixth Great Extinction.37
    Stengers, like Latour, evokes the name of Gaia in the way James
Lovelock and Lynn Margulis did, to name complex nonlinear couplings
between processes that compose and sustain entwined but nonadditive
subsystems as a partially cohering systemic whole.38 In this hypothesis,
Gaia is autopoietic—self-forming, boundary maintaining, contingent,

                                             Tentacular Thinking         43
dynamic, and stable under some conditions but not others. Gaia is not
reducible to the sum of its parts, but achieves finite systemic coherence
in the face of perturbations within parameters that are themselves re-
sponsive to dynamic systemic processes. Gaia does not and could not
care about human or other biological beings’ intentions or desires or
needs, but Gaia puts into question our very existence, we who have pro-
voked its brutal mutation that threatens both human and nonhuman
livable presents and futures. Gaia is not about a list of questions waiting
for rational policies;39 Gaia is an intrusive event that undoes thinking as
usual. “She is what specifically questions the tales and refrains of mod-
ern history. There is only one real mystery at stake, here: it is the answer
we, meaning those who belong to this history, may be able to create as
we face the consequences of what we have provoked.”40


Anthropocene
So, what have we provoked? Writing in the midst of California’s historic
multiyear drought and the explosive fire season of 2015, I need the pho-
tograph of a fire set deliberately in June 2009 by Sustainable Resource
Alberta near the Saskatchewan River Crossing on the Icefields Parkway
in order to stem the spread of mountain pine beetles, to create a fire
barrier to future fires, and to enhance biodiversity. The hope is that this
fire acts as an ally for resurgence. The devastating spread of the pine
beetle across the North American West is a major chapter of climate
change in the Anthropocene. So too are the predicted megadroughts and
the extreme and extended fire seasons. Fire in the North American West
has a complicated multispecies history; fire is an essential element for
ongoing, as well as an agent of double death, the killing of ongoingness.
The material semiotics of fire in our times are at stake.
   Thus it is past time to turn directly to the time-space-global thing
called Anthropocene.41 The term seems to have been coined in the early
1980s by University of Michigan ecologist Eugene Stoermer (d. 2012),
an expert in freshwater diatoms. He introduced the term to refer to
growing evidence for the transformative effects of human activities on
the earth. The name Anthropocene made a dramatic star appearance
in globalizing discourses in 2000 when the Dutch Nobel Prize–winning
atmospheric chemist Paul Crutzen joined Stoermer to propose that hu-
man activities had been of such a kind and magnitude as to merit the
use of a new geological term for a new epoch, superseding the Holocene,

44   chapter two
2.3. Icon for the Anthropocene: Flaming Forests. From Rocky Mountain House,
Alberta, Canada, June 2, 2009. Photograph by Cameron Strandberg.


which dated from the end of the last ice age, or the end of the Pleisto-
cene, about twelve thousand years ago. Anthropogenic changes signaled
by the mid-eighteenth-century steam engine and the planet-changing
exploding use of coal were evident in the airs, waters, and rocks.42 Evi-
dence was mounting that the acidification and warming of the oceans
are rapidly decomposing coral reef ecosystems, resulting in huge ghostly
white skeletons of bleached and dead or dying coral. That a symbiotic
system—coral, with its watery world-making associations of cnidarians
and zooanthellae with many other critters too—indicated such a global
transformation will come back into our story.
   But for now, notice that the Anthropocene obtained purchase in pop-
ular and scientific discourse in the context of ubiquitous urgent efforts
to find ways of talking about, theorizing, modeling, and managing a
Big Thing called Globalization. Climate-change modeling is a powerful
positive feedback loop provoking change-of-state in systems of political
and ecological discourses.43 That Paul Crutzen was both a Nobel laureate
and an atmospheric chemist mattered. By 2008, many scientists around
the world had adopted the not-yet-official but increasingly indispens-
able term;44 and myriad research projects, performances, installations,
and conferences in the arts, social sciences, and humanities found the

                                               Tentacular Thinking            45
term mandatory in their naming and thinking, not least for facing both
accelerating extinctions across all biological taxa and also multispecies,
including human, immiseration across the expanse of Terra. Fossil-
burning human beings seem intent on making as many new fossils as
possible as fast as possible. They will be read in the strata of the rocks
on the land and under the waters by the geologists of the very near fu-
ture, if not already. Perhaps, instead of the fiery forest, the icon for the
Anthropocene should be Burning Man!45
   The scale of burning ambitions of fossil-making man—of this An-
thropos whose hot projects for accelerating extinctions merits a name
for a geological epoch—is hard to comprehend. Leaving aside all the
other accelerating extractions of minerals, plant and animal flesh, hu-
man homelands, and so on, surely, we want to say, the pace of develop-
ment of renewable energy technologies and of political and technical
carbon pollution-abatement measures, in the face of palpable and costly
ecosystem collapses and spreading political disorders, will mitigate, if
not eliminate, the burden of planet-warming excess carbon from burn-
ing still more fossil fuels. Or, maybe the financial troubles of the global
coal and oil industries by 2015 would stop the madness. Not so. Even
casual acquaintance with the daily news erodes such hopes, but the trou-
ble is worse than what even a close reader of ipcc documents and the
press will find. In “The Third Carbon Age,” Michael Klare, a professor of
Peace and World Security Studies at Hampshire College, lays out strong
evidence against the idea that the old age of coal, replaced by the recent
age of oil, will be replaced by the age of renewables.46 He details the large
and growing global national and corporate investments in renewables;
clearly, there are big profit and power advantages to be had in this sector.
And at the same time, every imaginable, and many unimaginable, tech-
nologies and strategic measures are being pursued by all the big global
players to extract every last calorie of fossil carbon, at whatever depth
and in whatever formations of sand, mud, or rock, and with whatever
horrors of travel to distribution and use points, to burn before someone
else gets at that calorie and burns it first in the great prick story of the
first and the last beautiful words and weapons.47 In what he calls the Age
of Unconventional Oil and Gas, hydro-fracking is the tip of the (melting)
iceberg. Melting of the polar seas, terrible for polar bears and for coastal
peoples, is very good for big competitive military, exploration, drilling,
and tanker shipping across the northern passages. Who needs an ice-
breaker when you can count on melting ice?48

46   chapter two
    A complex systems engineer named Brad Werner addressed a session
at the meetings of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco
in 2012. His point was quite simple: scientifically speaking, global capi-
talism “has made the depletion of resources so rapid, convenient and
barrier-free that ‘earth-human systems’ are becoming dangerously un-
stable in response.” Therefore, he argued, the only scientific thing to do
is revolt! Movements, not just individuals, are critical. What is required
is action and thinking that do not fit within the dominant capitalist cul-
ture; and, said Werner, this is a matter not of opinion, but of geophysical
dynamics. The reporter who covered this session summed up Werner’s
address: “He is saying that his research shows that our entire economic
paradigm is a threat to ecological stability.”49 Werner is not the first or
the last researcher and maker of matters of concern to argue this point,
but his clarity at a scientific meeting is bracing. Revolt! Think we must;
we must think. Actually think, not like Eichmann the Thoughtless. Of
course, the devil is in the details—how to revolt? How to matter and not
just want to matter?


Capitalocene
But at least one thing is crystal clear. No matter how much he might be
caught in the generic masculine universal and how much he only looks
up, the Anthropos did not do this fracking thing and he should not name
this double-death-loving epoch. The Anthropos is not Burning Man af-
ter all. But because the word is already well entrenched and seems less
controversial to many important players compared to the Capitalocene,
I know that we will continue to need the term Anthropocene. I will use it
too, sparingly; what and whom the Anthropocene collects in its refur-
bished netbag might prove potent for living in the ruins and even for
modest terran recuperation.
   Still, if we could only have one word for these sf times, surely it must
be the Capitalocene.50 Species Man did not shape the conditions for the
Third Carbon Age or the Nuclear Age. The story of Species Man as the
agent of the Anthropocene is an almost laughable rerun of the great
phallic humanizing and modernizing Adventure, where man, made in
the image of a vanished god, takes on superpowers in his secular-sacred
ascent, only to end in tragic detumescence, once again. Autopoietic, self-
making man came down once again, this time in tragic system failure,
turning biodiverse ecosystems into flipped-out deserts of slimy mats

                                            Tentacular Thinking         47
2.4. Icon for the Capitalocene: Sea Ice Clearing from the Northwest Passage,
Data 2012. NASA Visible Earth image by Jesse Allen, 2015, using data from
the Land Atmosphere Near Real-Time Capability for EOS (LANCE). National Snow
and Ice Data Center.



and stinging jellyfish. Neither did technological determinism produce
the Third Carbon Age. Coal and the steam engine did not determine
the story, and besides the dates are all wrong, not because one has to go
back to the last ice age, but because one has to at least include the great
market and commodity reworldings of the long sixteenth and seven-
teenth centuries of the current era, even if we think (wrongly) that we
can remain Euro-centered in thinking about “globalizing” transforma-
tions shaping the Capitalocene.51 One must surely tell of the networks of
sugar, precious metals, plantations, indigenous genocides, and slavery,
with their labor innovations and relocations and recompositions of crit-
ters and things sweeping up both human and nonhuman workers of all
kinds. The infectious industrial revolution of England mattered hugely,
but it is only one player in planet-transforming, historically situated,
new enough, worlding relations. The relocation of peoples, plants, and
animals; the leveling of vast forests; and the violent mining of metals
preceded the steam engine; but that is not a warrant for wringing one’s
hands about the perfidy of the Anthropos, or of Species Man, or of Man
the Hunter.

48   chapter two
    The systemic stories of the linked metabolisms, articulations, or
coproductions (pick your metaphor) of economies and ecologies, of
histories and human and nonhuman critters, must be relentlessly op-
portunistic and contingent. They must also be relentlessly relational,
sympoietic, and consequential.52 They are terran, not cosmic or blissed
or cursed into outer space. The Capitalocene is terran; it does not have
to be the last biodiverse geological epoch that includes our species too.
There are so many good stories yet to tell, so many netbags yet to string,
and not just by human beings.
    As a provocation, let me summarize my objections to the Anthropo-
cene as a tool, story, or epoch to think with: (1) The myth system asso-
ciated with the Anthropos is a setup, and the stories end badly. More to
the point, they end in double death; they are not about ongoingness. It
is hard to tell a good story with such a bad actor. Bad actors need a story,
but not the whole story. (2) Species Man does not make history. (3) Man
plus Tool does not make history. That is the story of History human
exceptionalists tell. (4) That History must give way to geostories, to Gaia
stories, to symchthonic stories; terrans do webbed, braided, and tentac-
ular living and dying in sympoietic multispecies string figures; they do
not do History. (5) The human social apparatus of the Anthropocene
tends to be top-heavy and bureaucracy prone. Revolt needs other forms
of action and other stories for solace, inspiration, and effectiveness. (6)
Despite its reliance on agile computer modeling and autopoietic systems
theories, the Anthropocene relies too much on what should be an “un-
thinkable” theory of relations, namely the old one of bounded utilitarian
individualism—preexisting units in competition relations that take up
all the air in the atmosphere (except, apparently, carbon dioxide). (7)
The sciences of the Anthropocene are too much contained within re-
strictive systems theories and within evolutionary theories called the
Modern Synthesis, which for all their extraordinary importance have
proven unable to think well about sympoiesis, symbiosis, symbiogene-
sis, development, webbed ecologies, and microbes. That’s a lot of trouble
for adequate evolutionary theory.(8) Anthropocene is a term most easily
meaningful and usable by intellectuals in wealthy classes and regions; it
is not an idiomatic term for climate, weather, land, care of country, or
much else in great swathes of the world, especially but not only among
indigenous peoples.
    I am aligned with feminist environmentalist Eileen Crist when she
writes against the managerial, technocratic, market-and-profit besotted,

                                            Tentacular Thinking          49
modernizing, and human-exceptionalist business-as-usual commitments
of so much Anthropocene discourse. This discourse is not simply wrong-
headed and wrong-hearted in itself; it also saps our capacity for imagin-
ing and caring for other worlds, both those that exist precariously now
(including those called wilderness, for all the contaminated history of
that term in racist settler colonialism) and those we need to bring into
being in alliance with other critters, for still possible recuperating pasts,
presents, and futures. “Scarcity’s deepening persistence, and the suffer-
ing it is auguring for all life, is an artifact of human exceptionalism at
every level.” Instead, a humanity with more earthly integrity “invites the
priority of our pulling back and scaling down, of welcoming limitations
of our numbers, economies, and habitats for the sake of a higher, more
inclusive freedom and quality of life.”53
   If Humans live in History and the Earthbound take up their task
within the Anthropocene, too many Posthumans (and posthumanists,
another gathering altogether) seem to have emigrated to the Anthro-
pocene for my taste. Perhaps my human and nonhuman people are the
dreadful Chthonic ones who snake within the tissues of Terrapolis.
   Note that insofar as the Capitalocene is told in the idiom of funda-
mentalist Marxism, with all its trappings of Modernity, Progress, and
History, that term is subject to the same or fiercer criticisms. The stories
of both the Anthropocene and the Capitalocene teeter constantly on the
brink of becoming much Too Big. Marx did better than that, as did Dar-
win. We can inherit their bravery and capacity to tell big-enough stories
without determinism, teleology, and plan.54
   Historically situated relational worldings make a mockery both of the
binary division of nature and society and of our enslavement to Prog-
ress and its evil twin, Modernization. The Capitalocene was relation-
ally made, and not by a secular godlike anthropos, a law of history, the
machine itself, or a demon called Modernity. The Capitalocene must
be relationally unmade in order to compose in material-semiotic sf pat-
terns and stories something more livable, something Ursula K. Le Guin
could be proud of. Shocked anew by our—billions of earth habitants’,
including your and my—ongoing daily assent in practice to this thing
called capitalism, Philippe Pignarre and Isabelle Stengers note that de-
nunciation has been singularly ineffective, or capitalism would have long
ago vanished from the earth. A dark bewitched commitment to the lure
of Progress (and its polar opposite) lashes us to endless infernal alter-
natives, as if we had no other ways to reworld, reimagine, relive, and

50   chapter two
2.5. Octopi Wall Street: Symchthonic revolt. Art by Marley Jarvis, Laurel Hiebert,
Kira Treibergs, 2011. Oregon Institute of Marine Biology.


reconnect with each other, in multispecies well-being. This explication
does not excuse us from doing many important things better; quite the
opposite. Pignarre and Stengers affirm on-the-ground collectives capa-
ble of inventing new practices of imagination, resistance, revolt, repair,
and mourning, and of living and dying well. They remind us that the
established disorder is not necessary; another world is not only urgently
needed, it is possible, but not if we are ensorcelled in despair, cynicism,
or optimism, and the belief/disbelief discourse of Progress.55 Many
Marxist critical and cultural theorists, at their best, would agree.56 So
would the tentacular ones.57


Chthulucene
Reaching back to generative complex systems approaches by Lovelock
and Margulis, Gaia figures the Anthropocene for many contemporary
Western thinkers. But an unfurling Gaia is better situated in the Chthu-
lucene, an ongoing temporality that resists figuration and dating and
demands myriad names. Arising from Chaos,58 Gaia was and is a power-

                                                   Tentacular Thinking               51
ful intrusive force, in no one’s pocket, no one’s hope for salvation, capa-
ble of provoking the late twentieth century’s best autopoietic complex
systems thinking that led to recognizing the devastation caused by an-
thropogenic processes of the last few centuries, a necessary counter to
the Euclidean figures and stories of Man.59 Brazilian anthropologists and
philosophers Eduardo Viveiros de Castro and Déborah Danowski exor-
cise lingering notions that Gaia is confined to the ancient Greeks and
subsequent Eurocultures in their refiguring the urgencies of our times
in the post-Eurocentric conference “The Thousand Names of Gaia.”60
Names, not faces, not morphs of the same, something else, a thousand
somethings else, still telling of linked ongoing generative and destruc-
tive worlding and reworlding in this age of the earth. We need another
figure, a thousand names of something else, to erupt out of the Anthro-
pocene into another, big-enough story. Bitten in a California redwood
forest by spidery Pimoa chthulhu, I want to propose snaky Medusa and
the many unfinished worldings of her antecedents, affiliates, and de-
scendants. Perhaps Medusa, the only mortal Gorgon, can bring us into
the holobiomes of Terrapolis and heighten our chances for dashing the
twenty-first-century ships of the Heroes on a living coral reef instead
of allowing them to suck the last drop of fossil flesh out of dead rock.
   The terra-cotta figure of Potnia Theron, the Mistress of the Animals,
depicts a winged goddess wearing a split skirt and touching a bird with
each hand.61 She is a vivid reminder of the breadth, width, and temporal
reach into pasts and futures of chthonic powers in Mediterranean and
Near Eastern worlds and beyond.62 Potnia Theron is rooted in Minoan
and then Mycenean cultures and infuses Greek stories of the Gorgons
(especially the only mortal Gorgon, Medusa) and of Artemis. A kind of
far-traveling Ur-Medusa, the Lady of the Beasts is a potent link between
Crete and India. The winged figure is also called Potnia Melissa, Mistress
of the Bees, draped with all their buzzing-stinging-honeyed gifts. Note
the acoustic, tactile, and gustatory senses elicited by the Mistress and
her sympoietic, more-than-human flesh. The snakes and bees are more
like stinging tentacular feelers than like binocular eyes, although these
critters see too, in compound-eyed insectile and many-armed optics.
   In many incarnations around the world, the winged bee goddesses
are very old, and they are much needed now.63 Potnia Theron/Melissa’s
snaky locks and Gorgon face tangle her with a diverse kinship of chthonic
earthly forces that travel richly in space and time. The Greek word Gorgon
translates as dreadful, but perhaps that is an astralized, patriarchal hear-

52   chapter two
2.6. Icon for the Chthulucene. Potnia Theron with a Gorgon Face. Type of Potnia
Theron, Kameiros, Rhodes, circa 600 BCE, terracotta, 13 in. diameter, British
Museum, excavated by Auguste Salzmann and Sir Alfred Bilotti; purchased 1860.
Photograph by Marie-Lan Nguyen, © 2007.


ing of much more awe-ful stories and enactments of generation, destruc-
tion, and tenacious, ongoing terran finitude. Potnia Theron/Melissa/
Medusa give faciality a profound makeover, and that is a blow to mod-
ern humanist (including technohumanist) figurations of the forward-
looking, sky-gazing Anthropos. Recall that the Greek chthonios means
“of, in, or under the earth and the seas”—a rich terran muddle for sf,
science fact, science fiction, speculative feminism, and speculative fab-
ulation. The chthonic ones are precisely not sky gods, not a foundation
for the Olympiad, not friends to the Anthropocene or Capitalocene,
and definitely not finished. The Earthbound can take heart—as well
as action.
   The Gorgons are powerful winged chthonic entities without a proper
genealogy; their reach is lateral and tentacular; they have no settled line-
age and no reliable kind (genre, gender), although they are figured and

                                                 Tentacular Thinking              53
storied as female. In old versions, the Gorgons twine with the Erinyes
(Furies), chthonic underworld powers who avenge crimes against the
natural order. In the winged domains, the bird-bodied Harpies carry out
these vital functions.64 Now, look again at the birds of Potnia Theron and
ask what they do. Are the Harpies their cousins? Around 700 bce Hesiod
imagined the Gorgons as sea demons and gave them sea deities for par-
ents. I read Hesiod’s Theogony as laboring to stabilize a very bumptious
queer family. The Gorgons erupt more than emerge; they are intrusive
in a sense akin to what Stengers understands by Gaia.
   The Gorgons turned men who looked into their living, venomous,
snake-encrusted faces into stone. I wonder what might have happened if
those men had known how to politely greet the dreadful chthonic ones.
I wonder if such manners can still be learned, if there is time to learn
now, or if the stratigraphy of the rocks will only register the ends and
end of a stony Anthropos.65
   Because the deities of the Olympiad identified her as a particularly
dangerous enemy to the sky gods’ succession and authority, mortal
Medusa is especially interesting for my efforts to propose the Chthu-
lucene as one of the big-enough stories in the netbag for staying with
the trouble of our ongoing epoch. I resignify and twist the stories, but
no more than the Greeks themselves constantly did.66 The hero Perseus
was dispatched to kill Medusa; and with the help of Athena, head-born
favorite daughter of Zeus, he cut off the Gorgon’s head and gave it to his
accomplice, this virgin goddess of wisdom and war. Putting Medusa’s
severed head face-forward on her shield, the Aegis, Athena, as usual,
played traitor to the Earthbound; we expect no better from motherless
mind children. But great good came of this murder-for-hire, for from
Medusa’s dead body came the winged horse Pegasus. Feminists have a
special friendship with horses. Who says these stories do not still move
us materially?67 And from the blood dripping from Medusa’s severed
head came the rocky corals of the western seas, remembered today in
the taxonomic names of the Gorgonians, the coral-like sea fans and sea
whips, composed in symbioses of tentacular animal cnidarians and pho-
tosynthetic algal-like beings called zooanthellae.68
   With the corals, we turn definitively away from heady facial repre-
sentations, no matter how snaky. Even Potnia Theron, Potnia Melissa,
and Medusa cannot alone spin out the needed tentacularities. In the
tasks of thinking, figuring, and storytelling, the spider of my first pages,
Pimoa chthulhu, allies with the decidedly nonvertebrate critters of the

54   chapter two
seas. Corals align with octopuses, squids, and cuttlefish. Octopuses are
called spiders of the seas, not only for their tentacularity, but also for
their predatory habits. The tentacular chthonic ones have to eat; they
are at table, cum panis, companion species of terra. They are good figures
for the luring, beckoning, gorgeous, finite, dangerous precarities of the
Chthulucene. This Chthulucene is neither sacred nor secular; this earthly
worlding is thoroughly terran, muddled, and mortal—and at stake now.
   Mobile, many-armed predators, pulsating through and over the coral
reefs, octopuses are called spiders of the sea. And so Pimoa chthulhu and
Octopus cyanea meet in the webbed tales of the Chthulucene.69
   All of these stories are a lure to proposing the Chthulucene as a needed
third story, a third netbag for collecting up what is crucial for ongoing,
for staying with the trouble.70 The chthonic ones are not confined to a
vanished past. They are a buzzing, stinging, sucking swarm now, and hu-
man beings are not in a separate compost pile. We are humus, not Homo,
not anthropos; we are compost, not posthuman. As a suffix, the word ka-
inos, “-cene,” signals new, recently made, fresh epochs of the thick pres-
ent. To renew the biodiverse powers of terra is the sympoietic work and
play of the Chthulucene. Specifically, unlike either the Anthropocene or
the Capitalocene, the Chthulucene is made up of ongoing multispecies
stories and practices of becoming-with in times that remain at stake, in
precarious times, in which the world is not finished and the sky has not
fallen—yet. We are at stake to each other. Unlike the dominant dramas
of Anthropocene and Capitalocene discourse, human beings are not the
only important actors in the Chthulucene, with all other beings able
simply to react. The order is reknitted: human beings are with and of the
earth, and the biotic and abiotic powers of this earth are the main story.
   However, the doings of situated, actual human beings matter. It mat-
ters with which ways of living and dying we cast our lot rather than oth-
ers. It matters not just to human beings, but also to those many critters
across taxa which and whom we have subjected to exterminations, ex-
tinctions, genocides, and prospects of futurelessness. Like it or not, we
are in the string figure game of caring for and with precarious worldings
made terribly more precarious by fossil-burning man making new fossils
as rapidly as possible in orgies of the Anthropocene and Capitalocene.
Diverse human and nonhuman players are necessary in every fiber of
the tissues of the urgently needed Chthulucene story. The chief actors
are not restricted to the too-big players in the too-big stories of Capital-
ism and the Anthropos, both of which invite odd apocalyptic panics and

                                             Tentacular Thinking         55
even odder disengaged denunciations rather than attentive practices of
thought, love, rage, and care.
   Both the Anthropocene and the Capitalocene lend themselves too
readily to cynicism, defeatism, and self-certain and self-fulfilling predic-
tions, like the “game over, too late” discourse I hear all around me these
days, in both expert and popular discourses, in which both technotheo-
cratic geoengineering fixes and wallowing in despair seem to coinfect any
possible common imagination. Encountering the sheer not-us, more-
than-human worlding of the coral reefs, with their requirements for on-
going living and dying of their myriad critters, is also to encounter the
knowledge that at least 250 million human beings today depend directly
on the ongoing integrity of these holobiomes for their own ongoing liv-
ing and dying well. Diverse corals and diverse people and peoples are at
stake to and with each other. Flourishing will be cultivated as a multi-
species response-ability without the arrogance of the sky gods and their
minions, or else biodiverse terra will flip out into something very slimy,
like any overstressed complex adaptive system at the end of its abilities
to absorb insult after insult.
   Corals helped bring the Earthbound into consciousness of the Anthro-
pocene in the first place. From the start, uses of the term Anthropocene
emphasized human-induced warming and acidification of the oceans
from fossil-fuel-generated co2 emissions. Warming and acidification are
known stressors that sicken and bleach coral reefs, killing the photo-
synthesizing zooanthellae and so ultimately their cnidarian symbionts
and all of the other critters belonging to myriad taxa whose worlding
depends on intact reef systems. Corals of the seas and lichens of the land
also bring us into consciousness of the Capitalocene, in which deep-sea
mining and drilling in oceans and fracking and pipeline construction
across delicate lichen-covered northern landscapes are fundamental to
accelerating nationalist, transnationalist, and corporate unworlding.
   But coral and lichen symbionts also bring us richly into the storied tis-
sues of the thickly present Chthulucene, where it remains possible—just
barely—to play a much better sf game, in nonarrogant collaboration
with all those in the muddle. We are all lichens; so we can be scraped
off the rocks by the Furies, who still erupt to avenge crimes against the
earth. Alternatively, we can join in the metabolic transformations be-
tween and among rocks and critters for living and dying well. “‘Do you
realize,’ the phytolinguist will say to the aesthetic critic, ‘that [once upon
a time] they couldn’t even read Eggplant?’ And they will smile at our

56   chapter two
2.7. Day octopus, Octopus cyanea, in the water near Lanai, Hawaii.
Photograph by David Fleethham. © OceanwideImages.com.


ignorance, as they pick up their rucksacks and hike on up to read the
newly deciphered lyrics of the lichen on the north face of Pike’s Peak.’”71
    Attending to these ongoing matters returns me to the question that
began this chapter. What happens when human exceptionalism and
the utilitarian individualism of classical political economics become un-
thinkable in the best sciences across the disciplines and interdisciplines?
Seriously unthinkable: not available to think with. Why is it that the
epochal name of the Anthropos imposed itself at just the time when un-
derstandings and knowledge practices about and within symbiogenesis
and sympoietics are wildly and wonderfully available and generative in
all the humusities, including noncolonizing arts, sciences, and politics?
What if the doleful doings of the Anthropocene and the unworldings of
the Capitalocene are the last gasps of the sky gods, not guarantors of the
finished future, game over? It matters which thoughts think thoughts.
We must think!
    The unfinished Chthulucene must collect up the trash of the Anthro-
pocene, the exterminism of the Capitalocene, and chipping and shred-
ding and layering like a mad gardener, make a much hotter compost pile
for still possible pasts, presents, and futures.


                                                 Tentacular Thinking     57
    CHAPTER 3




        Sympoiesis
                       Symbiogenesis and the Lively Arts
                 of Staying with the Trouble




Symbiogenesis
Sympoiesis is a simple word; it means “making-with.” Nothing makes
itself; nothing is really autopoietic or self-organizing. In the words of
the Inupiat computer “world game,” earthlings are never alone.1 That
is the radical implication of sympoiesis. Sympoiesis is a word proper to
complex, dynamic, responsive, situated, historical systems. It is a word
for worlding-with, in company. Sympoiesis enfolds autopoiesis and gen-
eratively unfurls and extends it.
    The vivid four-by-six-foot painting called Endosymbiosis hangs in the
hallway joining the Departments of Geosciences and Biology at UMass
Amherst, near the Life and Earth Café, surely a spatial clue to how crit-
ters become-with each other.2 Perhaps as sensual molecular curiosity
and definitely as insatiable hunger, irresistible attraction toward enfold-
ing each other is the vital motor of living and dying on earth. Critters
interpenetrate one another, loop around and through one another, eat
each another, get indigestion, and partially digest and partially assimi-
late one another, and thereby establish sympoietic arrangements that
are otherwise known as cells, organisms, and ecological assemblages.
3.1. Endosymbiosis: Homage to Lynn Margulis, Shoshanah Dubiner, 2012.
www.cybermuse.com.
Another word for these sympoietic entities is holobionts, or, etymologi-
cally, “entire beings” or “safe and sound beings.”3
   That is decidedly not the same thing as One and Individual. Rather,
in polytemporal, polyspatial knottings, holobionts hold together con-
tingently and dynamically, engaging other holobionts in complex pat-
ternings. Critters do not precede their relatings; they make each other
through semiotic material involution, out of the beings of previous such
entanglements. Lynn Margulis knew a great deal about “the intimacy
of strangers,” a phrase she proposed to describe the most fundamental
practices of critters becoming-with each other at every node of intra-
action in earth history. I propose holoents as a general term to replace
“units” or “beings.”
   Like Margulis, I use holobiont to mean symbiotic assemblages, at
whatever scale of space or time, which are more like knots of diverse
intra-active relatings in dynamic complex systems, than like the entities
of a biology made up of preexisting bounded units (genes, cells, organ-
isms, etc.) in interactions that can only be conceived as competitive or
cooperative. Like hers, my use of holobiont does not designate host +
symbionts because all of the players are symbionts to each other, in di-
verse kinds of relationalities and with varying degrees of openness to
attachments and assemblages with other holobionts. Symbiosis is not a
synonym for “mutually beneficial.” The array of names needed to desig-
nate the heterogeneous webbed patterns and processes of situated and
dynamic dilemmas and advantages for the symbionts/holobionts is only
beginning to surface as biologists let go of the dictates of possessive
individualism and zero-sum games as the template for explanation.
   An adept in the study of microbes, cell biology, chemistry, geology,
and paleogeography, as well as a lover of languages, arts, stories, systems
theories, and alarmingly generative critters, including human beings,
Margulis was a radical evolutionary theorist. Her first and most intense
loves were the bacteria and archaea of Terra and all their bumptious
doings. The core of Margulis’s view of life was that new kinds of cells,
tissues, organs, and species evolve primarily through the long-lasting
intimacy of strangers. The fusion of genomes in symbioses, followed
by natural selection—with a very modest role for mutation as a motor
of system level change—leads to increasingly complex levels of good-
enough quasi-individuality to get through the day, or the aeon. Margulis
called this basic and mortal life-making process symbiogenesis.
   Bacteria and archaea did it first. My sense is that in her heart of hearts

60 c h a p t e r t h r e e
Margulis felt that bacteria and archaea did it all, and there wasn’t much
left for so-called higher-order biological entities to do or invent. Even-
tually, however, by fusing with each other in stabilized, ongoing ways,
archaea and bacteria invented the modern complex cell, with its nucleus
full of ropy chromosomes made of dna and proteins, and diverse other
sorts of extranuclear organelles, from undulating whips and spinning
blades for locomotion to specialized vesicles and tubules for a zillion
functions that work better kept a bit separate from each other.4 Because
she was a founder of Gaia theory with James Lovelock and a student
of interlocked and multileveled systemic processes of nonreductionist
organization and maintenance that make earth itself and earth’s living
beings unique, Margulis called these processes autopoietic.5 Perhaps she
would have chosen the term sympoietic, but the word and concept had
not yet surfaced.6 As long as autopoiesis does not mean self-sufficient
“self making,” autopoiesis and sympoiesis, foregrounding and back-
grounding different aspects of systemic complexity, are in generative
friction, or generative enfolding, rather than opposition.
    In 1998, a Canadian environmental studies graduate student named
M. Beth Dempster suggested the term sympoiesis for “collectively-
producing systems that do not have self-defined spatial or temporal
boundaries. Information and control are distributed among compo-
nents. The systems are evolutionary and have the potential for surpris-
ing change.” By contrast, autopoietic systems are “self-producing” au-
tonomous units “with self defined spatial or temporal boundaries that
tend to be centrally controlled, homeostatic, and predictable.”7 Symbio-
sis makes trouble for autopoiesis, and symbiogenesis is an even bigger
troublemaker for self-organizing individual units. The more ubiquitous
symbiogenesis seems to be in living beings’ dynamic organizing pro-
cesses, the more looped, braided, outreaching, involuted, and sympoietic
is terran worlding.
    Mixotricha paradoxa is everyone’s favorite critter for explaining com-
plex “individuality,” symbiogenesis, and symbiosis. Margulis described
this critter that is/are made up of at least five different taxonomic kinds
of cells with their genomes this way:
  Under low magnification, M. paradoxa looks like a single-celled swim-
  ming ciliate. With the electron microscope, however, it is seen to con-
  sist of five distinct kinds of creatures. Externally, it is most obviously
  the kind of one-celled organism that is classified as a protist. But in-

                                                          Sympoiesis     61
   side each nucleated cell, where one would expect to find mitochon-
   dria, are many spherical bacteria. On the surface, where cilia should
   be, are some 250,000 hairlike Treponema spirochetes (resembling the
   type that causes syphilis), as well as a contingent of large rod bac-
   teria that is also 250,000 strong. In addition, we have redescribed
   200 spirochetes of a larger type and named them Canaleparolina
   darwiniensis.8
   Leaving out viruses, each M. paradoxa is not one, not five, not sev-
eral hundred thousand, but a poster critter for holobionts. This holobi-
ont lives in the gut of an Australian termite, Mastotermes darwiniensis,
which has its own sf stories to tell about ones and manys, or holoents.
Termite symbioses, including their doings with people, not to mention
mushrooms, are the stuff of legends—and cuisine. Check out the holo-
biomes of Macrotermes natalensis and its cultivated fungus Termitomyces,
recently in the science news.9 M. paradoxa and their ilk have been my
companions in writing and thinking for decades.
   Since Darwin’s On the Origin of Species in 1859, biological evolutionary
theory has become more and more essential to our ability to think, feel,
and act well; and the interlinked Darwinian sciences that came together
roughly between the 1930s and 1950s into “the Modern Synthesis” or
“New Synthesis” remain astonishing. How could one be a serious person
and not honor such works as Theodosius Dobzhansky’s Genetics and the
Origin of Species (1937), Ernst Mayr’s Systematics and the Origin of Species
(1942), George Gaylord Simpson’s Tempo and Mode in Evolution (1944),
and even Richard Dawkins’s later sociobiological formulations within
the Modern Synthesis, The Selfish Gene (1976)? However, bounded units
(code fragments, genes, cells, organisms, populations, species, ecosys-
tems) and relations described mathematically in competition equations
are virtually the only actors and story formats of the Modern Synthe-
sis. Evolutionary momentum, always verging on modernist notions of
progress, is a constant theme, although teleology in the strict sense is
not. Even as these sciences lay the groundwork for scientific conceptu-
alization of the Anthropocene, they are undone in the very thinking of
Anthropocene systems that require enfolded autopoietic and sympoietic
analysis.
   Rooted in units and relations, especially competitive relations, the
sciences of the Modern Synthesis, for example, population genetics,
have a hard time with four key biological domains: embryology and de-

62 c h a p t e r t h r e e
velopment, symbiosis and collaborative entanglements of holobionts
and holobiomes, the vast worldings of microbes, and exuberant critter
biobehavioral inter- and intra-actions.10 Approaches tuned to “multi-
species becoming-with” better sustain us in staying with the trouble on
terra. An emerging “New New Synthesis”—an extended synthesis—in
transdisciplinary biologies and arts proposes string figures tying to-
gether human and nonhuman ecologies, evolution, development, his-
tory, affects, performances, technologies, and more.
   Indebted first to Margulis, I can only sketch a few aspects of the “Ex-
tended Evolutionary Synthesis” unfolding in the early twenty-first cen-
tury.11 Forming part of her cosmopolitan heritage, formulations of sym-
biogenesis predate Margulis in the early twentieth-century work of the
Russian Konstantin Mereschkowsky and others.12 However, Margulis,
her successors, and her colleagues bring together symbiogenetic imagi-
nations and materialities with all of the powerful cyborg tools of the late
twentieth-century molecular and ultrastructural biological revolutions,
including electron microscopes, nucleic acid sequencers, immunoassay
techniques, immense and comparative genomic and proteomic data-
bases, and more. The strength of the Extended Synthesis is precisely in
the intellectual, cultural, and technical convergence that makes it pos-
sible to develop new model systems, concrete experimental practices,
research collaborations, and both verbal and mathematical explanatory
instruments. Such a convergence was materially impossible before the
1970s and after.
   A model is a work object; a model is not the same kind of thing as a
metaphor or analogy. A model is worked, and it does work. A model is
like a miniature cosmos, in which a biologically curious Alice in Won-
derland can have tea with the Red Queen and ask how this world works,
even as she is worked by the complex-enough, simple-enough world.
Models in biological research are stabilized systems that can be shared
among colleagues to investigate questions experimentally and theoret-
ically. Traditionally, biology has had a small set of hard-working living
models, each shaped in knots and layers of practice to be apt for some
kinds of questions and not others. Listing seven basic model systems
of developmental biology (namely, fruit flies Drosophila melanogaster; a
nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans; the mouse Mus musculis; a frog, Xeno-
pus laevis; the zebrafish Danio rerio; the chicken Gallus gallus; and the
mustard Arabidopsis thaliana), Scott Gilbert wrote,


                                                         Sympoiesis     63
   The recognition that one’s organism is a model system provides a
   platform upon which one can apply for funds, and it assures one of
   a community of like-minded researchers who have identified prob-
   lems that the community thinks are important. There has been much
   lobbying for the status of a model system and the fear is that if your
   organism is not a recognized model, you will be relegated to the back-
   waters of research. Thus, “model organisms” have become the center
   for both scientific and political discussions in contemporary develop-
   mental biology.13
   Excellent for studying how parts (genes, cells, tissues, etc.) of well-
defined entities fit together into cooperating and/or competing units, all
seven of these individuated systems fail the researcher studying webbed
inter- and intra-actions of symbiosis and sympoiesis, in heterogeneous
temporalities and spatialities. Holobionts require models tuned to an ex-
pandable number of quasi-collective/quasi-individual partners in consti-
tutive relatings; these relationalities are the objects of study. The partners
do not precede the relatings. Such models are emerging for the transfor-
mative processes of EcologicalEvolutionaryDevelopmental biology.
   Margulis gave us dynamic multipartnered entities like Mixotricha
paradoxa to study the evolutionary invention of complex cells from the
intra- and interactions of bacteria and archaea. I will briefly introduce
two more models, each proposed and elaborated in the laboratory to
study a transformation of organizational patterning in the living world:
(1) a choanoflagellate-bacteria model for the invention of animal multi-
cellularity, and (2) a squid-bacteria model for the elaboration of develop-
mental symbioses between and among critters necessary to each other’s
becoming. A third symbiogenetic model for the formation of complex
ecosystems immediately suggests itself in the holobiomes of coral reefs,
and I will approach this model through science art worldings rather than
the experimental laboratory.
   Although multicellular plants appeared on earth half a million years
earlier, because of its robustness and sympoietic richness, I focus on a
proposed model system for the emergence of animal multicellularity. Ev-
ery living thing has emerged and persevered (or not) bathed and swad-
dled in bacteria and archaea. Truly nothing is sterile; and that reality
is a terrific danger, basic fact of life, and critter-making opportunity.
Using molecular and comparative genomic approaches and proposing
infectious—symbiogenetic—processes, Nicole King’s laboratory at the

64 c h a p t e r t h r e e
University of California, Berkeley, works to reconstruct possible origins
and development of animal multicellularity.14 These scientists show
that interspecies—really, interkingdom—meetings and enfoldings can
produce entities that hold together, develop, communicate, and form
layered tissues like animals do.
   As Alegado and King put it,
  Comparisons among modern animals and their closest living rela-
  tives, the choanoflagellates, suggest that the first animals used flagel-
  lated collar cells to capture bacterial prey. The cell biology of prey
  capture, such as cell adhesion between predator and prey, involves
  mechanisms that may have been co-opted to mediate intercellular in-
  teractions during the evolution of animal multicellularity. Moreover,
  a history of bacterivory may have influenced the evolution of animal
  genomes by driving the evolution of genetic pathways for immunity
  and facilitating lateral gene transfer. Understanding the interactions
  between bacteria and the progenitors of animals may help to explain
  the myriad ways in which bacteria shape the biology of modern ani-
  mals, including ourselves.15
In Marilyn Strathern’s sense, partial connections abound. Getting hun-
gry, eating, and partially digesting, partially assimilating, and partially
transforming: these are the actions of companion species.
   King’s ambitious program is crafting a stabilized and genomically
well-characterized model system of cultures of choanoflagellates (Salp-
ingoeca rosetta) and bacteria from the genus Algoriphagus to investigate
critical aspects of the formation of multicellular animals. Choanoflagel-
lates can live as either single cells or multicellular colonies; what de-
termines the transitions? The close evolutionary relationship between
choanoflagellates and animals lends strength to the model.16 The sym-
biogenetic theory of origins of multicellularity is contested; there are
attractive alternate explanations. What distinguishes King’s lab is its
production of a model system that is experimentally tractable, trans-
ferable in principle to other sites, and generative of testable questions
at the heart of being animal. To be animal is to become-with bacteria
(and, no doubt, viruses and many other sorts of critters; a basic aspect
of sympoiesis is its expandable set of players). No wonder the best sci-
ence writers bring Nicole King’s lab into my dinner conversations on a
regular basis.17
   Next, I hold out a tasty model system for studying developmental

                                                         Sympoiesis     65
symbioses. The question here is not how animals hold themselves to-
gether at all, but rather, how they craft developmental patternings that
take them through time in astonishing morphogeneses. My favorite
model is the diminutive Hawaiian bobtail squid, Euprymna scolopes, and
its bacterial symbionts, Vibrio fischeri, which are essential for the squid’s
constructing its ventral pouch that houses luminescing bacteria, so that
the hunting squid can look like a starry sky to its prey below on dark
nights, or appear not to cast a shadow on moonlit nights. The squid-
bacterial symbiosis has proven remarkably generative for many kinds
of studies, “from ecology and evolution of a symbiotic system to the un-
derlying molecular mechanisms of partner interactions that lead to es-
tablishment, development, and long-term-persistence of the alliance.”18
    Unless the juvenile squid are infected in the right spot, at the right
time, by the right bacteria, they do not develop their own structures
for housing bacteria when they are hunting adults. The bacteria are
fully part of the squid’s developmental biology. In addition, the bacte-
ria produce signals that regulate the adult squids’ circadian rhythms.
The squid regulate bacterial numbers, exclude unwanted associates, and
provide inviting surfaces for setting up vibrio homes. Herself trained in
marine invertebrate field biology, biochemistry, and biophysics, McFall-
Ngai began work on the naturally occurring squid-bacteria holobiont
in 1988, when she started to collaborate with Edward (Ned) Ruby, a
microbiologist also interested in symbiosis. Remembering that other
vibrio bacteria are responsible for the pathogenic communication that
is cholera, I was not surprised to learn what multitalented communica-
tors these sorts of bacteria are. As McFall-Ngai put it, “The Vibrionaceae
are a group of bacteria whose members often have broad physiological
scope and multiple ecological niches.”19 Material semiotics is exuberantly
chemical; the roots of language across taxa, with all its understandings
and misunderstandings, lie in such attachments.
    The sympoietic collaborations of squid and bacteria are matched by
the sympoietic string figures across disciplines and methodologies, in-
cluding genome sequencing, myriad imaging technologies, functional
genomics, and field biology, which make symbiogenesis such a powerful
framework for twenty-first-century biology. Working on pea aphid sym-
biosis with Buchnera, Nancy Moran emphasizes this point: “The primary
reason that symbiosis research is suddenly active, after decades at the
margins of mainstream biology, is that dna technology and genomics
give us enormous new ability to discover symbiont diversity, and more

66 c h a p t e r t h r e e
significantly, to reveal how microbial metabolic capabilities contribute
to the functioning of hosts and biological communities.”20 I would add
the necessity of asking how the multicellular partners in the symbioses
affect the microbial symbionts. “Host-symbiont” seems an odd locution
for what is happening; at whatever size, all the partners making up ho-
lobionts are symbionts to each other.
   Two transformative papers embody for me the profound scientific
changes afoot.21 Subtitling their paper “We Have Never Been Individu-
als,” Gilbert, Sapp, and Tauber argue for holobionts and a symbiotic view
of life by summarizing the evidence against bounded units from anat-
omy, physiology, genetics, evolution, immunology, and development. In
“Animals in a Bacterial World: A New Imperative for the Life Sciences,”
the twenty-six coauthors present the growing knowledge of a vast range
of animal-bacterial interactions at both ecosystem and intimate sym-
biosis scales. They argue that this evidence should profoundly alter ap-
proaches to five questions: “how have bacteria facilitated the origin and
evolution of animals; how do animals and bacteria affect each other’s
genomes; how does normal animal development depend on bacterial
partners; how is homeostasis maintained between animals and their
symbionts; and how can ecological approaches deepen our understand-
ing of the multiple levels of animal-bacterial interaction.”22
   Stories about worried colleagues at conferences, uncomprehend-
ing reviewers unused to so much evidential and disciplinary boundary
crossing in one paper, or initially enthusiastic editors getting cold feet
surround these papers. Such stories normally surround risky and gen-
erative syntheses and propositions. The critics are a crucial part of the
holobiome of making science, and I am not a disinterested observer.23
Nonetheless, I think it matters that both of these papers were published
in prominent places at a critical inflection point in the curve of research
on, and explanation of, complex biological systems in the urgent times
called the Anthropocene, when the arts for living on a damaged planet
demand sympoietic thinking and action.


Interlacing Sciences and Arts with Involutionary Momentum
I am committed to art science worldings as sympoietic practices for liv-
ing on a damaged planet. Carla Hustak and Natasha Myers gave all of us
a beautiful paper titled “Involutionary Momentum” that is a hinge for
me between symbiogenesis and the science art worldings I present in the

                                                         Sympoiesis     67
third section of this chapter. These authors reread Darwin’s own sensu-
ous writing about his exquisite attention to absurdly sexual orchids and
their pollinating insects; Hustak and Myers also themselves attend to
the many enfoldings and communications among bees, wasps, orchids,
and scientists. The authors suggest that “involution” powers the “evo-
lution” of living and dying on earth. Rolling inward enables rolling out-
ward; the shape of life’s motion traces a hyperbolic space, swooping and
fluting like the folds of a frilled lettuce, coral reef, or bit of crocheting.
Like the biologists of the previous section, Hustak and Myers argue that
a zero-sum game based on competing methodological individualists is a
caricature of the sensuous, juicy, chemical, biological, material-semiotic,
and science-making world. Counting “articulate plants and other loqua-
cious organisms” among their number, living critters love the floridly
repetitive mathematics of the pushes and pulls of hyperbolic geometry,
not the accountant’s hell of a zero-sum game.24
   Rather, the orchid and its bee-pollinators are mutually constituted
   through a reciprocal capture from which neither plant nor insect can
   be disentangled . . . It is in encounters among orchids, insects, and
   scientists that we find openings for an ecology of interspecies intima-
   cies and subtle propositions. What is at stake in this involutionary
   approach is a theory of ecological relationality that takes seriously
   organisms’ practices, their inventions, and experiments crafting in-
   terspecies lives and worlds. This is an ecology inspired by a feminist
   ethic of “response-ability” . . . in which questions of species difference
   are always conjugated with attentions to affect, entanglement, and
   rupture; an affective ecology in which creativity and curiosity charac-
   terize the experimental forms of life of all kinds of practitioners, not
   only the humans.25
   Orchids are famous for their flowers looking like the genitals of the fe-
male insects of the particular species needed to pollinate them. The right
sort of males seeking females of their own kind are drawn to the color,
shape, and alluring insectlike pheromones of a particular species of or-
chid. These interactions have been explained (away) in neo-Darwinian
orthodoxy as nothing but biological deception and exploitation of the
insect by the flower—in other words, an excellent example of the selfish
gene in action. Hustak and Myers instead read aslant neo-Darwinism,
even in this hard case of strong asymmetry of “costs and benefits,” to
find other necessary models for a science of plant ecology. The stories

68 c h a p t e r t h r e e
of mutation, adaptation, and natural selection are not silenced; but
they are not turned up so loud as to deafen scientists, as if the evidence
demanded it, when increasingly something more complex is audible in
research across fields. “This requires reading with our senses attuned to
stories told in otherwise muted registers. Working athwart the reduc-
tive, mechanistic, and adaptationist logics that ground the ecological
sciences, we offer a reading that amplifies accounts of the creative, im-
provisational, and fleeting practices through which plants and insects
involve themselves in one another’s lives.”26
    But what happens when a partner involved critically in the life of ano-
ther disappears from the earth? What happens when holobionts break
apart? What happens when entire holobiomes crumble into the rubble
of broken symbionts? This kind of question has to be asked in the urgen-
cies of the Anthropocene and Capitalocene if we are to nurture arts for
living on a damaged planet. In his science fiction novel The Speaker for
the Dead Orson Scott Card explored how a young boy who had excelled in
exterminationist technoscience in a cross-species war with an insectoid
hive species later in life took up responsibility for the dead, for collecting
up the stories for those left behind when a being, or a way of being, dies.
The man had to do what the boy, immersed only in cyber-realities and
deadly virtual war, was never allowed to do; the man had to visit, to live
with, to face the dead and the living in all of their materialities. The task
of the Speaker for the Dead is to bring the dead into the present, so as to
make more response-able living and dying possible in times yet to come.
My hinge to science art worldings turns on the ongoing performance of
memory by an orchid for its extinct bee.
    In xkcd’s cartoon “Bee Orchid,” we know a vanished insect once ex-
isted because a living flower still looks like the erotic organs of the avid
female bee hungry for copulation. But the cartoon does something very
special; it does not mistake lures for identity; it does not say the flower
is exactly like the extinct insect’s genitals. Instead, the flower collects
up the presence of the bee aslant, in desire and mortality. The shape
of the flower is “an idea of what the female bee looked like to the male
bee . . . as interpreted by a plant . . . the only memory of the bee is a
painting by a dying flower.”27 Once embraced by living buzzing bees, the
flower is a speaker for the dead. A stick figure promises to remember
the bee flower when it comes time. The practice of the arts of mem-
ory enfold all terran critters. That must be part of any possibility for
resurgence!

                                                           Sympoiesis      69
3.2. “Bee Orchid.” © xkcd.com (Randall Munroe).
Science Art Worldings for Staying with the Trouble
I end this chapter with four engaged science art activist worldings com-
mitted to partial healing, modest rehabilitation, and still possible resur-
gence in the hard times of the imperial Anthropocene and Capitalocene.
I think of these worldings as stinger-endowed, unfurling, grasping ten-
tacles of the ink-spurting, disguise-artist, hunting critters of an ongoing
past, present, and future called the Chthulucene.28 Speaking resurgence
to despair, the Chthulucene is the timespace of the symchthonic ones,
the symbiogenetic and sympoietic earthly ones, those now submerged
and squashed in the tunnels, caves, remnants, edges, and crevices of
damaged waters, airs, and lands. The chthonic ones are those indigenous
to the earth in myriad languages and stories; and decolonial indigenous
peoples and projects are central to my stories of alliance.
   Each of the science art worldings cultivates robust response-ability
for powerful and threatened places and beings. Each is a model system
for sympoietic, multiplayer, multispecies thinking and action located
in a particularly sensitive place: (1) the Great Barrier Reef and all the
world’s coral reefs, with the Crochet Coral Reef project, initiated and
coordinated by the Institute for Figuring in Los Angeles; (2) the island
Republic of Madagascar, with the Malagasy-English children’s natural
history book series called the Ako Project, made possible by multina-
tional friendships among scientists and artists; (3) the circumpolar
northern lands of the Inupiat in Alaska, site of the Never Alone computer
game project, centered in story-making practices among the Inupiat29
and brought into being by the sympoiesis of E-Line Media and the Cook
Inlet Tribal Council; and, my most developed case, (4) Black Mesa and
the Navajo and Hopi lands enmeshed in Arizona, site of many-threaded
coalitional work including Black Mesa Indigenous Support, Black Mesa
Trust (Hopi), the scientists and indigenous herding people committed to
Navajo-Churro sheep, Black Mesa Weavers for Life and Land, the mostly
Diné activists of the Black Mesa Water Coalition, and the people and
sheep of Diné be’iiná / The Navajo Lifeway.30
   Each of these projects is a case of noninnocent, risky, committed “be-
coming involved in one another’s lives.”31 Making-with and tangled-with
the tentacular ones, which are gripping and stinging for an ongoing gen-
erative Chthulucene, each is a sf string figure of multispecies becoming-
with. These science art worldings are holobiomes, or holoents, in which
scientists, artists, ordinary members of communities, and nonhuman

                                                         Sympoiesis      71
beings become enfolded in each other’s projects, in each other’s lives;
they come to need each other in diverse, passionate, corporeal, mean-
ingful ways. Each is an animating project in deadly times. They are sym-
poietic, symbiogenetic, and symanimagenic.

Four Critical Zones
Bathed in hot and acid oceans that are becoming more acidic and hotter
by the decade, coral holobiomes everywhere are threatened. Coral reefs
have the highest biodiversity of any kind of marine ecosystem. The sym-
biosis of cnidarian polyps, photosynthesizing dinoflagellates called zoo-
anthellae living in the coral tissue, and a horde of microbes and viruses
make up the keystone of the coral holobiome, which is home to multi-
tudes of other critters. Hundreds of millions of human beings, many of
them very poor, depend directly on healthy coral ecosystems for their
livelihoods.32 Such sentences hugely understate coral interdependence
with human and nonhuman critters. Recognition of dying coral reef eco-
systems in warming and acidifying seas was at the heart of advancing
the very term Anthropocene in 2000. Coral, along with lichens, are also
the earliest instances of symbiosis recognized by biologists; these are the
critters that taught biologists to understand the parochialism of their
own ideas of individuals and collectives. These critters taught people
like me that we are all lichens, all coral. In addition, deepwater reefs in
some locations seem to be able to function as refugia for replenishing
damaged corals in shallower waters.33 Coral reefs are the forests of the
sea, like Anna Tsing’s forest refugia of the land. Besides all of this, coral
reef worlds are achingly beautiful. I cannot imagine it is only human
people who know this beauty in their flesh.
   A large island nation off the east coast of Africa, the Republic of Mad-
agascar is home to complex, layered tapestries of historically situated
peoples and other critters, including lemurs, close relatives of monkeys
and apes. Nine out of ten kinds of Madagascar’s nonhuman critters,
including all species of lemurs, live nowhere else on earth. The rate of
extinction and destruction of the many kinds of Madagascar’s forests
and watersheds vital for rural people (the large majority of Madagascar’s
human citizens), urban and town residents, and myriad nonhumans is
almost beyond imagination, except that it is well advanced—but not
uncontested locally and translocally. Evidence from photography indi-
cates that 40 to 50 percent of the forests of Madagascar that were still

72 c h a p t e r t h r e e
thriving in 1950 are gone now, along with their critters, including their
people, who for centuries harvested (and cultivated) woodland bounty
for their lives. Forest well-being is one of the most urgent priorities for
flourishing—indeed, survival—all over the earth. The contestations
must matter; it’s not a choice, it’s a necessity.34
    The circumpolar North bears the brunt of the Anthropocene and Cap-
italocene. The Arctic is warming at almost twice the rate of the global
average. Sea ice, glaciers, and permafrost melt; people, animals, mi-
crobes, and plants can no longer rely on the seasons, nor indeed on the
temporally punctuated solid or liquid forms of matter crucial to their
perceptions and ways of getting on in life. Eating each other properly
requires meeting each other properly, and that requires good-enough
synchronicity. Synchronicity is exactly one of the system properties
flipping out all over earth. Change on earth is not the problem; rates
and distributions of change are very much the problem. In addition,
consumption-obsessed imperial circumpolar nations vie with each other
in increasingly militarized seas to claim and extract the huge reserves of
carbonized fossils encased in the far North, promising a further release
of greenhouse gases on a scale that simply cannot be allowed to hap-
pen. A geophysical, geopolitical storm of unprecedented proportions is
changing practices of living and dying across the North. The coalitions
of peoples and critters facing this storm are critical to the possibilities
of earth’s powers of resurgence.
    Located on the four-thousand-square-mile Colorado Plateau, Black
Mesa, or Big Mountain, is ancestral land for both Hopi and Diné peoples.
Black Mesa is also a contemporary place needed by both Navajo and
Hopi families for income, food, water, sociality, and ceremony. The Black
Mesa coalfield, once a huge Pleistocene lake, is the largest coal deposit in
the United States. Beginning in 1968, this colonizing capitalist extractive
nation hosted the largest strip-mining operation in North America, run
by the Peabody Western Coal Company, part of Peabody Energy, the
world’s largest private-sector coal company. For forty years, coal from
the Black Mesa strip mine was pulverized, mixed with immense quanti-
ties of pristine water from the irreplaceable Navajo aquifer, and carried
in a giant slurry pipeline (owned by Southern Pacific) 273 miles to the
heavily polluting coal-fired Mohave Generating Station in Nevada, built
by the Bechtel Corporation. This plant provided energy for the bloom-
ing toxic cities in the desert Southwest, including Los Angeles. People
living on Black Mesa to this day have neither assured clean water nor

                                                          Sympoiesis     73
reliable electricity, and many of their wells failed as the Navajo aquifer
was depleted. Sheep that drink from sulfate-rich toxic waste ponds die,
and groundwater is polluted.
   First the slurry pipe, then the Black Mesa mine, and finally the Mo-
have Generating Station were closed down in 2005 through the concerted
work of both indigenous and settler environmentalists.35 Attempting to
combine operations with its nearby Kayenta site under a single renewal
permit running to 2026, Peabody currently has plans to reopen and ex-
pand the Black Mesa mine, targeting still more land needed by sheep and
people, not to mention other critters. The expanded operation would
wash coal with water from the Coconino Aquifer.
   Coal from the Kayenta strip mine is shipped ninety-seven miles to
the Navajo Generating Station (ngs) on the Arizona-Utah border, near
Glen Canyon Dam; the ngs is the largest power-generating plant in the
U.S. West.36 The irony of the power station’s name should escape no
one, since half of Navajo homes do not have electricity and the Navajo
Nation does not own the plant. Even setting aside the long-term well-
being of people, other critters, land, and water, without a serious share
in the profits made from coal and affordable energy for local residents,
dependence on coal-related jobs keeps the Navajo Nation, as well as the
Hopi, in a vise grip. Unemployment in the Navajo Nation runs around 45
percent, and both Hopi and Diné are among the poorest citizens of the
United States. When built by Bechtel in the 1970s on land leased from
the Navajo Nation, this plant was the second-largest utility in the United
States. The largest owner of the Navajo Generating Station is the federal
government’s Bureau of Reclamation in the Department of the Interior;
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, also in the Department of the Interior, is
charged with protecting Native lands and resources. Coyote is well and
truly in the sheep corral in that arrangement. In 2010 Peabody’s Kayenta
mine was listed among the most dangerous in the United States and
targeted for increased scrutiny by the federal Mine Safety and Health
Administration.37 This plant powers the pumping stations that transfer
the waters of the Colorado River through a 336-mile-long aqueduct to
the always fast-growing cities of Tucson and Phoenix. Amid ongoing
struggles over both the plant’s effect on air quality and access to water
in the desert, in 2014 the ngs obtained a permit to continue operation
as a conventional coal-fired plant until December 2044.38
   Hopi ancestors dug coal for their fires out of seams in Black Mesa’s
sandstone for centuries. Despite a destructive meme to the contrary—a

74 c h a p t e r t h r e e
very useful meme for the fossil fuel extraction industry—Diné and Hopi
agriculturalists and herders lived adjacent to and among each other in
mixed amity and competition until the advent of industrial-scale coal
mining on Black Mesa, which engineered intense conflict conveniently
misread as timeless tribal feuds. In 1966, transnational corporations
obtained leases signed by both tribal councils, without discussion or
consent by the great majority of tribal members or collective bodies
(kivas, chapters). The terms of bargaining for these leases were both
inherently asymmetrical and enabled by ethically compromised legal
processes, epitomized by a lawyer and bishop of the Mormon church
named John Boyden, who, without the Hopi’s knowledge, worked simul-
taneously for Peabody and selected Hopi leaders. Thousands of Navajo
lived on Black Mesa, including some of the most traditional among the
Diné. The Navajo tribal council initially refused to work with Boyden,
so he cultivated Hopi whose leaders were bitterly factionalized between
so-called traditionalists and progressives, beginning at a time when the
Hopi had no overall governing council. Boyden worked effectively over
a long period to craft legislation to clear the land of Navajo sheep people
and to shift legal control to the Hopi, who did not live on the land that
would be strip-mined. Traditional Hopi fiercely opposed Boyden, but to
no avail. Well connected in Washington, Boyden was crucial to crafting
the legal, political, and economic strategy to exploit Black Mesa’s coal
bounty. A Freedom of Information Act suit filed by the Native American
Rights Fund ascertained that out of funds held in a federal trust for the
Hopi, over thirty years Boyden was paid $2.7 million for his “pro bono”
services to the tribe.39
   In 1974, the U.S. Congress passed a bill introduced by Arizona sena-
tor John McCain, a man with close personal and family ties to mining
and energy industries, called the Navajo-Hopi Land Settlement Act. The
act has resulted in the forced removal of up to fifteen thousand Diné
without serious provision of anywhere for people and animals to go,
even if ties to specific places were irrelevant. But both sheep and people
know and care a great deal where they come from, where they are, and
where they go.40 In 1980 the federal government purchased a uranium-
contaminated site near Chambers, Arizona, as new lands for the evicted
Diné. In 1996, McCain, then chairman of the Senate Committee on In-
dian Affairs, authored a second forced relocation act. The Navajo turned
to the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights. The strug-
gle continues, with extraordinary efforts by young activists to heal the

                                                         Sympoiesis      75
coal-scarred wounds dividing Hopi and Navajo. In 2005, 75 percent of
overall annual Hopi income and 40 percent of Navajo income derived
ultimately from Black Mesa mining operations. The struggle is daunt-
ingly complex.41
   The stories I will tell about Black Mesa are about resurgence in the
face of genocide and extermination, about sheep and weaving, about
art science activist worldings, about coalitions in struggle for what the
Navajo call hózhó—balance, harmony, beauty, right relations of land and
people—in this troubled world on the Colorado Plateau.
   And so these are four critical zones of the tussle between the Anthro-
pocene and Capitalocene, on the one hand, and the Chthulucene, on the
other: coral forests of the oceans, diverse tropical forests of an island
nation and ecosystem, rapidly melting arctic lands and seas, and coal
seams and aquifers of indigenous lands linked in a global chain of on-
going colonial anthropogenic devastation. It is time to turn to sympoi-
etic worldings, to vital models crafted in sf patterns in each zone, where
ordinary stories, ordinary becoming “involved in each other’s lives,” pro-
pose ways to stay with the trouble in order to nurture well-being on a
damaged planet. Symchthonic stories are not the tales of heroes; they
are the tales of the ongoing.

Resurgence in Four Parts

   The Crochet Coral Reef
In 1997, Daina Taimina, a Latvian mathematician at Cornell University,
“finally worked out how to make a physical model of hyperbolic space
that allows us to feel, and to tacitly explore the properties of this unique
geometry. The method she used was crochet.”42 With this tie between
math and fiber arts in mind, in 2005, after reading an article on coral
bleaching, Christine Wertheim, a crafter and poet, suggested to her twin
sister Margaret, a mathematician and artist, “We should crochet a coral
reef.”43 We can fight for the coral reefs that way, implied this odd impera-
tive. The sisters were watching an episode of Xena Warrior Princess, and
Xena’s and her sidekick Gabrielle’s fabulous fighting action—or maybe
just the incomparable Lucy Lawless and Renee O’Connor—inspired
them.44 The consequences have been utterly out of proportion to what
the twin sisters in Los Angeles imagined that first night. So far, about
eight thousand people, mostly women, in twenty-seven countries—


76 c h a p t e r t h r e e
3.3. Beaded jellyfish made by Vonda N. McIntyre for the Crochet Coral Reef.
From the collection of the Institute for Figuring (IFF). Photograph © IFF.
from Ireland, Latvia, the United Arab Emirates, Australia, the United
States, the UK, Croatia, and more—have come together to crochet in
wool, cotton, plastic bags, discarded reel-to-reel tape, vinyl jelly yarn,
Saran wrap, and just about anything else that can be induced to loop and
whirl in the codes of crocheting.
   The code is so simple: crocheted models of hyperbolic planes achieve
their ruffled forms by progressively increasing the number of stitches in
each row. The emergent vitalities of this wooly experimental life-form
take diverse corporeal shape as crafters increase the numbers from row
to row irregularly, oddly, whimsically, or strictly to see what forms they
could make—not just any forms, but crenulated beings that take life
as marine critters of the vulnerable reefs.45 “Every woolen form has
its fibrous dna.”46 But wool is hardly the only material. Plastic bottle
anemone trees with trash tendrils and anemones made from New York
Times blue plastic wrappers find their reef habitats. Making fabulated,
rarely mimetic, but achingly evocative models of coral reef ecosystems,
or maybe of just a few critters, the Crochet Coral Reef has morphed into
what is probably the world’s largest collaborative art project.
   The involutionary momentum of the crochet coral reef powers the
sympoietic knotting of mathematics, marine biology, environmental
activism, ecological consciousness raising, women’s handicrafts, fiber
arts, museum display, and community art practices. A kind of hyperbolic
embodied knowledge, the crochet reef lives enfolded in the materialities
of global warming and toxic pollution; and the makers of the reef prac-
tice multispecies becoming-with to cultivate the capacity to respond,
response-ability.47 The crochet reef is the fruit of “algorithmic code, im-
provisational creativity, and community engagement.”48 The reef works
not by mimicry, but by open-ended, exploratory process. “Iterate, de-
viate, elaborate” are the principles of the process.49 dna could not have
said it better.
   The Crochet Coral Reef has a core set of reefs made for exhibitions,
like the first ones at the Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh and the Chi-
cago Cultural Center, both in 2007, to the Coral Forest exhibited in Abu
Dhabi in 2014 and beyond. The morphing assemblages are kept at the
Los Angeles Institute for Figuring (iff), and they fill the Wertheims’
home. The iff is the Wertheims’ nonprofit organization in LA, founded
in 2003 and dedicated to “the aesthetic dimensions of mathematics,
science, and engineering.”50 The core concept is material play, and the
iff proposes and enacts not think tanks or work tanks, but play tanks,

78 c h a p t e r t h r e e
which I understand as arts for living on a damaged planet. The iff and
the Crochet Coral Reef are art-science-activist worldings, bringing peo-
ple together to do string figures with math, sciences, and arts in order
to make active attachments that might matter to resurgence in the An-
thropocene and Capitalocene—that is, to make string figures tangled
in the Chthulucene. There are incarnations of a “biodiverse reef,” “toxic
reef,” “bleached reef,” “coral forest,” “plastic midden,” “white spire gar-
den,” “bleached bone reef,” “beaded coral garden,” “coral forest medusa,”
and more, along with the many satellite reefs made by collectives of
crafters that come together all over the world to mount local exhibits.
Crafters make fabulated healthy reefs, but my sense is that most of the
reefs show the stigmata of plastic trash, bleaching, and toxic pollution.
Crocheting with this trash feels to me like the looping of love and rage.
   The skills and sensibilities of Margaret and Christine Wertheim, who
were born in Brisbane near the Great Barrier Reef, are fundamental,
along with the skills and concerns of the thousands of reef crafters. With
degrees in mathematics and physics, Margaret Wertheim is a science
writer, curator, and artist. She has written extensively on the cultural
history of theoretical physics. Her 2009 ted talk “The Beautiful Math
of Coral” has been watched by over a million people.51 With two books
written in feminine feminist materialist poetics, Christine Wertheim is a
poet, performer, artist, critic, curator, crafter, and teacher. She aptly de-
scribes her work as “infesting fertile zones between cunning linguistics,
psychoanalysis, poetry and gender studies.”52 Clearly, these twin sisters
were primed for sympoietic sf.
   Infecting each other and anyone who comes into contact with their
fibrous critters, the thousands of crafters crochet psychological, mate-
rial, and social attachments to biological reefs in the oceans, but not by
practicing marine field biology or by diving among the reefs or making
some other direct contact. Rather, the crafters stitch “intimacy with-
out proximity,” a presence without disturbing the critters that animate
the project, but with the potential for being part of work and play for
confronting the exterminationist, trashy, greedy practices of global in-
dustrial economies and cultures.53 Intimacy without proximity is not
“virtual” presence; it is “real” presence, but in loopy materialities. The
abstractions of the mathematics of crocheting are a kind of lure to an
affective cognitive ecology stitched in fiber arts. The crochet reef is a
practice of caring without the neediness of touching by camera or hand
in yet another voyage of discovery. Material play builds caring publics.

                                                           Sympoiesis     79
3.4. Green turtles (Chelonia mydas) crawling out of the ocean onto the beach to lay
their eggs. Credit: Mark Sullivan, NOAA, Permit #10137-07.



The result is another strong thread in the holobiome of the reef: we are
all corals now.
    Returning to the birth tendrils of the Wertheim sisters in coral reef
worlds, I close this little section on the Crochet Coral Reef with a gor-
geous photo of green sea turtles coming out of the ocean onto the beach
to lay their eggs. Laying their eggs in more than eighty countries and
endangered or threatened everywhere, green turtles are globally dis-
tributed across the tropical and subtropical belt of earth. A portrait of
another green turtle flying in the ocean over the Great Barrier Reef in
Australia advertises the Regional Chamber of the Rights of Nature Tri-
bunal held in Far North Queensland in 2015.54 About eighteen thousand
female turtles nest each season on Raine Island in the Great Barrier
Reef; this population is one of only two large nesting groups on the earth
today.55 The tribunal collected statements from Aboriginal witnesses
about proper governance of the reef to present at the International Tri-
bunal for the Rights of Nature during the Climate Change summit in
Paris in December 2015. Sea turtles, corals, Aboriginal witnesses on the
care of decolonizing Country, the holobiomes of scientists, denizens of

80 c h a p t e r t h r e e
3.5. Page from Tik-Tik the Ringtailed Lemur / Tikitiki Ilay Maky. UNICEF
Madagascar and the Lemur Conservation Foundation. Text by Alison Jolly and
Hanta Rasamimanana. Art by Deborah Ross. Courtesy of Margaretta Jolly.


the Chthulucene, diverse environmental justice activists, and interna-
tional art science crafters come together in sf, in speculative fabulation
for flourishing.

   The Madagascar Ako Project
As a Yale graduate student studying lemur behavior in 1962 in what is
now the Berenty Primate Reserve, Alison Jolly fell into noninnocent
love and knowledge in her first encounter with female-led, swaggering,
opportunistic ring-tailed lemurs in the spiny forest and dry gallery for-
est of the south of the island. Simply and transformatively, this young
six-foot-tall American white woman became a lover and seeker of knowl-
edge and well-being with and for the beings of Madagascar, especially
the astonishing species of lemurs, the radically different forest ecosys-
tems the length and breadth of the island, and the land’s complex people
and peoples. Author of many books and scientific papers and participant
in numerous study and conservation teams, Jolly died in 2014. Her con-
tributions to primatology, biodiversity conservation, and historically
informed, passionate analyses of conservation conflicts and necessities
were legion. But Jolly herself seemed especially to prize the sympoietic

                                                             Sympoiesis      81
gift she helped craft, the Ako Project,56 which is tuned to practices for
resurgence in vulnerable Malagasy worlds. This is the part of her work
I most love.57
   In the marrow of her bones, Jolly understood the terrible contradic-
tions and frictions in her embrace of both the rural people, who cut and
burn the forests to make small agricultural plots called tavy, and her
beloved prosimians with all their forest partners.58 Of course, she knew
she was not Malagasy, but at best a guest who might reciprocate appro-
priately, and at worst another in a long line of colonizers, always taking
land and giving advice for the best reasons. Aware of the controversies
over whether shifting cultivators destroyed or nurtured and managed
the forest, she learned a great deal about what made contemporary, es-
calating tavy burnings lethal to the future of the forests and of all their
critters, including the people who need them not just for their products
(including lemurs for food), but to sustain fertility in phosphorous-poor
tropical soils. She knew that making tavy had been part of the cycle
of forest succession and biodiversity maintenance, with evidence in old
stands in Ranomafana Park. But, she argued, not anymore. Nothing
has time to regenerate anymore. Jolly knew in detail what the press of
rapidly increasing human numbers means to the forests in the situated
history of multiple land dispossessions, relocations, violent suppres-
sions, imposition of regimes of private property, insecure markets, a
succession of failed national governments, huge solicited and imposed
national debt, and broken development promises. She wrote vividly
about local people’s accurate assessment of the effects of generations
of visiting experts, while the experts and visiting research scientists of-
ten knew little or nothing about the terrible history of land seizures,
colonial and postcolonial search-and-destroy operations, rapacious ex-
traction schemes, and the impact on villagers of the failed projects of
usually well intentioned but often ignorant foreign scientists and both
local and foreign ngos. She also knew what sustained committed work
of real colleagues and friends could accomplish in Madagascar against
the odds and across differences of all sorts. There are many possible
examples and many important people, but I want to tell about one little
project that might be considered a model system for sympoiesis.
   Written in both English and Malagasy, each book in the Ako Project
vividly narrates the adventures of a young Malagasy lemur from one
of six species, from the tiny mouse lemur or ny tsididy, to the queer-


82 c h a p t e r t h r e e
fingered aye-aye or ny aiay, to singing Indri or ilay babakoto. The stories
are fleshed-out natural histories, full of the empirical sensuous curios-
ity of that genre; and they are bumptious adventures of gutsy young
lemurs living the joys and dangers of their habitats and of their groups’
social arrangements. Surrounding each lemur species with diverse plant
and animal critters proper to their habitats, the project provides both
teachers’ guides in Malagasy and beautifully crafted posters showing the
unique regions of Madagascar where the stories take place. The books
are not textbooks; they are stories, feasts for mind, heart, and body for
children (and adults) who have no access to storybooks or to the critters
of their own nation or even region. Most Malagasy never see a lemur on
the land, on television, or in a book. Those privileged enough to go to a
school with books saw pictures of French rabbits, a fact Alison Jolly told
me with disgust in the 1980s when I interviewed her for Primate Visions.
Many villages are still without schools; and the formal curriculum for
children, whether modeled on the older French system or newer learner-
centered approaches, is irrelevant to most of the population. State fi-
nancing for rural schools is extremely paltry, and most rural children are
taught by community teachers with no teacher training and no income
except from fees paid by very poor families. Teaching about local critters
or ecologies rarely happens.
    The Ako Project did an end run around the starved schools and unre-
sponsive bureaucracies. After Jolly saw the alluring watercolors of fauna
and flora by Deborah Ross, she asked the artist if she would illustrate her
children’s books about lemurs. Ross said yes; Jolly then contacted her
old friend, the lemur biologist Hantanirina Rasamimanana. They raised
money; the project was off and running.59 In exciting, beautiful, funny,
and scary stories, distributed outside the school bureaucracies, the Ako
Project nurtures empathy and knowledge about the extraordinary bio-
diversity of Madagascar for the Malagasy.
    The Ako Project is the generative fruit of a colleagueship and friend-
ship over decades.60 In 1983 Alison Jolly met Hanta Rasamimanana, a
scientist seventeen years her junior. They bonded as mothers doing
fieldwork in challenging conditions, primatologists riveted by ring-
tailed lemurs, lovers of Malagasy people and nature, and participants
in global and local politics, with differently situated vulnerability and
authority. Born in the capital city and part of the generation sponsored
by the Soviet Union under Didier Ratsiraka’s socialism, Rasamimanana


                                                         Sympoiesis     83
3.6. Painting for Tsambiki Ilamba Fotsy / Bounce the White Sifaka. UNICEF
Madagascar and the Lemur Conservation Foundation. Text by Alison Jolly and
Hanta Rasamimanana. Art by Deborah Ross. Courtesy of Margaretta Jolly
and Deborah Ross.
trained in animal husbandry at the Veterinary Academy in Moscow. She
earned a PhD at the Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle in Paris, and
she has a master’s in primate conservation. She is professor of zoology
and scientific education at l’École Normale Supérieure of Antananarivo.
Studying ringtails, Rasamimanana has published on feeding behavior,
energy expenditure, and lemur female precedence and supreme author-
ity in their societies (“dominance”). Her responsibilities in the scientific
academy of Madagascar have been multiple, and she initiated a master’s
degree in primate conservation run in Mahajanga and the Comoros. An
adviser on the Madagascar National Curriculum, she heads the Ako Proj-
ect teacher support program and wrote the Malagasy teacher’s guides
based on workshops she ran in rural areas.61
   In the summer of 2013, Rasamimanana was the program chair for
the Fifth International Prosimian Congress, held at the Centre ValBio
Research Campus in Ranomafana National Park, where Alison Jolly’s
friend and colleague Patricia Wright and so many others had worked for
decades to strengthen biodiversity and primate research in Madagascar
and by Malagasy scientists.62 Eighty of the two hundred participants in
2013 were from Madagascar. Half of the two hundred present were stu-
dents, the core of the next generation of scientists dedicated to holding
open space and time for lemurs and their associates in vulnerable for-
est webs. Writing in her conservation diaries shortly before her death,
Jolly celebrated what this congress meant: “The big change is that most
papers are by Malagasy speaking on their own biodiversity, eager to ad-
vance their own careers in conservation. A contrast to the continuing
bewilderment of so many other Malagasy as to why anyone would want
to visit forests! And a huge swing from all the meetings in the past domi-
nated by foreigners.”63
   In all their attachments, working with book and poster artists, to-
gether the scientists and storytellers Jolly and Rasamimanana brought
the Ako Project into the world. In this project and in their work and
play across many crises in Madagascar and its conservation history, they
have nurtured new generations of Malagasy naturalists and scientists,
including small children, field station guides, and school and university
students. Without innocence and with relentless commitment, Jolly and
Rasamimanana have practiced, in solidarity, the arts of living on a dam-
aged planet; it matters.



                                                          Sympoiesis     85
3.7. Cover image for Never Alone (Kisima Ingitchuna). Courtesy of E-line Media,
in collaboration with Upper One Games, and the Cook Inlet Tribal Council.



   Never Alone (Kisima Ingitchuna)
My third example of science art worlding for living on a damaged planet
is making “world games.” World games are made with and from indig-
enous peoples’ stories and practices. “But what good are old stories if
the wisdom they contain is not shared?”64 These games both remember
and create worlds in dangerous times; they are worlding practices. In-
digenous peoples around the earth have a particular angle on the dis-
courses of coming extinctions and exterminations of the Anthropocene
and Capitalocene.65 The idea that disaster will come is not new; disaster,
indeed genocide and devastated home places, has already come, decades
and centuries ago, and it has not stopped. The resurgence of peoples
and of places is nurtured with ragged vitality in the teeth of such loss,
mourning, memory, resilience, reinvention of what it means to be na-
tive, refusal to deny irreversible destruction, and refusal to disengage
from living and dying well in presents and futures. World games require
inventive, sympoietic collaborations that bring together such things as
computer game platforms and their designers, indigenous storytellers,
visual artists, carvers and puppet makers, digital-savvy youngsters, and
community activists. The set of computer world games at the moment

86 c h a p t e r t h r e e
I write this sentence is small; there is one. Others, however, are in the
collaboration and design phase.66
    However, even though the models of sympoiesis are expandable, it is
critical not to once again raid situated indigenous stories as resources
for the woes of colonizing projects and peoples, entities that seem per-
manently undead. Never Alone is not a New Age game for universal
oneness, a posthumanist solution to epistemological crises, a general
model for collaboration, or a way to finesse the Anthropocene with Na-
tive Climate Wisdom. Nor is Never Alone a primer for the Chthulucene.
If Inupiat “Sila” meets in sf games with the tentacular Chthulucene, it
will be a risk-taking proposition, not an innocent translation.67 Never
Alone requires a different sort of attention; and perhaps the fact that I
continue to die early and often playing the game is less a reflection of my
poor gaming skills than a proper reminder that a world game is situated
indigenous storytelling in specific histories. The fact that the game is
narrated in Inupiaq, with English subtitles, is another reminder where
worlding authority lies here. Stories, even stories offered for sale on the
Internet, belong to storytellers, who share them, or not, in practices of
situated worlding. The conditions for sharing stories must not be set
by raiders, academic or otherwise.68 That does not mean the game is re-
stricted to native commentators in native places for native audiences in
a perverse caricature of a reservation. It does mean the terms of telling,
listening, and playing have been relocated decisively.
    “Never Alone (Kisima Ingitchuna) is the first game developed in col-
laboration with the Inupiat, an Alaska Native people. Play as a young
Inupiat girl and an arctic fox as they set out to find the source of the
eternal blizzard which threatens the survival of everything they have
ever known.”69 No one acts alone; connections and corridors are practical
and material, even if also fabulous, located in what Anglophones tend to
dismiss as the spirit world. The girl Nuna’s personal courage and skills
are also fundamental. These are the arts of living on a damaged planet
(Anna Tsing’s term). Never Alone might be played in a string figure pat-
tern with Ursula Le Guin’s Always Coming Home.
    Game makers define the new genre “world games” as taking place
inside ongoing indigenous stories. Makers of Never Alone (Kisima In-
gitchuna) include Gloria O’Neill, the president and chief executive of the
Cook Inlet Tribal Council; dozens of advisers and elders from the Alaska
Native community; Alan Gershenfeld, cofounder of E-line Media; E-Line
creative director Sean Vesce; the design team’s studio in Seattle; young

                                                         Sympoiesis     87
and old people playing the game; and a shared sense of contemporary ur-
gency for the lands and waters with their human and other-than-human
beings. “O’Neill said she loved the chance to participate in the video
game because the council could be a codeveloper in the process—and
because no Native American group had ever played such a role in the
history of the video game industry.”70
    The sympoiesis of Never Alone has many threads, and one of them is
hard for most modernist people, namely the symanimagenic richness of
the stories and the game. The girl Nuna and her arctic fox companion go
from the home village to face the unprecedented blizzard, find what is
causing it, and save the people and the land. Helping each other, girl and
fox learn to traverse many obstacles, and even to swim in the belly of a
whale, finally escaping into the sky through the blowhole. Those kinds of
sym linkages and fabled travels are not an ontological or epistemological
problem, or at least not much of one. But the presence and agency of
multiple spirit helpers are absolutely central to this worlding, to these
stories, and to this sympoiesis in the Arctic of the Anthropocene. Digital
information system ontologies, spirit helpers, and biocultural girls and
foxes have to play an agile string figure game seriously for “never alone”
to have its full meaning.
    Working with Brazilian Amerindian hunters, with whom he learned
to theorize the radical conceptual realignment he called multinaturalism
and perspectivism, Eduardo Viveiros de Castro wrote, “Animism is the
only sensible version of materialism.”71 I am not talking about people like
me—or kids like Nuna—“believing” in the spirit world. Belief is nei-
ther an indigenous nor a “chthulucenean” category. Relentlessly mired
in both internecine and colonizing disputes of Christianity, including
its scholarly and civic secular forms, the category of belief is tied to doc-
trine, profession, confession, and taxonomies of errors. That is, believ-
ing is not sensible.72 I am talking about material semiotics, about prac-
tices of worlding, about sympoiesis that is not only symbiogenetic, but
is always a sensible materialism. The sensible materialisms of involution-
ary momentum are much more innovative than secular modernisms will
allow. Stories for living in the Chthulucene demand a certain suspension
of ontologies and epistemologies, holding them lightly, in favor of more
venturesome, experimental natural histories. Without inhabiting sym-
animagenic sensible materialism, with all its pushes, pulls, affects, and
attachments, one cannot play Never Alone; and the resurgence of this
and other worlds might depend on learning to play.

88 c h a p t e r t h r e e
   But, continuing to die early and often in Never Alone, I have not for-
gotten that spirit helpers favor their kin. Animism cannot be donned
like a magic cape by visitors. Making kin in the ongoing Chthulucene will
be more difficult than that, and even the unwilling heirs of colonizers are
poorly qualified to set conditions for recognition of kinship. Plus, many
contemporary Inuit, including those committed to cultural renewal, are
wary of animism in their own heritage. Staying with the trouble, yearn-
ing toward resurgence, requires inheriting hard histories, for everybody,
but not equally and not in the same ways.

  Navajo Weaving: Cosmological Performance,
  Mathematical Rhythm, Navajo-Churro Sheep, Hózhó
                                                         Black Mesa, on it life.
                                There will be life again, this is what they say.
                                          For this reason they are weaving.73

For my last model system for sympoiesis, in risky propositions I return
to fibers, linking the Crochet Coral Reef to Navajo weaving. Navajo weav-
ing is practiced all over the Navajo Nation, but I will emphasize the weav-
ers of Black Mesa, their sheep, and their alliances.74 It would be a serious
category mistake to call Navajo weaving “art science activism,” which
was a comfortable enough name for the Crochet Coral Reef. Besides by-
passing robust and precise Diné namings, both the categories “art” and
“science” continue to do colonizing work in this context. However, it
would also be a serious category error to fence Navajo weaving off from
ongoing mathematical, cosmological, and creative practice that never
fit ongoing colonial definitions of “traditional.” Like the Crochet Coral
Reef, Navajo weaving, especially with the wool of Churro sheep, ties peo-
ple to animals through patterns of care and response-ability in blasted
places of excess death and threatened ongoingness. As in the Crochet
Coral Reef, the play of collective making and personal invention is every-
where in Navajo fiber work. Both the Crochet Coral Reef and Navajo
weaving exist in a modernizing ecology of gendered and commodifying
structures that elevate ”art” over “craft.” Both the Crochet Coral Reef
and Navajo weaving are done mainly by women, but men also figure in
the webs of thinkers/makers.75 Both the Crochet Coral Reef and Navajo
weaving perform worlds with mathematical vitality that remains invisi-
ble in the doxa of scholarship on women’s fiber practices in both settler
and colonized indigenous production. Finally, attuned to a sympoiesis

                                                             Sympoiesis        89
3.8. Navajo rug, Two Gray Hills. Weaver unknown.
Photograph by Donna Haraway. Purchased by Rusten
Hogness’s father, John Hogness, in the Navajo Nation
in the 1960s.


of practical coalitions, both the Crochet Coral Reef and Navajo weaving
are at the heart of thinking/making for more livable politics and ecol-
ogies in the times of burning and extraction called the Anthropocene
and Capitalocene. In face-to-face and hand-to-hand entanglements, the
Great Barrier Reef and Black Mesa are crocheted and woven together in
cosmological performances to animate the tentacular Chthulucene of a
Thousand Names.
   A refrain from Navajo prayers often accompanies a weaver’s work:
“With me there is beauty” (shil hózhó); “in me there is beauty” (shii’
hózhó); “from me beauty radiates” (shits’ áá d óó hózhó).76 Hózhó is a cen-
tral concept in Navajo cosmology and daily practice. Usual translations
into English are “beauty,” “harmony,” and “order”; but I think a better

90 c h a p t e r t h r e e
translation would emphasize right relations of the world, including hu-
man and nonhuman beings, who are of the world as its storied and dy-
namic substance, not in the world as a container. Disorder, often figured
in the doings of Coyote, disrupts right relations, which must be restored
in ceremony and daily life for proper living to be again possible, for the
person to be restored in hózhó to the People. For the Diné, greed is the
greatest source of disorder; it destroys right relations at their root.
   Weaving is a useful practice, to be sure, and an economic one; but,
fundamentally, weaving is also cosmological performance, knotting
proper relationality and connectedness into the warp and weft of the
fabric.77 The geometric patterns of repetition and invention in weaving
are performances of Diné stories and knowledge; the patterns propose
and embody world-making and world-sustaining relations. The dynamic
patterning continues in contemporary weavings, many of which explore
new as well as inherited themes, colors, stories, and fibers.78 Weavings
are individual; they are made by a particular woman and embody her
style and sensibility, recognizable by knowledgeable members of the
community.79 Names of weavers and weavers’ lineages matter, but
weavings are not made to be possessed as property. Neither that nor
the entanglement of the creative personal and the cosmological is a con-
tradiction. The sensible order inherent in the storied cosmos of Changing
Woman, the Holy Twins, Spider Woman, and the other world-making
Holy People is the pattern for right living. Weaving is neither secular nor
religious; it is sensible. It performs and manifests the meaningful lived
connections for sustaining kinship, behavior, relational action—for
hózhó—for humans and nonhumans. Situated worlding is ongoing, nei-
ther traditional nor modern.
   Navajo weaving relied especially on the so-called rough sheep brought
to the Americas by the Spanish in the sixteenth century and developed
by Navajo herders over a long time as a distinct kind of sheep, named
T’aa Dibei or Navajo-Churro sheep, who are particularly well adapted to
the lands of Diné bikéyah on the Colorado Plateau.80 In Western histori-
cal temporalities, Navajo matrifocal pastoralism and farming developed
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, with sheep as core compan-
ions for living and dying in hózhó. The art of weaving and care of Churro
sheep reciprocally enact Diné relations of natural and cosmic order.
   The Diné endured two intense periods of efforts by U.S. officials to
exterminate their Churro sheep. The first such genocide, called Hwéeldi
and effected in 1863 under Kit Carson for the U.S. War Department,

                                                         Sympoiesis     91
was the Long Walk of all the People who could be forcibly rounded up
from Dinetah and marched for hundreds of miles to Bosque Redondo
in New Mexico. The Hwéeldi followed a scorched-earth campaign led by
Carson against the Navajo. Killing of Navajo animals was a central act of
the removal. From the beginning, across the Southwest and West U.S.
modernizers saw Spanish-introduced stock as rough and unimproved.
Exterminating flocks, cutting down peach orchards, and forcing the re-
moval of people to Fort Sumner/Bosque Redondo were, in effect, normal
actions of U.S. colonizing officials pacifying and civilizing an unruly mo-
bile population. The correct name is attempted genocide. Full of suffer-
ing and death, this forced march was followed by four years in a prison
camp and then the walk back to their lands. The Hwéeldi is remembered
in the flesh of land and people; it is an “originary” trauma, of the kind
Toni Morrison understood in her novel Paradise.81
   The Diné returned to the Navajo reservation on the Colorado Pla-
teau. Churro sheep had been carefully tended by people who escaped
Kit Carson’s soldiers in the deep canyons and remote areas of Dinetah,
including Big Mountain / Dzil ni Staa / Black Mesa. The boundaries of
the reservation extended gradually until the 1930s; and, despite the fail-
ure of the U.S. government after the Diné return from Bosque Redondo
to provide promised stock, sheep flocks grew much faster than the hu-
man population. This growth was partly driven by the trading post sys-
tem, which turned wool into blankets to realize value and bought these
blankets by the pound in a system of perpetual indebtedness. To obtain
basic necessities in this system of debt, the Navajo were forced to pro-
duce more and more wool from more and more sheep. The traders sold
the weavings in the art and tourist market, but purchased the women’s
weavings as if they were low-value raw wool. Despite the efforts of fede-
ral agents, most of the Diné continued to prefer multipurpose, hardy
Churro sheep to merinos and other “improved” breeds. Sheep, goats,
horses, and cattle were all part of the pattern of Navajo pastoralism,
ordered by complex clan and gender relationships. The animals and the
people made kin together.82 Sheep and goats were especially crucial for
women’s abilities to feed and provision their families, as well as to their
authority in the clans.
   With intensifying erosion, severe grazing, and sustained drought,
by the 1930s the system was increasingly out of harmony, a condition
recognized by both whites and Navajos. The second intense efforts of
the U.S. government to exterminate Navajo-Churro sheep occurred in

92 c h a p t e r t h r e e
this context; like the first originary trauma, this lethal event can be nei-
ther forgotten nor effectively mourned. It bears evil fruit to this day.
Restoring the land, animals, and people to hózhó is an ongoing process
that continues to require continuous weaving. The colonial and capital-
ist structures of both exterminations have not been dismantled. The
first Churro sheep extermination was conducted by U.S. military men;
the second was also conducted by force, this time by U.S. progressive
agricultural authorities within the ideology and apparatus of the New
Deal. These officials worked within the ecological concept of carrying
capacity, the patriarchal colonial concepts of male-headed households,
and the modernizers’ concepts of progress. Without asking how colonial
economic structures like the unequal wool trade might be a significant
cause of both poverty and ecological damage and judging the erosion of
Navajo lands to be due to overstocking as a biological sort of fact, U.S.
government scientists in the Department of Agriculture and others in
1934 killed most of the women’s goats, the primary source of subsis-
tence meat for families. White-settler divisions of the world into nature
and culture split Navajo lifeways into colonial apparatuses of ecology
and economics, practiced by different sorts of scientific specialists who
could not systematically think even with each other, much less with
Navajo herders and weavers. In 1935, officials killed vast numbers of
sheep. Churro sheep, many known individually by their people, were
preferentially killed, often in front of their human families. Evident in
photographs, piles of bones from these animal murders were still prom-
inent in the 1970s; and people still dramatically narrated the trauma,
even describing particular animals in their flocks.
   Following the killing of about a million sheep and goats (without sig-
nificant compensation to this day), stocking quotas were imposed, and
collective ownership of land was not recognized. The census by which
stock quotas and permits were allocated recognized only heads of house-
holds, who could not be married women, which was a major blow to Diné
matrifocal ways of ordering their relations with land, animals, and each
other. Transhumance was disrupted as land boundaries were redrawn
into Land Management Units, exacerbating erosion as both seasonal
and dynamic rain-pattern-sensitive movements for grazing became
difficult across such boundaries. Besides an act of scientific colonial
arrogance and culpable ignorance, the animal exterminations of the
1930s effected a profound decapitalization of the whole people, whose
existing poverty, itself linked to the consequences of the first Hwéeldi,

                                                          Sympoiesis     93
was structurally intensified. With the failure to restore the health of
lands, waters, animals, and people in hózhó, balanced pastoralism was
not reconstructed; resurgence on the Colorado Plateau was wounded.
Stock levels and erosion remain a major problem, intensified by deep re-
sentment of forced controls, including colonial conceptual apparatuses
within the Navajo Nation.
    In a crisis of drought and multispecies lifeways out of balance in the
1930s, the opportunity was missed to bring scientific ecological ideas like
carrying capacity into difficult but necessary conversation with Navajo
concepts and practices of hózhó. Neither carrying capacity nor hózhó is
a fixed, deterministic concept; both are relational, contextual, tuned to
some ways of living and dying and not others. It matters what concepts
think concepts, and vice versa; but in this case, colonial structures as-
sured that the important concepts would not be allowed to think each
other, would not be allowed perhaps to issue in something that did not
yet exist in thought for either people, but might be needed by both.
When one system of thinking and practice can only disparage and nul-
lify another in colonial recursions, there can be no sympoiesis and no
hózhó. The consequences of the failure to invent the needed decolonial
conversations ramifies into the present. Since this period, pastoralism
has not been able to support the Diné; and poverty is perpetuated by
the post–World War II wage-based economy in the context of extreme
under- and unemployment, federal subsidies, tourism, and income from
uranium and coal mining.83
    However, there is also an extraordinary story of resurgence and par-
tial healing to be told, one that belongs to the Diné and their allies in
the ongoing Chthulucene and the ongoing Diné Bahane’ / Story of the
People / Navajo Creation Story. By 1970, only about 430 Navajo-Churro
sheep survived, scattered across the reservation. The traditional Diné
of Black Mesa and others had protected what sheep they could in re-
mote places. Other Churro sheep survived from a research population
studied from 1934 to 1967 at the Southwest Range and Sheep Breeding
Laboratory at Fort Wingate, New Mexico. When the research project
shut down, 165 Churro sheep were auctioned off in 1967 to a rancher
in Gonzales, California, who used them in a shoot-in-a-barrel safari en-
terprise for Hollywood notables. Besides their double coat, long fibers,
high-lanolin wool, ability to survive on scrubby pasture, and excellent
mothering skills by the ewes, Churro rams frequently have a double set
of horns that incite hunting fantasists to pay to turn them into tro-

94 c h a p t e r t h r e e
phies. The story of Navajo-Churro resurgence—with Navajo herders
and weavers; an Anglo scientist committed to Churro sheep and their
people; Navajo and Anglo students; Hispanic and Anglo ranchers; Tara-
humara/Rarámuri Indians of the Sierra Madre Occidental of northern
Mexico, who interbred Churro from the Navajo Sheep Project with their
own rough sheep to recover genetic diversity; activists on Black Mesa;
and more—begins at these crossroads. Over decades Diné herders nur-
tured remnant flocks in spite of the odds, and Buster Naegle, who had
taken over the ranch in Gonzales in 1970 to raise paint horses, donated
six ewes and two four-horned rams to Lyle McNeal, an animal scientist
then at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, as seed animals. In ensuing lifelong
coalitional work, McNeal founded the Navajo Sheep Project in 1977.84
   The story of Navajo-Churro restoration is complexly tentacular and
fibrous, braided by many actors and full of obstacles as well as successes.
Collecting sheep on the reservation from Diné cooperating to help re-
build the flocks, Lyle McNeal donated some of the first rams born from
his seed flock in the 1980s to Women in Resistance on Black Mesa. Keep-
ing his nucleus flock and operations alive involved thirteen moves in
four states over twenty-five years with many adventures with the law,
especially private property law. With Diné Churro sheep herders and
weavers including Glenna Begay, Lena Nez, and others, Carol Halber-
stadt, a poet, activist, and lover of wool from Massachusetts, cofounded
Black Mesa Weavers for Life and Land as a fair trade cooperative as-
sociation to better the economic and social conditions of Black Mesa
Diné through supporting sheep herding, wool buys, and weaving.85 A
Navajo-Churro flock has been established at the Diné College in Tsaile,
Arizona, for teaching. Diné be’iína / The Navajo Lifeway was founded
in 1991 to nurture community-based partnerships to restore economy
and culture. The college hosts the Dibé be’iína / Sheep Is Life celebration
every summer.86 Churro are central to cultural renewal through weaving
and taking care of sheep. Reconnecting generations broken by board-
ing schools and forced stock exterminations and encouraging Navajo
language use among the young are also tied to these sheep.87 Kosher
Navajo-Churro sheep jerky, guard llamas, the American Livestock Breeds
Conservancy, the Navajo-Churro Sheep Association, the Agricultural Re-
search Service National Center for Genetic Resources Preservation, the
Slow Food Foundation for Biodiversity, Two Grey Hills Trading Post,
the Teec Nos Pos Chapter and its regional wool-processing facility, the
Ganados del Valle Hispanic agricultural development corporation, Tierra

                                                         Sympoiesis     95
Wool and Los Ojos Handweavers, the Crownpoint Auction, and Heifer
International are all involved in diverse configurations.88
    Not least, the sheep themselves are active participants in the inter-
laced relational worlds. Like all sheep, they recognize hundreds of faces;
they know their people and their land.89 Weaving is cosmological perfor-
mance, relational worlding, with human and nonhuman fibers from the
Holy People, ordinary human beings, plants, soils, waters, and sheep.
The critters are critical to taking care of country, to environmental jus-
tice, to robust ecosystems for humans and nonhumans, to hózhó. It mat-
ters which beings recognize beings.
    So the sheep lead back to Black Mesa and to a concluding sympoiesis
with the activists—the thinkers/makers—of the Black Mesa Water Coa-
lition (bmwc). Supporting the weavers, herders, and sheep of the region,
bmwc partners with Diné be’iína and holds wool buys; they even part-
ner with a sheep-farming outfit in Maine called Peace Fleece.90 bmwc is
thoroughly entangled with sheep and their people across damaged lands
and blasted histories. But my reason for tying the threads of cosmologi-
cal performance and continuous weaving together through bmwc is
grounded in coal, water, indigenous environmental justice movements,
and surging coalitions for Just Transition toward still possible worlds in
urgent times. Probably still possible. Barely still possible. Still possible if
we render each other capable of worlding and reworlding for flourishing.
I want to propose the Black Mesa Water Coalition as a sympoietic model
for learning to stay with the trouble together, for hózhó.
    The bmwc was founded in 2001 by a group of young intertribal, inter-
ethnic people, mostly students at the time, committed to addressing
water depletion, natural resource exploitation, and health in Navajo
and Hopi communities.91 Quickly focusing on Peabody Energy, they
were central to the actions that closed down the Black Mesa Mine and
Mohave Generating Station in 2006. But that was the beginning, not
the end. The coalition sees Black Mesa as a critical place for learning
to transition out of coal-based economies and ecologies and into abun-
dant solar and other renewable power, situated on damaged lands, as a
needed practice for multispecies environmental justice. Black Mesa itself
is not just any place; within Navajo cosmology Black Mesa is the mother
encircled by the four sacred mountains. The waters are the mother’s
blood, and coal is her liver. That condensed Diné geo-anatomy is only an
indication of the corporeal relational cosmology of place that is utterly
illegible to Peabody Energy—and to settler colonialism more broadly,

96 c h a p t e r t h r e e
to this day. My colleague Anna Tsing talks about “worlds worth fighting
for”; Black Mesa is such a world.92
   The bmwc’s Just Transition Initiative, beginning in 2005, is a com-
prehensive vision and practice for building on the strengths of local
people, culture, and land, in alliance with many partners, to make re-
surgence on Black Mesa and beyond a reality. Pilot projects for restoring
regional watersheds and for economic development, the vision and work
toward a Black Mesa Solar Project, the Food Security Project, the Navajo
Wool Market Project, the Green Economy Project, and the Climate Jus-
tice Solutions Project are all part of the bmwc’s work. These activists
aim to develop a strong regional, integrated environmental and social
justice movement led by indigenous communities and organizations, as
well as to ally with the worldwide Climate Justice Alliance.93 These are
big, important ideas and actions; these kinds of continuous weaving are
at the heart of staying with the trouble in a damaged world. Continuing
to be led by young adults within a multigenerational web, the bmwc
proposes the sort of resurgence that can face the originary, repeating
traumas of history without denial and without cynicism or despair. In
my idiom, the Black Mesa Water Coalition is a strong tentacle in the
surging Chthulucene.


Conclusion: Tying Off the Threads
We relate, know, think, world, and tell stories through and with other
stories, worlds, knowledges, thinkings, yearnings. So do all the other
critters of Terra, in all our bumptious diversity and category-breaking
speciations and knottings. Other words for this might be materialism,
evolution, ecology, sympoiesis, history, situated knowledges, cosmolog-
ical performance, science art worldings, or animism, complete with all
the contaminations and infections conjured by each of these terms. Crit-
ters are at stake in each other in every mixing and turning of the terran
compost pile. We are compost, not posthuman; we inhabit the humus-
ities, not the humanities. Philosophically and materially, I am a com-
postist, not a posthumanist. Critters—human and not—become-with
each other, compose and decompose each other, in every scale and reg-
ister of time and stuff in sympoietic tangling, in ecological evolutionary
developmental earthly worlding and unworlding.
    This chapter began with Lynn Margulis’s proposition of symbiogene-
sis and segued into the biologies that make an extended evolutionary

                                                        Sympoiesis     97
synthesis necessary to thinking well about multispecies living and dying
on earth at every scale of time and space. The involutionary momentum
of a vanishing bee and its faithful orchid enfolded the EcoEvoDevo biolo-
gies into four naturalsocial ecologies of a damaged planet. Actual places,
these are worlds worth fighting for; and each has nourished brave, smart,
generative coalitions of artists/scientists/activists across dangerous his-
torical divisions. The biologies, arts, and politics need each other; with
involutionary momentum, they entice each other to thinking/making in
sympoiesis for more livable worlds that I call the Chthulucene.94
   Isabelle Stengers’s sense of cosmopolitics gives me courage.95 Includ-
ing human people, critters are in each other’s presence, or better, in-
side each other’s tubes, folds, and crevices, insides and outsides, and
not quite either. The decisions and transformations so urgent in our
times for learning again, or for the first time, how to become less deadly,
more response-able, more attuned, more capable of surprise, more able
to practice the arts of living and dying well in multispecies symbiosis,
sympoiesis, and symanimagenesis on a damaged planet, must be made
without guarantees or the expectation of harmony with those who are
not oneself—and not safely other, either. Neither One nor Other, that
is who we all are and always have been. All of us must become more on-
tologically inventive and sensible within the bumptious holobiome that
earth turns out to be, whether called Gaia or a Thousand Other Names.




98 c h a p t e r t h r e e
                                                       CHAPTER 4




                                           Making Kin
           Anthropocene, Capitalocene,
                 Plantationocene, Chthulucene




There is no question that anthropogenic processes have had planetary
effects, in inter/intra-action with other processes and species, for as
long as our species can be identified (a few tens of thousand years); and
agriculture has been huge (a few thousand years). Of course, from the
start the greatest planetary terraformers (and reformers) of all have
been and still are bacteria and their kin, also in inter/intra-action of
myriad kinds (including with people and their practices, technological
and otherwise).1 The spread of seed-dispersing plants millions of years
before human agriculture was a planet-changing development, and so
were many other revolutionary evolutionary ecological developmental
historical events.
   People joined the bumptious fray early and dynamically, even before
they/we were critters who were later named Homo sapiens. But I think
the issues about naming relevant to the Anthropocene, Plantationocene,
or Capitalocene have to do with scale, rate/speed, synchronicity, and
complexity. The constant questions when considering systemic phe-
nomena have to be, When do changes in degree become changes in kind?
and What are the effects of bioculturally, biotechnically, biopolitically,
historically situated people (not Man) relative to, and combined with,
the effects of other species assemblages and other biotic/abiotic forces?
No species, not even our own arrogant one pretending to be good indi-
viduals in so-called modern Western scripts, acts alone; assemblages of
organic species and of abiotic actors make history, the evolutionary kind
and the other kinds too.
    But is there an inflection point of consequence that changes the name
of the “game” of life on earth for everybody and everything? It’s more
than climate change; it’s also extraordinary burdens of toxic chemistry,
mining, nuclear pollution, depletion of lakes and rivers under and above
ground, ecosystem simplification, vast genocides of people and other
critters, et cetera, et cetera, in systemically linked patterns that threaten
major system collapse after major system collapse after major system
collapse. Recursion can be a drag.
    Anna Tsing in a recent paper called “Feral Biologies” suggests that the
inflection point between the Holocene and the Anthropocene might be
the wiping out of most of the refugia from which diverse species assem-
blages (with or without people) can be reconstituted after major events
(like desertification, or clear cutting, or, or, . . . ).2 This is kin to the
World-Ecology Research Network coordinator Jason Moore’s arguments
that cheap nature is at an end; cheapening nature cannot work much
longer to sustain extraction and production in and of the contempo-
rary world because most of the reserves of the earth have been drained,
burned, depleted, poisoned, exterminated, and otherwise exhausted.3
Vast investments and hugely creative and destructive technology can
drive back the reckoning, but cheap nature really is over. Anna Tsing
argues that the Holocene was the long period when refugia, places of
refuge, still existed, even abounded, to sustain reworlding in rich cul-
tural and biological diversity. Perhaps the outrage meriting a name like
Anthropocene is about the destruction of places and times of refuge for
people and other critters. I along with others think the Anthropocene is
more a boundary event than an epoch, like the K-Pg boundary between
the Cretaceous and the Paleogene.4 The Anthropocene marks severe dis-
continuities; what comes after will not be like what came before. I think
our job is to make the Anthropocene as short/thin as possible and to
cultivate with each other in every way imaginable epochs to come that
can replenish refuge.
    Right now, the earth is full of refugees, human and not, without
refuge.
    So I think a big new name, actually more than one name, is war-
ranted—hence Anthropocene, Plantationocene,5 and Capitalocene (An-

100   chapter four
dreas Malm’s and Jason Moore’s term before it was mine).6 I also insist
that we need a name for the dynamic ongoing symchthonic forces and
powers of which people are a part, within which ongoingness is at stake.
Maybe, but only maybe, and only with intense commitment and collabo-
rative work and play with other terrans, flourishing for rich multispecies
assemblages that include people will be possible. I am calling all this the
Chthulucene—past, present, and to come.7 These real and possible time-
spaces are not named after sf writer H. P. Lovecraft’s misogynist racial-
nightmare monster Cthulhu (note spelling difference), but rather after
the diverse earthwide tentacular powers and forces and collected things
with names like Naga, Gaia, Tangaroa (burst from water-full Papa), Terra,
Haniyasu-hime, Spider Woman, Pachamama, Oya, Gorgo, Raven, A’aku-
luujjusi, and many many more. “My” Chthulucene, even burdened with
its problematic Greek-ish rootlets, entangles myriad temporalities and
spatialities and myriad intra-active entities-in-assemblages—including
the more-than-human, other-than-human, inhuman, and human-as-
humus. Even rendered in an American English-language text like this
one, Naga, Gaia, Tangaroa, Medusa, Spider Woman, and all their kin are
some of the many thousand names proper to a vein of sf that Lovecraft
could not have imagined or embraced—namely, the webs of speculative
fabulation, speculative feminism, science fiction, and scientific fact.8 It
matters which stories tell stories, which concepts think concepts. Math-
ematically, visually, and narratively, it matters which figures figure fig-
ures, which systems systematize systems.
   All the thousand names are too big and too small; all the stories are
too big and too small. As Jim Clifford taught me, we need stories (and
theories) that are just big enough to gather up the complexities and keep
the edges open and greedy for surprising new and old connections.9
   One way to live and die well as mortal critters in the Chthulucene
is to join forces to reconstitute refuges, to make possible partial and
robust biological-cultural-political-technological recuperation and re-
composition, which must include mourning irreversible losses. Thom
van Dooren and Vinciane Despret taught me that.10 There are so many
losses already, and there will be many more. Renewed generative flour-
ishing cannot grow from myths of immortality or failure to become-with
the dead and the extinct. There is a lot of work for Orson Scott Card’s
Speaker for the Dead.11 And even more for Ursula Le Guin’s worlding in
Always Coming Home.
   I am a compostist, not a posthumanist: we are all compost, not post-

                                                       Making Kin      101
human. The boundary that is the Anthropocene/Capitalocene means
many things, including that immense irreversible destruction is really
in train, not only for the 11 billion or so people who will be on earth near
the end of the twenty-first century, but for myriads of other critters too.
(The incomprehensible but sober number of around 11 billion will only
hold if current worldwide birth rates of human babies remain low; if
they rise again, all bets are off.) The edge of extinction is not just a meta-
phor; system collapse is not a thriller. Ask any refugee of any species.
   The Chthulucene needs at least one slogan (of course, more than one);
still shouting “Cyborgs for Earthly Survival,” “Run Fast, Bite Hard,” and
“Shut Up and Train,” I propose “Make Kin Not Babies!” Making—and
recognizing—kin is perhaps the hardest and most urgent part.12 Femi-
nists of our time have been leaders in unraveling the supposed natural
necessity of ties between sex and gender, race and sex, race and nation,
class and race, gender and morphology, sex and reproduction, and re-
production and composing persons (our debts here are due especially to
Melanesians, in alliance with Marilyn Strathern and her ethnographer
kin).13 If there is to be multispecies ecojustice, which can also embrace
diverse human people, it is high time that feminists exercise leadership
in imagination, theory, and action to unravel the ties of both genealogy
and kin, and kin and species.
   Bacteria and fungi abound to give us metaphors; but, metaphors
aside (good luck with that!), we have a mammalian job to do, with our
biotic and abiotic sympoietic collaborators, colaborers. We need to make
kin symchthonically, sympoetically. Who and whatever we are, we need
to make-with—become-with, compose-with—the earth-bound (thanks
for that term, Bruno Latour–in-Anglophone-mode).14
   We, human people everywhere, must address intense, systemic ur-
gencies; yet so far, as Kim Stanley Robinson put it in 2312, we are living
in times of “The Dithering” (in this sf narrative, lasting from 2005 to
2060—too optimistic?), a “state of indecisive agitation.”15 Perhaps the
Dithering is a more apt name than either the Anthropocene or Capita-
locene! The Dithering will be written into earth’s rocky strata, indeed al-
ready is written into earth’s mineralized layers. Symchthonic ones don’t
dither; they compose and decompose, which are both dangerous and
promising practices. To say the least, human hegemony is not a sym-
chthonic affair. As ecosexual artists Beth Stephens and Annie Sprinkle
say on a sticker they had made for me, composting is so hot!
   My purpose is to make “kin” mean something other/more than en-

102   chapter four
tities tied by ancestry or genealogy. The gently defamiliarizing move
might seem for a while to be just a mistake, but then (with luck) appear
as correct all along. Kin making is making persons, not necessarily as in-
dividuals or as humans. I was moved in college by Shakespeare’s punning
between kin and kind—the kindest were not necessarily kin as family;
making kin and making kind (as category, care, relatives without ties
by birth, lateral relatives, lots of other echoes) stretch the imagination
and can change the story. Marilyn Strathern taught me that “relatives”
in British English were originally “logical relations” and only became
“family members” in the seventeenth century—this is definitely among
the factoids I love.16 Go outside English, and the wild multiplies.
    I think that the stretch and recomposition of kin are allowed by the
fact that all earthlings are kin in the deepest sense, and it is past time to
practice better care of kinds-as-assemblages (not species one at a time).
Kin is an assembling sort of word. All critters share a common “flesh,”
laterally, semiotically, and genealogically. Ancestors turn out to be very
interesting strangers; kin are unfamiliar (outside what we thought was
family or gens), uncanny, haunting, active.17
    Too much for a tiny slogan, I know! Still, try. Over a couple hundred
years from now, maybe the human people of this planet can again be
numbered 2 or 3 billion or so, while all along the way being part of in-
creasing well-being for diverse human beings and other critters as means
and not just ends.
    So, make kin, not babies! It matters how kin generate kin.18




                                                         Making Kin      103
       CHAPTER 5




            Awash in Urine
                                     DES and Premarin
                  in Multispecies Response-ability




Cyborg Littermates
Cyborgs are kin, whelped in the litter of post–World War II informa-
tion technologies and globalized digital bodies, politics, and cultures
of human and not-human sorts. Cyborgs are not machines in just any
sense, nor are they machine-organism hybrids. In fact, they are not hy-
brids at all. They are, rather, imploded entities, dense material semiotic
“things”—articulated string figures of ontologically heterogeneous, his-
torically situated, materially rich, virally proliferating relatings of partic-
ular sorts, not all the time everywhere, but here, there, and in between,
with consequences. Particular sorts of historically situated machines
signaled by the words information and system play their part in cyborg
living and dying. Particular sorts of historically situated organisms, sig-
naled by the idioms of labor systems, energetics, and communication,
play their part. Finally, particular sorts of historically situated human
beings, becoming-with the practices and artifacts of technoscience, play
their part. Characterized by partial connections, the parts do not add up
to any whole; but they do add up to worlds of nonoptional, stratified,
webbed, and unfinished living and dying, appearing and disappearing.
Cyborgs are constitutively full of multiscalar, multitemporal, multima-
terial critters of both living and nonliving persuasions.1 Cyborgs matter
in terran worlding.
    But cyborgs are critters in a queer litter, not the Chief Figure of Our
Times. Queer here means not committed to reproduction of kind and
having bumptious relations with futurities. Irreducible to cyborgs, the
litter interests me, the particular kin and kind nursed on the fluid and
solid effluvia of terra in the late twentieth and early twenty-first cen-
turies. I return to “my” cyborg in this litter in order to relay the string
figures—the speculative fabulations, the scientific facts, the science fic-
tions, and the speculative feminisms—to whatever sorts of tentacular
grippers will receive the pattern to keep living and dying well possible
in “our times.” Made up of an aging California dog, pregnant mares on
the western Canadian prairies, human women who came to be known
as des daughters, lots of menopausal U.S. women, and assorted other
players in the story of “synthetic” and “natural” estrogens, the litter
for this chapter is decanted from bodies awash in a particular pungent
fluid—urine. Waste and resource, out-of-place urine from particular
female bodies is the salty ocean needed for my tale. Leaks and eddies
are everywhere. These leaks and eddies might help open passages for a
praxis of care and response—response-ability—in ongoing multispecies
worlding on a wounded terra.


DES for Hot Peppers
In October 2011 my twelve-year-old canine friend and lifelong sports
partner Cayenne, aka Hot Pepper, started taking a notorious, industri-
ally produced, nonsteroidal, synthetic estrogen called des (diethylstil-
besterol) to deal with urinary leakage.2 Perhaps I should not write she
“started taking,” but, rather, “I started feeding her as an occasional late-
night treat, following her last pee, a luscious, slippery, Earth Balance®
margarine-coated capsule of des.” Plato gave us the tones in the inex-
tricable ambiguities of his pharmakon: cure and poison; care, curare;
remedy, toxin; treat, threat. Aging spayed bitches like Cayenne and post-
menopausal women like me often could use a hormonal tightening of
slack smooth muscles in the urethra to keep socially unacceptable leaks
plugged up. The term estrogen deficiency is a tough one for feminists
like me, marinated at a young age in the women’s health movements
and feminist science studies, to pronounce. But the fact is that a few
extra dabs of estrogens do some handy jobs in aging mammalian female

                                                   Awash in Urine       105
bodies—at a price, of course, in many currencies of living and dying.
Granted, the adrenal glands still secrete some estrogens for those of us
with missing or dried-up ovaries, but output is pretty low and smooth
muscle can get pretty flaccid.
   But giving this beloved, elder, nonreproducing dog to whom I am re-
sponsible even very low-dose and infrequent diethylstilbesterol caused
acute des Anxiety Syndrome in me. My blood pressure rose higher than
the high canine blood pressure that motivated changing urine-plugging
drugs for Cayenne in the first place. Even if I could keep my critique of
biocapital in a sealed flask, my feminist biopolitical juices started oozing
from every pore, leaking all over my obligations to our dog. Rusten, my
male human spouse, was drawn deeply into this mammalian female well
of worry, and not just because neither one of us much wanted to sleep
in the urinary wet spot if estrogen-deprived urethral smooth muscle
were left unattended in the nocturnal hours in our species-queer con-
nubial bed. Cross-species kinship has consequences. Our now shared
des Anxiety Syndrome had to be treated immediately by our excellent
primary care veterinarian, who did the service of presenting us with sci-
entific studies and her own history of practice with low-dose, minimum-
frequency des for elder dogs; this was the “talking cure” we needed—a
high dose of reason, evidence, and story, taken weekly with uncanny
and unruly molecules. Still, my vet herself is too young to have been
infected with my kind of terror of des. Besides, she can’t possibly be
the daughter of a woman who took des sometime between 1940 and
1971, when a report in the New England Journal of Medicine tied des to a
nasty vaginal clear cell adenocarcinoma in girls and young women who
had been exposed to this drug in utero. Otherwise, my vet would surely
do more than remember what I am afraid of. A talking cure might not
be enough.
   Even though a double-blind study done at the University of Chicago
in the early 1950s showed no benefit from des for sustaining pregnan-
cies in women, and even though by the late 1960s six of seven leading
human gynecological textbooks stated that des did not prevent mis-
carriages, the drug continued to be prescribed frequently over three
decades for averting miscarriage and also for an almost comical (except
it was not funny) host of other “indications,” both on and off label. Ul-
timately, probably 2 million women in the United States alone took des
during pregnancy. Probably every reader of this chapter knows some
of the offspring of these pregnancies, but may or may not know their

106 c h a p t e r f i v e
often hidden suffering. I do—both people and their suffering, or a little
bit of it—and the extraordinary psychologist-scholar-friend who told
me about her des history when I told her about Cayenne performed
just the generative acts of “becoming-with” that have occupied my soul
since writing When Species Meet, or really since the “Cyborg Manifesto.”
My human friend, this human des daughter, was already an avid, if dog-
allergic, admirer of Cayenne; she is one of the humans who, when she
visits, induces enthusiastic canine play-solicitation performances from
my very nonpromiscuous dog. But suddenly and oddly, their unexpected
des kinship threw them transversally, not genealogically, into a litter
together differently. Separated by allergies, they were joined in the flesh
by a disreputable nonsteroidal estrogen. It is clear to me that human
Sheila has assigned herself to keep a baleful queer sisterly eye on those
gelcaps I give dog Cayenne. That kindly critical lateral eye will comple-
ment the regular blood tests Cayenne will now have to endure to keep
track of the health of her blood-forming cells and immune functions.3 A
good sphincter can be hard to find.
   For very good reasons tied to the history of the women’s health move-
ments and to action, finally, by agencies like the U.S. Food and Drug Ad-
ministration, these days des is a controlled substance you can get only
(or mainly) for nonhumans. In the 1990s, the only approved indication
for des in human beings was treatment of advanced prostate cancer
in men and of advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal women, and
that use has been superseded. The last U.S. manufacturer of des, Eli
Lilly, stopped making and marketing the no-longer-profitable drug in
1997. That’s why Cayenne and I found ourselves at a homeopathic and
compounding pharmacy in 2011.4
   Diethylstilbesterol was first synthesized in 1938 in a laboratory of the
Oxford University in the waning heroic days of the history of endocri-
nology. Those were the days when one might still find eminent biochem-
ists prowling around nonhuman animal slaughter floors collecting many
pounds of ovaries, pancreas, testes, adrenal glands, kidneys, pituitaries
(try collecting pounds or kilograms of pituitary gland!), and other organs
and tissues from many species to ferret back to the lab to extract and
then chemically and physiologically characterize the first few precious
micrograms of natural steroids or other potent hormones. Stalking the
newly dead in graves of the European Renaissance for human bodies to
dissect has a long uncanny laboratory history into the present. Current-
day laboratory mice and their archived and curated parts would probably

                                                   Awash in Urine      107
be our best informants for today’s stories of organs without bodies and
life after death. The 1930s were still the days when biochemical labora-
tories were accustomed to distilling tiny amounts of chemical gold from
the dross of vats of urine and other bodily fluids, human and not.
    des did not come from these material sources, but it inhabits the
same cross-hatched histories, where what counts as natural or artificial
was (and is) constantly morphing in the study and production of things
called “sex hormones.” No wonder biologist feminists like me find our
politics and psyches relentlessly and variously material in ways that Fou-
cault hardly dreamed of. It’s those laboratory wet spots in nighttime
knowledge making that get feminists roused.
    So in my town, you purchase the expensive, carcinogenic, immune-
suppressing, anemia-inducing, smooth muscle–plumping molecules
known as des in snowy powder form in gelcaps from a homeopathic and
compounding pharmacy, Lauden Integrative Pharmacy. “Compounding
pharmacy” sounds so early twentieth-century to my ear, but I can see
that when Big Pharma no longer makes or sells a still useful molecule, one
that is no better than she should be, the up-to-the-minute, seemingly
old-fashioned drugstore gets the leavings. Lauden Integrative Pharmacy
sells lots of homeopathic substances for both human and more-than-
human animals. I paid for Cayenne’s des capsules at a counter draped
in the colors, posters, and icons of “Western” and “Eastern” alternative
medicine, both ancient and modern.
    To say this scene is emblematic of the mixed structures and affects
of biomedical technoscience is an understatement. Lauden formulates
many of the chemotherapeutic and other drugs prescribed by the vete-
rinary specialist clinic where Cayenne and I were under the care of a fine
consulting internist and cardiac specialist for her early mitral valve dis-
ease (mvd). mvd is the reason my fast and sporty Hot Pepper’s mode-
rately high blood pressure was not acceptable, and so a new diagnosis of
mvd is the reason we changed prescriptions from a drug she had gob-
bled happily for a few years, called Propolin® (ppa or phenylpropanola-
mine, “for oral use in dogs only”), to des. ppa does a fine job pumping
up urethral smooth muscle and keeping urine in its hygienic reservoirs
for properly timed release in assigned places. But unfortunately ppa is
indiscriminate and tightens arterial smooth muscle too, thereby raising
blood pressure—not a good idea in dogs with early heart disease. For
better and for worse, estrogens are more discriminating in the tissues
they home in on. Anyone with breasts—or breast cancer—knows this.

108 c h a p t e r f i v e
    But it’s the multispecies business in the compounding pharmacy that
really drew my attention. When I get an anxiety syndrome, I am thrown
into compulsive scholarly antics, and des Anxiety Syndrome was no ex-
ception. Urine, urethras, damaged heart valves, “abnormal pregnancy
outcomes,” and cancer-ravaged breasts and uteruses have provided the
cross-species organic stuff of the story. So far, my tale has emphasized
a litter of critters made up of dogs, humans, and slaughtered animals,
mainly pigs, sheep, and cows. It’s that last category that will take me
into the last stanza of the des recitative and plump out the litter a bit
before we get to my next starring estrogen molecules for remaking kin
and kind.
    des was the molecule used in the first experimental, scientific demon-
stration of successful hormonal growth promotion in cattle in the his-
tory of those animal-human relations called agriculture.5 Although in
1947 researchers at Purdue University demonstrated des-induced growth
promotion in heifers, Purdue did not pursue patent protection for the
cattle and sheep work that its investigators carried out. These agricul-
tural scientists used des because implants had already been formulated
for use in poultry, those feathered workhorses in so much of the his-
tory of factory farming. The fda banned des for growth promotion in
chickens and lambs in 1959 and in all animal feed in 1979. But from 1954
to the early 1970s des was used widely as a growth promoter in the
beef industry. Agricultural industry and university agricultural science
(especially Iowa State College) were close partners in research for this
use. The agricultural-industrial complex was in its postwar adolescent
growth spurt. Iowa State and W. Burroughs filed for a patent on oral
des for cattle in 1953, granted in 1956. In 1972 the fda removed oral des
from the market for use in cattle (1973 for implants). des residues found
in bovine livers and human des daughters converged to take the drug off
the legal agricultural market, although stories of illegal use still surface.
    But the core story here is not des as such; the big story is the relentless
rise of hormonal growth promoters of the next molecular generations
that are integral to the ecosystem-destroying, human and animal labor-
transforming, multispecies soul-mutilating, epidemic-friendly, corn
monocrop-promoting, cross-species heartbreaking, feedlot cattle indus-
tries. All of a sudden, I cannot forget that in 1947 heifers too became des
daughters, and the bovine sons followed in droves. Cyborg’s enhanced
litter is outsized. Daughter of a dog family known for prowess in cattle
herding before the times of des, my dog dribbling urine spots leads in-

                                                     Awash in Urine        109
exorably to feedlots, slaughterhouses, and unmet agricultural animal,
human, and ecological well-being and advocacy obligations around the
world. Response-ability yet to come, again. In companion species world-
ing, becoming-with makes strong demands on the littermates.


Conjugating Kin with Premarin
Conjugating is about yoking together; conjugal love is yoked love; con-
jugated chemical compounds join together two or more constituents.
People conjugate in public spaces; they yoke themselves together trans-
versally and across time and space to make significant things happen.
Students conjugate verbs to explore the yoked inflections of person,
number, gender, kind, voice, mood, position, tense, and aspect in a field
of material-semiotic meaning making. To learn about recursive yoking,
conjugate “to conjugate.” Now, do that with estrogens. Conjunctivitis is
an irritation of the mucous membrane lining the inner surface of the
eyelid. What might conjunctivitis mean in the odoriferous fluid mixtures
of conjugated estrogens, such as the motley of naturally occurring but
nonhuman estrogens purified from pregnant mare’s urine to make very
profitable pills for Big Pharma? And also to give lots of human women
the means to decide whether or not they will bear children, endure hot
flashes, lose bone mass, or add to or subtract from their risk of cancer
or heart disease? Or, to find that “our bodies ourselves” includes mares
and their foals (and a few stallions), with all the political and ethical con-
sequences of that conjugation? Conjugated estrogens are about yoking
molecules and species to each other in consequential ways. In the Moby
Thesaurus, one mouth-watering synonym of conjugate is conglobulate;
that is what I will try to do with horses, humans, urine, and hearts con-
jugated with Premarin.
   Once upon a time, when I thought I needed estrogen during meno-
pause—to stave off familial heart disease, of all things—I relied on the
animal-industrial complex, repeated pregnancies and long-term con-
finement of mares, and natural conjugated estrogens called Premarin
(compounded with a progestin into hrt, Hormone Replacement Ther-
apy) extracted from equine urine.6 Now I give my dog a synthetic es-
trogen with a terrible human and bovine history to control her urinary
incontinence, for the sake of her heart—and her indoor way of life. (It
works.) Oh, Cayenne, dog of my heart, a human taste for irony will not
get us through these companion species relationships, these meals of

110 c h a p t e r f i v e
situated molecules and required response-ability yet to come. Somehow,
a feminist science studies scholar and lifelong animal lover, my meno-
pausal self failed to know much about the pregnant mares and their
disposable foals.
   Did I forget, never know, not look—or just not care? What kind of
conjunctivitis was that? Social movements for animal flourishing had
noticed those horses and made a very effective fuss about it, and these
movements were full of feminist women and men. Why not me too? Was
it only after it turned out that hrt probably harmed my heart rather
than guarded it that the horses came into my ken? I don’t remember.
Marx understood all about how privileged positions block knowledge
of the conditions of one’s privilege. So did the innovators of feminist
standpoint theory, the founders of the women’s health movements, and
the thinkers and activists shaping movements for animal flourishing—
that is, my friends, comrades, and colleagues—well before I was in
menopause. Still, I managed not to know about the conditions of work
for those adult horses for a very long time, much less know about the
fate of the excess foals. I ate equine conjugated estrogens; I drank pooled
mares’ urine, literally; but I did not conjugate well with the horses
themselves. Shame is a prod to lifelong rethinking and recrafting one’s
accountabilities!
   A collaboration between a Canadian pharmaceutical company and
an endocrinologist at McGill University led to the development in 1930
of the first orally active, water-soluble, conjugated estrogen, called Em-
menin®.7 Emmenin® was extracted from the urine of Canadian women
in late stages of their pregnancies, but supply considerations set the
researchers and company to looking for a more copious and available
mammalian source. Even if they were paid and desperate, pregnant
women would not stay attached to collection bags for long, nor did
they pee nearly enough to supply their sisters with hormones. German
researchers at the time were studying water-soluble estrogens in the
urine of pregnant zebras and horses in the Berlin zoo, and by 1939 the
pharmaceutical company Ayerst had established a method to get a sta-
ble concentrate from pregnant mares’ urine. The result of an extraction
and concentration process with more than one hundred steps, Premarin
was ready to be marketed in Canada in 1941. The horses, confined in
stalls for months at a time attached to collection bags, were originally
contract workers on Quebec farms, and the product was manufactured
in Montreal. Eventually, high demand issuing from the growing practice

                                                   Awash in Urine       111
of prescribing hormones for menopause, coupled with the history of
successive buyouts among the pharmaceutical companies, resulted in
production moving to the expansive Canadian western prairies, with a
new processing plant in Manitoba.
   About a decade after I started menopause in the late 1980s, by 1997
Premarin became the number-one prescribed drug in the United States,
reaching the sales figure of $2 billion by 2002.8 Used in over three thou-
sand scientific investigations by 2011, this drug complex remains the
most studied estrogen therapy in the world. Definitively by 2002, strong
data gathered in the context of the Women’s Health Initiative showed
that not only did estrogens not prevent heart disease; they were also
positively correlated with increased incidences of blood clots, strokes,
heart attack, and breast cancer. Sales of Premarin dropped fast—by a
lot. Redundant equine workers went to slaughter—lots of them. Depen-
dent contract farmers were put out of business. Drug companies scram-
bled. Women worried; I know.
   However reduced in volume, harvesting of pregnant mare urine re-
mains a worldwide business, and Premarin remains a much-prescribed
and profitable product. Today Pfizer, which bought out Wyeth-Ayerest
in 2009, contracts with about two dozen horse ranches, mainly in west-
ern Canada. In 2003, there were over four hundred Wyeth-Ayerest con-
tracted pmu farms in Manitoba. With industry reorganization in the
wake of the crisis in Premarin prescriptions after 2002, profit per pmu
mare went up between 2003 and 2007—a lot. The North American
Equine Ranching Information Council (naeric) is a committed, sophis-
ticated industry group that presents in its best light the history and
contemporary practices of pmu farming.9 The naeric website includes
a “four seasons” description, with beautiful pictures, of the annual life
cycle of the horses on idyllic-looking farms said to be thoroughly regu-
lated and inspected for animal welfare. This site narrates that, from au-
tumn through early spring, mares are confined in their own “comfort-
able” stalls attached to a “lightweight, flexible pouch that is suspended
from the ceiling by rubber suspension lines” that allow a full range of
motion, including lying down. Horses have access to sufficient water—
a major change from the period before reform, when the demand for
concentrated urine trumped equine thirst, with predictable medical
consequences for the horses. Put together by international veterinary
and welfare groups which inspect equine ranches, and available online
from the naeric site, the “Equine Veterinarians’ Consensus Report on

112 c h a p t e r f i v e
the Care of Horses on pmu Ranches” concluded that numerous reforms
after an investigation in 1995 led to major improvements in the lives of
the horses. “The public should be assured that the care and welfare of
the horses involved in the production of an estrogen replacement medi-
cation is good, and is closely monitored.”10
   Onsite analysis on several farms by HorseAid in 1999 found condi-
tions much less satisfactory than naeric claims, even if one grants that
the guidelines, which leave the question of exercise to the discretion of
pressed farmers with no indoor exercise facilities in a northern plains
winter, are good enough for horses.11 Confined mares stand around too
much, eat too much, get fat, and develop bad feet—sounds like a lot of
working females across species to me. With very little room to make
costly changes in care practices, contract farmers are at the low end of
the financial food chain generated by pregnant mares’ urine, just as they
are for broiler chickens or other animal industrial products.
   By 2011, about 2000 naeric foals per year were born on twenty-six
pmu farms, including draft, light horse, and sport breeds. The foals
were sold mostly to families and show barns. About forty-nine thousand
horses have been registered with naeric since 1998. Better-bred foals
are more profitable, so fewer are slaughtered or enter the rescue and
adoption apparatus. These days, ranchers collecting pregnant mares’
urine “rely on selling foals as much as they rely upon the urine collected
from the pregnant mares. Many of these farms utilize websites and
forms of promotion identical to non-Premarin-related horse breeders,
and, in nearly all ways, are indistinguishable from the average breeder
of equines.”12
   The reforms promoted by naeric came into being because of activist
animal rights, women’s health, and horse advocacy groups. Beginning
with a hands-on, on-site study in 1986, HorseAid was the first animal
rights organization to investigate conditions on pmu farms and the risks
to women from hrt medication, publishing its damning results first in
print in 1988 and then in 1994 on the Internet, with graphic images and
details about farm and industry practices and human medical data.13
In 1995, seven years after HorseAid’s 1988 report, naeric formed to
advocate for reform and humane treatment of pmu horses. But reform
was not and is not the ultimate goal for HorseAid or organizations like
the International Fund for Horses. Both groups continue to argue for
shutting down all pmu farming, where months-long confinement of
pregnant horses, however “comfortable” (i.e., in a box 8 feet wide by 3.5

                                                  Awash in Urine       113
feet wide by 5 feet high for six months), and slaughtering mares who
fail to become pregnant, continue.14 The availability of a wider range of
laboratory-synthesized and plant-derived hormones makes arguments
to end pmu production harder to evade. Taking account of all pmu farms
in 2002, HorseAid estimated that about fifteen thousand “excess” foals
went to slaughter. Reflecting Premarin sales declines since 2002, cuts
in contracts to farms, and a more market-oriented foal production, the
number now is much lower, but could be zero.15
   HorseAid was always clear about its advocacy both for women’s
health and the well-being of horses, and its reports also paid attention to
the difficulties of farms and farmers in an agribusiness system in which
making a living by farming has become brutal.That fact, of course, does
not address what would make raising horses on the northern prairies
viable for economic and ecological human-animal well-being, and that
should not be an idle goal.


Viral Response-ability
There is no innocence in these kin stories, and the accountabilities are
extensive and permanently unfinished. Indeed, responsibility in and for
the worldings in play in these stories requires the cultivation of viral
response-abilities, carrying meanings and materials across kinds in or-
der to infect processes and practices that might yet ignite epidemics of
multispecies recuperation and maybe even flourishing on terra in ordi-
nary times and places. Call that utopia; call that inhabiting the despised
places; call that touch; call that the rapidly mutating virus of hope, or
the less rapidly changing commitment to staying with the trouble. My
slogan from the 1980s, “Cyborgs for Earthly Survival,” still resonates, in
a cacophony of sound and fury emanating from a very big litter whelped
in shared but nonmimetic suffering and issuing in movements for flour-
ishing yet to come.
   In my des story, tracking Cayenne’s urine spots to out-of-the-way
places brought us into a still-expanding conglobulation of interlinked
research, marketing, medical and veterinary, activist, agricultural, and
scholarly body- and subject-making apparatuses. Digital and molecular
species vied for attention with urethras and vaginas. Females in trouble
seemed to luxuriate everywhere; even the industrially synthesized mole-
cules seemed to respond to the lure of (always nonreproductive, in this
story) sexual tropisms, despite decades of astute feminist wariness of

114 c h a p t e r f i v e
so-called sex hormones. Cyborgs laughed. Do cyborgs get mitral valve
disease or go through menopause? Of course they do, just like their kin.
The relations of intimate care yoking together one woman and one dog
rampaged virally into all sorts of publics. Sheer contagion. Companion
species infect each other all the time. Bodily ethical and political obliga-
tions are infectious, or they should be. Before my dog and I could get out
of the story, we were in the nonoptional company of—and accountable
to—heifers in labs, beef cattle in feedlots, pregnant women in all sorts
of places, daughters and sons and granddaughters and grandsons of
once pregnant women, angry and well-informed women’s health move-
ment activists, dogs with heart disease, and bevies of other spayed leaky
bitches and their people in vet clinics and on beds.
   In my Premarin story, all the players seemed to be marinating in vats
of Canadian equine urine, the only thing that seemed to hold together
the virally exploding, vulnerable species of the tale. One registered
trademark’s travels through bodies brought together, in the need to craft
response-ability, quite a motley of mortal beings: fetal calves stripped
of amniotic fluid, urinating pregnant Canadian women, pregnant mares
and their foals and consorts in Manitoba and beyond, activists in horse
rescue and women’s health, economically strapped contract farmers, a
California menopausal woman worried about familial heart disease in
the company of a lucrative market-ready crowd of other menopausal
Americans, and German zebras in zoos in the 1930s. Big Pharma, Big
Agribusiness, and Big Science provided drama and villains aplenty, but
also plenty of reason to damp down the certainty of villainy and explore
the complexities of cyborg worlding.
   Each diner exposed to high risks of familial heart failure, eating dan-
gerous and notorious estrogens in later life seems, finally, to be what
here, in this tale, conjugates—yokes together—the cyborg author and
the dog of her heart. Cum panis, companion species, females of two spe-
cies (along with their microbiomes with species in the zillions) at table
together, in different decades, slurping drafts of dubious estrogens in
self-care and care of the other. Why tell stories like this, when there are
only more and more openings and no bottom lines? Because there are
quite definite response-abilities that are strengthened in such stories.
   It is no longer news that corporations, farms, clinics, labs, homes,
sciences, technologies, and multispecies lives are entangled in multi-
scalar, multitemporal, multimaterial worlding; but the details matter.
The details link actual beings to actual response-abilities. Each time a

                                                    Awash in Urine       115
story helps me remember what I thought I knew, or introduces me to
new knowledge, a muscle critical for caring about flourishing gets some
aerobic exercise. Such exercise enhances collective thinking and move-
ment too. Each time I trace a tangle and add a few threads that first
seemed whimsical but turned out to be essential to the fabric, I get a
bit straighter that staying with the trouble of complex worlding is the
name of the game of living and dying well together on terra. Having
eaten Premarin makes me more accountable to the well-being of ranch-
ers, northern prairie ecologies, horses, activists, scientists, and women
with breast cancer than I would otherwise be. Giving my dog des makes
me accountable to histories and ongoing possibilities differently than
if we never shaped kinships with the attachment sites of this molecule.
Perhaps reading this chapter has consequences for response-ability too.
We are all responsible to and for shaping conditions for multispecies
flourishing in the face of terrible histories, but not in the same ways. The
differences matter—in ecologies, economies, species, lives.




116 c h a p t e r f i v e
                                                                   CHAPTER 6




                                               Sowing Worlds
         A Seed Bag for Terraforming
                with Earth Others




“Do you realize,” the phytolinguist will say to the aesthetic critic, “that they
couldn’t even read Eggplant?” And they will smile at our ignorance, as they
pick up their rucksacks and hike on up to read the newly deciphered lyrics of
the lichen on the north face of Pike’s Peak.
—Ursula K. Le Guin, “The Author of the Acacia Seeds”

The political slogan I wore in the Reagan Star Wars era of the 1980s
read, “Cyborgs for Earthly Survival!” The terrifying times of George
H. W. Bush and the secondary Bushes made me switch to slogans pur-
loined from tough schutzhund dog trainers, “Run Fast, Bite Hard!” and
“Shut Up and Train!” Today my slogan reads, “Stay with the Trouble!”
But in all these knots and especially now, wherewhenever that potent
and capacious placetime is—we need a hardy, soiled kind of wisdom.
Instructed by companion species of the myriad terran kingdoms in all
their placetimes, we need to reseed our souls and our home worlds in or-
der to flourish—again, or maybe just for the first time—on a vulnerable
planet that is not yet murdered.1 We need not just reseeding, but also re-
inoculating with all the fermenting, fomenting, and nutrient-fixing as-
sociates that seeds need to thrive. Recuperation is still possible, but only
in multispecies alliance, across the killing divisions of nature, culture,
and technology and of organism, language, and machine.2 The feminist
cyborg taught me that; the humanimal worlds of dogs, chickens, turtles,
and wolves taught me that; and in fugal, fungal, microbial, symbioge-
netic counterpoint, the acacia trees of Africa, the Americas, Australia,
and the Pacific Islands, with their congeries of associates reaching across
taxa, teach me that. Sowing worlds is about opening up the story of
companion species to more of its relentless diversity and urgent trouble.
   To study the kind of situated, mortal, germinal wisdom we need, I
turn to Ursula K. Le Guin and Octavia Butler.3 It matters what stories we
tell to tell other stories with; it matters what concepts we think to think
other concepts with. It matters wherehow Ouroboros swallows its tale,
again. That’s how worlding gets on with itself in dragon time. These are
such simple and difficult koans; let us see what kind of get they spawn.
A careful student of dragons, Le Guin taught me the carrier bag theory
of fiction and of naturalcultural history.4 Her theories, her stories, are
capacious bags for collecting, carrying, and telling the stuff of living. “A
leaf a gourd a shell a net a bag a sling a sack a bottle a pot a box a con-
tainer. A holder. A recipient.”5
   So much of earth history has been told in the thrall of the fantasy of
the first beautiful words and weapons, of the first beautiful weapons as
words and vice versa. Tool, weapon, word: that is the word made flesh in
the image of the sky god. In a tragic story with only one real actor, one
real world-maker, the hero, this is the Man-making tale of the hunter
on a quest to kill and bring back the terrible bounty. This is the cutting,
sharp, combative tale of action that defers the suffering of glutinous,
earth-rotted passivity beyond bearing. All others in the prick tale are
props, ground, plot space, or prey. They don’t matter; their job is to be in
the way, to be overcome, to be the road, the conduit, but not the traveler,
not the begetter. The last thing the hero wants to know is that his beauti-
ful words and weapons will be worthless without a bag, a container, a net.
   Nonetheless, no adventurer should leave home without a sack. How
did a sling, a pot, a bottle suddenly get in the story? How do such lowly
things keep the story going? Or maybe even worse for the hero, how
do those concave, hollowed-out things, those holes in Being, from the
get-go generate richer, quirkier, fuller, unfitting, ongoing stories, stories
with room for the hunter but which weren’t and aren’t about him, the
self-making Human, the human-making machine of history? The slight
curve of the shell that holds just a little water, just a few seeds to give

118   chapter six
away and to receive, suggests stories of becoming-with, of reciprocal in-
duction, of companion species whose job in living and dying is not to end
the storying, the worlding. With a shell and a net, becoming human, be-
coming humus, becoming terran, has another shape—the side-winding,
snaky shape of becoming-with.
    Le Guin quickly assures all of us who are wary of evasive, sentimental
holisms and organicisms: “Not, let it be said at once, [am I] an unaggres-
sive or uncombative human being. I am an aging, angry woman laying
about me with my handbag, fighting hoodlums off . . . It’s just one of
those damned things you have to do in order to go on gathering wild oats
and telling stories.”6 There is room for conflict in Le Guin’s story, but her
carrier bag narratives are full of much else in wonderful, messy tales to
use for retelling, or reseeding, possibilities for getting on now, as well as
in deep earth history. “It sometimes seems that that [heroic] story is ap-
proaching its end. Lest there be no more telling of stories at all, some of us
out here in the wild oats, amid the alien corn, think we’d better start tell-
ing another one, which maybe people can go on with when the old one’s
finished . . . Hence it is with a certain feeling of urgency that I seek the
nature, subject, words of the other story, the untold one, the life story.”7
    Octavia Butler knows all about the untold stories, the ones that need
a restitched seedbag and a traveling sower to hollow out a place to flour-
ish after the catastrophes of that Sharp Story. In Parable of the Sower,
the U.S. teenage hyperempath Lauren Oya Olamina grows up in a gated
community in Los Angeles. Important in New World Santeria and in
Catholic cults of the Virgin Mary, in Yoruba Oya, mother of nine, is the
Orisha of the Niger River, with its nine tributaries, its nine tentacles
gripping the living and the dead. She is among the chthonic entities of a
thousand names, generators of persisting times called the Chthulucene.
Wind, creation, and death are Oya’s attributes and powers for worlding.
Olamina’s gift and curse were her inescapable abilities to feel the pain of
all living beings, a result of a drug taken by her addicted mother during
pregnancy. After the murder of her family, the young woman traveled
from a devastated and dying society with a motley band of survivors to
sow a new community rooted in a religion called Earthseed. In the story
arc of what was to be a trilogy (Parable of the Trickster was not completed
before her death), Butler’s sf worlding imagined Earthseed ultimately
flourishing on a new home world among the stars. But Olamina started
the first Earthseed community in Northern California, and it is there
and at other sites on Terra where my own explorations for reseeding our

                                                     Sowing Worlds        119
home world must stay. This home is where Butler’s lessons apply with
special ferocity.
   In the Parable novels, “God is change,” and Earthseed teaches that the
seeds of life on earth can be transplanted and can adapt and flourish in all
sorts of unexpected and always dangerous places and times. Note “can,”
not necessarily “may” or “should.” Butler’s entire work as an sf writer
is riveted on the problem of destruction and wounded flourishing—
not simply survival—in exile, diaspora, abduction, and transportation—
the earthly gift-burden of the descendants of slaves, refugees, immi-
grants, travelers, and of the indigenous too. It is not a burden that stops
with settlement. In the sf mode,8 my own writing works and plays only
on earth, in the mud of cyborgs, dogs, acacia trees, ants, microbes, fungi,
and all their kin and get. With the twist in the belly that etymology
brings, I remember too that kin, with the g-k exchange of Indo-European
cousins, becomes gen on the way to get. Terran spawn all, we are side-
winding as well as arboreal kindred—blown get—in infected and seedy
generation after generation, blowsy kind after blowsy kind.
   Planting seeds requires medium, soil, matter, mutter, mother. These
words interest me greatly for and in the sf terraforming mode of atten-
tion. In the feminist sf mode, matter is never “mere” medium to the
“informing” seed; rather, mixed in terra’s carrier bag, kin and get have a
much richer congress for worlding. Matter is a powerful, mindfully bod-
ied word, the matrix and generatrix of things, kin to the riverine gener-
atrix Oya. It doesn’t take much digging or swimming to get to matter as
source, ground, flux, reason, and consequential stuff—the matter of the
thing, the generatrix that is simultaneously fluid and solid, mathemati-
cal and fleshly—and by that etymological route to one tone of matter as
timber, as hard inner wood (in Portuguese, madeira). Matter as timber
brings me to Le Guin’s The Word for World Is Forest, published in 1976
as part of her Hainish fabulations for dispersed native and colonial be-
ings locked in struggle over imperialist exploitation and the chances for
multispecies flourishing. That story took place on another planet and
is very like the tale of colonial oppression in the name of pacification
and resource extraction that takes place on Pandora in James Came-
ron’s 2009 blockbuster film Avatar. Except one particular detail is very
different; Le Guin’s Forest does not feature a repentant and redeemed
“white” colonial hero. Her story has the shape of a carrier bag that is
disdained by heroes. Also, even as they condemn their chief oppressor
to live, rather than killing him after their victory, for Le Guin’s “natives”

120 c h a p t e r s i x
6.1. An ant of the species Rhytidoponera metallica in western
Australia holding a seed of Acacia neurophylla by the elaiosome
during seed transport. © Benoit Guenard, 2007.


the consequences of the freedom struggle bring the lasting knowledge
of how to murder each other, not just the invader, as well as how to recol-
lect and perhaps relearn to flourish in the face of this history. There is
no status quo ante, no salvation tale, like that on Pandora. Instructed
by the struggle on Forest’s planet of Athshea, I will stay on Terra and
imagine that Le Guin’s Hainish species have not all been of the hom-
inid lineage or web, no matter how dispersed. Matter, mater, mutter
make me—make us, that collective gathered in the narrative bag of the
Chthulucene—stay with the naturalcultural multispecies trouble on
earth, strengthened by the freedom struggle for a postcolonial world on
Le Guin’s planet of Athshea. It is time to return to the question of find-
ing seeds for terraforming for a recuperating earthly world of difference,
wherewhen the knowledge of how to murder is not scarce.
   My carrier bag for terraforming is full of acacia seeds, but as we shall
see, that collection brings its full share of trouble too. I begin with the
decapitated corpse of an ant found by scientist-explorers next to Seed 31
in a row of degerminated acacia seeds at the end of an ant-colony tunnel
in Le Guin’s story “‘The Author of the Acacia Seeds’ and Other Extracts
from the Journal of the Association of Therolinguistics.” The therolinguists
were perplexed in their reading of the touch-gland exudate script that
the ant seemed to have written in her biochemical ink on the aligned
seeds. The scientists were uncertain both about how to interpret the
script and about who the ant was—an intruder killed by the colony’s
soldiers? A resident rebel writing seditious messages about the queen

                                                         Sowing Worlds   121
and her eggs? A myrmexian tragic poet?9 The therolinguists could not
apply rules from human languages to their task, and their grasp of ani-
mal communication was (is) still raggedly fragmentary, full of guesses
across profound naturalcultural difference. From the scientific and her-
meneutic study of other animal languages recorded in difficult expedi-
tions of discovery, therolinguists held that “language is communication”
and that many animals use an active collective kinesthetic semiotics,
as well as chemosensory, visual, and tactile language. They might have
been troubled about their reading of this unexpected ant’s exudate text,
but they felt confident that at least they were engaging therolingistic
acts and would someday learn to read them.
    Plants, however, they speculated, “do not communicate” and so have
no language. Something else is going on in the vegetative world, perhaps
something that should be called art.10 Phytolinguistics pursued along
these lines by the scientists and explorers was just beginning and would
surely require entirely new modes of attention, field methodology, and
conceptual invention. The president of the Therolinguists Association
waxed lyrical: “If a noncommunicative, vegetative art exists, we must
re-think the very elements of our science, and learn a whole new set of
techniques. For it is simply not possible to bring the critical and techni-
cal skills appropriate to the study of weasel murder-mysteries, or Battra-
chian erotica, or the tunnel-sagas of the earthworm, to bear on the art
of the redwood or the zucchini.”11
    In my view, the president got it right about the need to question the
tissues of one’s knowings and ways of knowing in order to respond to
nonanthropocentric difference. But a closer look at that decapitated ant
and the degerminated acacia seeds should have told those still zoocentric
scientists that their sublime aestheticization of plants led them astray
about earth-making companion species. Plants are consummate com-
municators in a vast terran array of modalities, making and exchanging
meanings among and between an astonishing galaxy of associates across
the taxa of living beings. Plants, along with bacteria and fungi, are also
animals’ lifelines to communication with the abiotic world, from sun to
gas to rock. To pursue this matter, I need to leave Le Guin’s story for now
and instead draw on the stories told by students of symbiosis, symbio-
genesis, and ecological evolutionary developmental biology.12
    Acacias and ants can do almost all of the work for me. With fifteen
hundred species (about a thousand of which are indigenous to Austra-
lia), the genus Acacia is one of the largest genera of trees and shrubs on

122 c h a p t e r s i x
earth. Different acacias flourish in temperate, tropical, and desert cli-
mates across oceans and continents. They are crucial species maintaining
the healthy biodiversity of complex ecologies, housing many lodgers, and
nourishing a motley guest list of diners. Relocated from wherever they
originated, acacias were the darlings of human colonial foresters and still
are the stock-in-trade of landscapers and plant breeders. In those histo-
ries, some acacias become the overgrowing destroyers of endemic ecolo-
gies that are the special responsibility of restoration biologists and just
plain citizens of recuperating places.13 In part and in whole, acacias show
up in the most unexpected places. They give the bounty of the gorgeous
hardwoods like Hawaiian koa, which are cut down in greedy, exterminat-
ing, global-capitalist excess. Acacias also make the humble polysaccharide
gums, including gum arabic from Acacia senegal, which show up in hu-
man industrial products like ice cream, hand lotion, beer, ink, jelly beans,
and old-fashioned postage stamps. Those same gum exudates are the
immune system of the acacias themselves, helping to seal wounds and
discourage opportunistic fungi and bacteria. Bees make a prized honey
from acacia flowers, among the few honeys that will not crystallize. Many
animals, including moths, human beings, and the only known vegetarian
spider, use acacias for food. People rely on acacias for seed pastes, fritters
made from pods, curries, shoots, toasted seeds, and root beer.
   Acacias are members of the vast family of legumes. That means that,
among their many talents, in association with fungal mycorrhizal sym-
bionts (which host their own bacterial endosymbionts), many acacias fix
the nitrogen crucial to soil fertility, plant growth, and animal existence.14
In defending themselves from grazers and pests, acacias are veritable al-
kaloid chemical factories, making many compounds that are psychoactive
in animals like me. I can only imagine with my hominid brain what these
compounds feel like to critters like insects. From giraffes’ points of view,
acacias sport lovely leafy salads on their crowns, and the acacias respond
to assiduous giraffe pruning by producing the picturesque African savan-
nah flattop tree landscape prized by human photographers and tourist
enterprises, not to mention life-saving shade and rest for many critters.
   Supported within this big narrative netbag, I am ready to add a few
details of my own to Le Guin’s ongoing carrier bag story of the decapi-
tated ant and her acacia-seed writing tablet. The therolinguists were
worried about the message they tried to decipher in the writing, but I am
riveted by what drew ant and acacia seed together in the first place. How
did they know each other? How did they communicate? Why did the ant

                                                     Sowing Worlds        123
paint her message on that shiny surface? The degerminated seed is the
clue. Acacia verticulata, an Australian shrub related to the coastal wattle
so worrisome to Southern Californian ecologists, makes seeds that are
dispersed by ants. The wily acacias draw the ants’ attention with a showy
attachment stalk coiled around every seed. The ants carry the decorated
seeds to their nests, where they consume the fat-rich attachment stalks,
called elaisosomes, at their leisure. In time, the seeds germinate out of
the nice womb provided by the ant tunnels, and the ants have the nu-
tritious, calorie-dense food they need to fuel all those stories of their
hard-working habits. In evolutionary-ecological terms, these ants and
acacias are necessary to each other’s reproductive business.
   Some ant-acacia associations are much more elaborate than that,
reaching into the internal tissues of each participant, shaping genomes
and developmental patterning of the structures and functions of both
companion species. Several Central American acacias make large, hol-
low thornlike structures called stipules that provide shelter for several
species of Pseudomyrmex ants. “The ants feed on a secretion of sap on
the leaf-stalk and small, lipid-rich [and protein-rich] food-bodies at the
tips of the leaflets called Beltian bodies. In return, the ants add protec-
tion to the plant against herbivores.”15 There is nothing like a dedicated
bevy of angry, biting ants to make a day’s foraging uncomfortable and
the leaf-grazer of whatever species move on to less infested pantries. In
the 2005 bbc Science and Nature five-part special with David Attenbor-
ough, in the episode called “Intimate Relations,” we see these matters
in exquisite, sensuous detail. We also witness that “some ants ‘farm’ the
trees that give them shelter, creating areas known as ‘Devil’s gardens.’ To
make sure these grow without competition, they kill off other seedlings
in the surrounding vegetation.”16 The ants accomplish this task by gnaw-
ing methodically through branches and shoots and then injecting formic
acid into the conductive tissue of the offending plants. Similar ant-acacia
mutualisms occur in Africa. For example, the Whistling Thorn acacias
in Kenya provide shelter for ants in the thorns and nectar in extrafloral
nectaries for their symbiotic ants, such as Crematogaster mimosae. In
turn, the ants protect the plant by attacking large mammalian herbi-
vores and stem-boring beetles that damage the plant. The more one
looks, the more the name of the game of living and dying on earth is a
convoluted multispecies affair that goes by the name of symbiosis, the
yoking together of companion species, at table together.
   Ants and acacias are both highly diverse, well-populated groups. They

124 c h a p t e r s i x
are sometimes world travelers and sometimes homebodies that cannot
flourish away from natal countries and natal neighbors. Homebody or
traveler, their ways of living and dying have consequences for terrrafor-
ming, past and present. Ants and acacias are avid for association with
critters of all sorts of sizes and scales, and they are opportunistic in their
approaches to living and dying in both evolutionary and organismic or
whole group timeplaces. These species in all their complexities and on-
goingness both do great harm and sustain whole worlds, sometimes in
association with human people, sometimes not. The devil is truly in the
details of response-able naturecultures inhabited by accountable compan-
ion species. They—we—are here to live and die with, not just think and
write with. But also that, also here to sow worlds with, to write in ant
exudates on acacia seeds to keep the stories going. No more than Le Guin’s
carrier bag story—with the crusty elderly lady ready to use her purse to
whack evildoers and the author avid for the mess as well as the order of
her bumptious critters, human and not—is my story of these worldly wise
symbionts a tale of rectitude and final peace. With Le Guin, I am commit-
ted to the finicky, disruptive details of good stories that don’t know how to
finish. Good stories reach into rich pasts to sustain thick presents to keep
the story going for those who come after.17 Emma Goldman’s understand-
ing of anarchist love and rage make sense in the worlds of ants and acacias.
These companion species are a prompt to shaggy dog stories—growls,
bites, whelps, games, snufflings, and all. Symbiogenesis is not a synonym
for the good, but for becoming-with each other in response-ability.
   Finally, and not a moment too soon, sympoesis enlarges and displaces
autopoesis and all other self-forming and self-sustaining system fanta-
sies. Sympoesis is a carrier bag for ongoingness, a yoke for becoming-
with, for staying with the trouble of inheriting the damages and achieve-
ments of colonial and postcolonial naturalcultural histories in telling the
tale of still possible recuperation. Le Guin’s therolinguists, even bound in
their animal hides, had the vision of these scary and inspiring possibili-
ties: “And with them, or after them, may there not come that even bolder
adventurer—the first geolinguist, who, ignoring the delicate, transient
lyrics of the lichen, will read beneath it the still less communicative, still
more passive, wholly atemporal, cold, volcanic, poetry of the rocks; each
one a word spoken, how long ago, by the earth itself, in the immense sol-
itude, the immenser community, of space.”18 Communicative and mute,
the old lady and her purse will be found in Earthseed communities on
terra and throughout timespace. Mutter, matter, mother.

                                                     Sowing Worlds        125
    CHAPTER 7




         A Curious Practice




                                    Interesting research is research conducted
                                under conditions that make beings interesting.
                                                           —Vinciane Despret
To think with an enlarged mentality means that one trains
one’s imagination to go visiting.
—Hannah Arendt, Lectures on Kant’s Political Philosophy

Vinciane Despret thinks-with other beings, human and not. That is a rare
and precious vocation. Vocation: calling, calling with, called by, calling as
if the world mattered, calling out, going too far, going visiting. Despret
listened to a singing blackbird one morning—a living blackbird outside
her particular window—and that way learned what importance sounds
like. She thinks in attunement with those she thinks with—recursively,
inventively, relentlessly—with joy and verve. She studies how beings
render each other capable in actual encounters, and she theorizes—
makes cogently available—that kind of theory and method. Despret is
not interested in thinking by discovering the stupidities of others, or
by reducing the field of attention to prove a point. Her kind of thinking
enlarges, even invents, the competencies of all the players, including
herself, such that the domain of ways of being and knowing dilates, ex-
pands, adds both ontological and epistemological possibilities, proposes
and enacts what was not there before. That is her worlding practice.
She is a philosopher and a scientist who is allergic to denunciation and
hungry for discovery, needy for what must be known and built together,
with and for earthly beings, living, dead, and yet to come.
   Referring both to her own practice for observing scientists and also to
the practices of ethologist Thelma Rowell observing her Soay sheep, De-
spret affirmed “a particular epistemological position to which I am com-
mitted, one that I call a virtue: the virtue of politeness.”1 In every sense,
Despret’s cultivation of politeness is a curious practice. She trains her
whole being, not just her imagination, in Arendt’s words, “to go visiting.”
Visiting is not an easy practice; it demands the ability to find others ac-
tively interesting, even or especially others most people already claim to
know all too completely, to ask questions that one’s interlocutors truly
find interesting, to cultivate the wild virtue of curiosity, to retune one’s
ability to sense and respond—and to do all this politely! What is this
sort of politeness? It sounds more than a little risky. Curiosity always
leads its practitioners a bit too far off the path, and that way lie stories.
   The first and most important thing at risk in Despret’s practice is an
approach that assumes that beings have pre-established natures and abili-
ties that are simply put into play in an encounter. Rather, Despret’s sort
of politeness does the energetic work of holding open the possibility that
surprises are in store, that something interesting is about to happen, but
only if one cultivates the virtue of letting those one visits intra-actively
shape what occurs. They are not who/what we expected to visit, and
we are not who/what were anticipated either. Visiting is a subject- and
object-making dance, and the choreographer is a trickster. Asking ques-
tions comes to mean both asking what another finds intriguing and also
how learning to engage that changes everybody in unforeseeable ways.
Good questions come only to a polite inquirer, especially a polite inquirer
provoked by a singing blackbird. With good questions, even or especially
mistakes and misunderstandings can become interesting. This is not so
much a question of manners, but of epistemology and ontology, and of
method alert to off-the-beaten-path practices. At the least, this sort of
politeness is not what Miss Manners purveys in her advice column.
   There are so many examples of Despret learning and teaching polite
inquiry. Perhaps the most famous is her visit to the Negev desert field
site of the Israeli ornithologist Amotz Zahavi, where she encountered
Arabian babblers who defied orthodox accounts of what birds should

                                               A Curious Practice        127
be doing, even as the scientists also acted off-script scientifically. Specif-
ically, Zahavi asked in excruciating detail, what matters to babblers? He
could not do good science otherwise. The babblers’ practices of altru-
ism were off the charts, and they seemed to do it, according to Zahavi,
for reasons of competitive prestige not well accounted for by theories
like kin selection. Zahavi let the babblers be interesting; he asked them
interesting questions; he saw them dance. “Not only were these birds
described as dancing together in the morning sunrise, not only were they
eager to offer presents to one another, not only would they take pride in
caring for each other’s nestlings or in defending an endangered comrade,
but also, according to Zahavi’s depiction, their relations relied on trust.”2
   What Despret tells us she came to know is that the specific practices
of observation, narration, and the liveliness of the birds were far from
independent of each other. This was not just a question of worldviews
and related theories shaping research design and interpretations, or
of any other purely discursive effect. What scientists actually do in the
field affects the ways “animals see their scientists seeing them” and
therefore how the animals respond.3 In a strong sense, observers and
birds rendered each other capable in ways not written into preexisting
scripts, but invented or provoked, more than simply shown, in practi-
cal research. Birds and scientists were in dynamic, moving relations of
attunement. The behavior of birds and their observers were made, but
not made up. Stories are essential, but are never “mere” stories. Zahavi
seemed intent on making experiments with rather than on babblers. He
was trying to look at the world with the babblers rather than at them, a
very demanding practice. And the same demands were made of Despret,
who came to watch scientists but ended up in a much more complex
tangle of practices. Birds and scientists do something, and they do it
together. They become-with each other.
   The world in the southern Israeli desert was composed by adding
competencies to engage competencies, adding perspectives to engage
perspectives, adding subjectivities to engage subjectivities, adding ver-
sions to understand versions. In short, this science worked by addition,
not subtraction. Worlds enlarged; the babblers and the scientists—
Despret included—inhabited a world of propositions not available be-
fore. “Both humans and babblers create narratives, rather than just
telling them. They create/disclose new scripts.”4 Good questions were
posed; surprising answers made the world richer. Visiting might be
risky, but it is definitely not boring.

128 c h a p t e r s e v e n
    Despret’s work is full of literal collaborations, with people and with
animals, not simply metaphors of thinking with each other. I admit I am
drawn most by the collaborations that entangle people, critters, and
apparatuses. No wonder that Despret’s work with sociologist Jocelyne
Porcher and the farmers, pigs, and cows in their care sustains me. De-
spret and Porcher visited cow and pig breeders on nonindustrial French
farms, where the humans and animals lived in daily interaction that
led sober, nonromantic, working breeders to say such things as, “We
don’t stop talking with our animals.”5 The question that led Despret and
Porcher to the farmers circled around their efforts to think through what
it means to claim that these domestic food-producing animals are work-
ing, and working with their people. The first difficulty, not surprisingly,
was to figure out how to ask questions that interested the breeders, that
engaged them in their conversations and labors with their animals. It
was decidedly not interesting to the breeders to ask how animals and
people are the same or different in general. These are people who make
particular animals live and die and who live, and die, by them. The task
was to engage these breeders in constructing the questions that mat-
tered to them. The breeders incessantly “uprooted” the researchers’ ques-
tions to address the queries that concerned them in their work.
    The story has many turns, but what interested me most was the in-
sistence of the breeders that their animals “know what we want, but we,
we don’t know what they want.”6 Figuring out what their animals want,
so that people and cows could together accomplish successful breeding,
was the fundamental conjoined work of the farm. Farmers bad at lis-
tening to their animals, bad at talking to them, and bad at responding
were not good farmers in their peers’ estimation. The animals paid at-
tention to their farmers; paying equally effective attention to the cows
and pigs was the job of good breeders. This is an extension of subjectiv-
ities for both people and critters, “becoming what the other suggests to
you, accepting a proposal of subjectivity, acting in the manner in which
the other addresses you, actualizing and verifying this proposal, in the
sense of rendering it true.”7 The result is bringing into being animals
that nourish humans, and humans that nourish animals. Living and dy-
ing are both in play. “Working together” in this kind of daily interaction
of labor, conversation, and attention seems to me to be the right idiom.
    Continually hungry for more of Despret’s visiting with critters, their
people, and their apparatuses—hungry for more of her elucidations
of “anthropo-zoo-genesis”8 —I have a hard time feeling satisfied with

                                              A Curious Practice       129
only human people on the menu. That prejudice took a tumble when I
read Women Who Make a Fuss: The Unfaithful Daughters of Virginia Woolf,
which Isabelle Stengers and Vinciane Despret wrote together with an
extraordinary collective of bumptious women.9 “Think we must!” cries
this book, in concert with the famous line from Virginia Woolf’s Three
Guineas. In Western worlds, and elsewhere too, women have hardly
been included in the patrilines of thinking, most certainly including the
patrilines making decisions for (yet another) war. Why should Virginia
Woolf, or any other woman, or men for that matter, be faithful to such
patrilines and their demands for sacrifice? Infidelity seems the least we
should demand of ourselves!
   This all matters, but the question in this book is not precisely that,
but rather what thinking can possibly mean in the civilization in which
we find ourselves. “But how do we take back up a collective adventure
that is multiple and ceaselessly reinvented, not on an individual basis,
but in a way that passes the baton, that is to say, affirms new givens and
new unknowns?”10 We must somehow make the relay, inherit the trou-
ble, and reinvent the conditions for multispecies flourishing, not just in
a time of ceaseless human wars and genocides, but in a time of human-
propelled mass extinctions and multispecies genocides that sweep peo-
ple and critters into the vortex. We must “dare ‘to make’ the relay; that
is to create, to fabulate, in order not to despair. In order to induce a
transformation, perhaps, but without the artificial loyalty that would
resemble ‘in the name of a cause,’ no matter how noble it might be.”11
   Hannah Arendt and Virginia Woolf both understood the high stakes
of training the mind and imagination to go visiting, to venture off the
beaten path to meet unexpected, non-natal kin, and to strike up con-
versations, to pose and respond to interesting questions, to propose to-
gether something unanticipated, to take up the unasked-for obligations
of having met. This is what I have called cultivating response-ability.
Visiting is not a heroic practice; making a fuss is not the Revolution;
thinking with each other is not Thought. Opening up versions so stories
can be ongoing is so mundane, so earth-bound. That is precisely the
point. The blackbird sings its importance; the babblers dance their shin-
ing prestige; the storytellers crack the established disorder. That is what
“going too far” means, and this curious practice is not safe. Like Arendt
and Woolf, Despret and her collaborators understand that we are dealing
with “the idea of a world that could be habitable.”12 “The very strength
of women who make a fuss is not to represent the True, rather to be

130 c h a p t e r s e v e n
witnesses for the possibility of other ways of doing what would perhaps
be ‘better.’ The fuss is not the heroic statement of a grand cause . . . It
instead affirms the need to resist the stifling impotence created by the
‘no possibility to do otherwise, whether we want it or not,’ which now
reigns everywhere.”13 It is past time to make such a fuss.
   Despret’s curious practice has no truck with loyalty to a cause or doc-
trine; but it draws deeply from another virtue that is sometimes con-
fused with loyalty, namely, “thinking from” a heritage. She is tuned to
the obligations that inhere in starting from situated histories, situated
stories. She retells the parable of the twelve camels in order to tease out
what it means to “start from,” that is, to “remain obligated with respect
to that from which we speak, think, or act. It means to let ourselves learn
from the event and to create from it.” In a sort of cat’s cradle with power-
ful fables, Despret received the parable from Isabelle Stengers, and then
she relayed it to me in early 2013. I relay it back to her here. To inherit is
an act “which demands thought and commitment. An act that calls for
our transformation by the very deed of inheriting.”14
   In his will, the father in this story left his three quarrelsome sons
a seemingly impossible inheritance: eleven camels to be divided in a
precise way, half to the eldest son, a quarter to the second son, and a
sixth to the third. The perverse requirements of the legacy provoked
the confused sons, who were on the verge of failing to fulfill the terms
of the will, to visit an old man living in the village. His savvy kindness in
giving the sons a twelfth camel allowed the heirs to create a solution to
their difficult heritage; they could make their inheritance active, alive,
generative. With twelve camels, the fractions worked, and there was one
camel left over to give back to the old man.
   Despret notes that the tale she read left actual camels out of the en-
largement and creativity of finding what it means to “start from.” Those
storied camels were conventional, discursive, figural beasts, whose only
function was to give occasion for the problematic sons to grow in pa-
triarchal understanding, recapitulating more than a little the history
of philosophy that Despret—and I—inherited. But by listening, tell-
ing, and activating that particular story her way, she makes something
that was absent present. She made an interesting, curious fuss without
denouncing anybody. Therefore, another heritage emerges and makes
claims on anyone listening, anyone attuned. It isn’t just philosophy that
has to change; the mortal world shifts. Long-legged, big-lipped, humped
camels shake the dust from their hot, hard-worked hides and nuzzle the

                                                A Curious Practice        131
storyteller for a scratch behind the ears. Despret, and because of her, we,
inherit camels now, camels with their people, in their markets and places
of travel and labor, in their living and dying in worlds-at-stake, like the
contemporary Gobi Desert.15 We start from what is henceforth a dilated
story that makes unexpected demands to cultivate response-ability. If
we are to remain faithful to starting from the transformed story, we
can no longer not know or not care that camels and people are at stake
to each other—across regions, genders, races, species, practices. From
now on, call that philosophy, a game of cat’s cradle, not a lineage. We
are obligated to speak from situated worlds, but we no longer need start
from a humanist patriline and its breath-taking erasures and high-wire
acts. The risk of listening to a story is that it can obligate us in ramifying
webs that cannot be known in advance of venturing among their myriad
threads. In a world of anthropozoogenesis, the figural is more likely than
not to grow teeth and bite us in the bum.
   Despret’s philosophical ethology starts from the dead and missing as
well as from the living and visible. She has studied situated human beings’
mourning practices for their dead in ways strongly akin to her practice of
philosophical ethology; in both domains, she attends to how—in prac-
tice—people can and do solicit the absent into vivid copresence, in many
kinds of temporality and materiality. She attends to how practices—
activated storytelling—can be on the side of what I call “ongoingness”:
that is, nurturing, or inventing, or discovering, or somehow cobbling
together ways for living and dying well with each other in the tissues of
an earth whose very habitability is threatened.16 Many kinds of failure of
ongoingness crumble lifeways in our times of onrushing extinctions, ex-
terminations, wars, extractions, and genocides. Many kinds of absence,
or threatened absence, must be brought into ongoing response-ability,
not in the abstract but in homely storied cultivated practice.
   To my initial surprise, this matter brought Despret and me together
with racing pigeons, also called carrier pigeons (in French voyageurs) and
with their avid fanciers (in French colombophiles, lovers of pigeons). I
wrote an essay for Despret after an extraordinary week with her and
her colleagues in the chateau at Cerisy in July 2010, in which I proposed
playing string figure games with companion species for cultivating mul-
tispecies response-ability.17 I sent Despret a draft containing my discus-
sion of the wonderful art-technology-environmental-activist project by
Beatriz da Costa called PigeonBlog, as well as a discussion of the com-
munities of racing pigeons and their fanciers in Southern California.

132 c h a p t e r s e v e n
Pigeon racing is a working-class men’s sport around the world, one made
immensely difficult in conditions of urban war (Baghdad, Damascus),
racial and economic injustice (New York, Berlin), and displaced labor and
play of many kinds across regions (France, Iran, California).
   I care about art-design-activist practices that join diverse people and
varied critters in shared, often vexed public spaces. “Starting from” this
caring, not from some delusional caring in general, landed me in inno-
vative pigeon lofts, where, it turned out, Despret, attuned to practices
of commemoration, had already begun to roost. In particular, by leading
me to Matali Crasset’s Capsule, built in 2003 in the leisure park of Cau-
dry, she shared her understanding of the power of holding open actual
space for ongoing living and working in the face of threatened absence as
a potent practice of commemoration.18 The Beauvois association of car-
rier pigeon fanciers asked Crasset, an artist and industrial designer, to
build a prototype pigeon loft that would combine beauty, functionality
for people and birds, and a pedagogic lure to draw future practitioners
into learning demanding skills. Actual pigeons had to thrive inhabiting
this loft; actual colombophiles had to experience the loft working; and
actual visitors to the ecological park, which was rehabilitating exhausted
farmland into a variegated nature reserve for recuperating critters and
people, had to be infected with the desire for a life transformed with
avian voyageurs. Despret understood that the prototype, the memorial,
had to be for both the carrier pigeons and their people—past, present
and yet to come.19
   Neither the critters nor the people could have existed or could endure
without each other in ongoing, curious practices. Attached to ongoing
pasts, they bring each other forward in thick presents and still possible
futures; they stay with the trouble in speculative fabulation.




                                             A Curious Practice        133
    CHAPTER 8




        The Camille Stories
                     Children of Compost




And then Camille came into our lives, rendering present the cross-
stitched generations of the not-yet-born and not-yet-hatched of vul-
nerable, coevolving species. Proposing a relay into uncertain futures, I
end Staying with the Trouble with a story, a speculative fabulation, which
starts from a writing workshop at Cerisy in summer 2013, part of Isa-
belle Stengers’s colloquium on gestes spéculatifs. Gestated in sf writing
practices, Camille is a keeper of memories in the flesh of worlds that may
become habitable again. Camille is one of the children of compost who
ripen in the earth to say no to the posthuman of every time.
   I signed up for the afternoon workshop at Cerisy called Narration
Spéculative. The first day the organizers broke us down into writing
groups of two or three participants and gave us a task. We were asked
to fabulate a baby, and somehow to bring the infant through five hu-
man generations. In our times of surplus death of both individuals and
of kinds, a mere five human generations can seem impossibly long to
imagine flourishing with and for a renewed multispecies world. Over
the week, the groups wrote many kinds of possible futures in a ram-
bunctious play of literary forms. Versions abounded. Besides myself,
the members of my group were the filmmaker Fabrizio Terranova and
psychologist, philosopher, and ethologist Vinciane Despret. The version
8.1. Mariposa mask, Guerrero, Mexico, 62 cm= 72.5 cm = 12.5 cm, before
1990, Samuel Frid Collection, UBC Museum of Anthropology, Vancouver.
Installation view, The Marvellous Real: Art from Mexico, 1926–2011 exhibition
(October 2013—March 2014), UBC Museum of Anthropology. Curator Nicola
Levell. Photograph by Jim Clifford.
I tell here is itself a speculative gesture, both a memory and a lure for a
“we” that came into being by fabulating a story together one summer
in Normandy. I cannot tell exactly the same story that my cowriters
would propose or remember. My story here is an ongoing speculative
fabulation, not a conference report for the archives. We started writ-
ing together, and we have since written Camille stories individually,
sometimes passing them back to the original writers for elaboration,
sometimes not; and we have encountered Camille and the Children of
Compost in other writing collaborations too.1 All the versions are nec-
essary to Camille. My memoir for that workshop is an active casting of
threads from and for ongoing, shared stories. Camille, Donna, Vinciane,
and Fabrizio brought each other into copresence; we render each other
capable.
    The Children of Compost insist that we need to write stories and live
lives for flourishing and for abundance, especially in the teeth of ram-
paging destruction and impoverization. Anna Tsing urges us to cobble
together the “arts of living on a damaged planet”; and among those arts
are cultivating the capacity to reimagine wealth, learn practical healing
rather than wholeness, and stitch together improbable collaborations
without worrying overmuch about conventional ontological kinds.2 The
Camille Stories are invitations to participate in a kind of genre fiction
committed to strengthening ways to propose near futures, possible fu-
tures, and implausible but real nows. Every Camille Story that I write
will make terrible political and ecological mistakes; and every story asks
readers to practice generous suspicion by joining in the fray of inventing
a bumptious crop of Children of Compost.3 Readers of science fiction are
accustomed to the lively and irreverent arts of fan fiction. Story arcs and
worlds are fodder for mutant transformations or for loving but perverse
extensions. The Children of Compost invite not so much fan fiction as
sym fiction, the genre of sympoiesis and symchthonia—the coming to-
gether of earthly ones. The Children of Compost want the Camille Sto-
ries to be a pilot project, a model, a work and play object, for composing
collective projects, not just in the imagination but also in actual story
writing. And on and under the ground.
    Vinciane, Fabrizio, and I felt a vital pressure to provide our baby with
a name and a pathway into what was not yet but might be. We also felt
a vital pressure to ask our baby to be part of learning, over five gener-
ations, to radically reduce the pressure of human numbers on earth,
currently set on a course to climb to more than 11 billion by the end of

136   chapter eight
the twenty-first century ce. We could hardly approach the five genera-
tions through a story of heteronormative reproduction (to use the ugly
but apt American feminist idiom)! More than a year later, I realized that
Camille taught me how to say, “Make Kin Not Babies.”4
   Immediately, however, as soon as we proposed the name of Camille to
each other, we realized that we were now holding a squirming child who
had no truck with conventional genders or with human exceptionalism.
This was a child born for sympoiesis—for becoming-with and making-
with a motley clutch of earth others.5


Imagining the World of the Camilles
Luckily, Camille came into being at a moment of an unexpected but pow-
erful, interlaced, planetwide eruption of numerous communities of a
few hundred people each, who felt moved to migrate to ruined places
and work with human and nonhuman partners to heal these places,
building networks, pathways, nodes, and webs of and for a newly hab-
itable world.6
   Only a portion of the earthwide, astonishing, and infectious action
for well-being came from intentional, migratory communities like Ca-
mille’s. Drawing from long histories of creative resistance and genera-
tive living in even the worst circumstances, people everywhere found
themselves profoundly tired of waiting for external, never materializing
solutions to local and systemic problems. Both large and small individ-
uals, organizations, and communities joined with each other, and with
migrant communities like Camille’s, to reshape terran life for an epoch
that could follow the deadly discontinuities of the Anthropocene, Capi-
talocene, and Plantationocene. In system-changing simultaneous waves
and pulses, diverse indigenous peoples and all sorts of other laboring
women, men, and children—who had been long subjected to devas-
tating conditions of extraction and production in their lands, waters,
homes, and travels—innovated and strengthened coalitions to recraft
conditions of living and dying to enable flourishing in the present and
in times to come. These eruptions of healing energy and activism were
ignited by love of earth and its human and nonhuman beings and by
rage at the rate and scope of extinctions, exterminations, genocides,
and immiserations in enforced patterns of multispecies living and dying
that threatened ongoingness for everybody. Love and rage contained
the germs of partial healing even in the face of onrushing destruction.

                                            the camille stories       137
   None of the Communities of Compost could imagine that they inhab-
ited or moved to “empty land.” Such still powerful, destructive fictions of
settler colonialism and religious revivalism, secular or not, were fiercely
resisted. The Communities of Compost worked and played hard to un-
derstand how to inherit the layers upon layers of living and dying that
infuse every place and every corridor. Unlike inhabitants in many other
utopian movements, stories, or literatures in the history of the earth, the
Children of Compost knew they could not deceive themselves that they
could start from scratch. Precisely the opposite insight moved them;
they asked and responded to the question of how to live in the ruins
that were still inhabited, with ghosts and with the living too. Coming
from every economic class, color, caste, religion, secularism, and region,
members of the emerging diverse settlements around the earth lived by
a few simple but transformative practices, which in turn lured—became
vitally infectious for—many other peoples and communities, both mi-
gratory and stable. The communities diverged in their development with
sympoietic creativity, but they remained tied together by sticky threads.
   The linking practices grew from the sense that healing and ongoing-
ness in ruined places requires making kin in innovative ways. In the
infectious new settlements, every new child must have at least three
parents, who may or may not practice new or old genders. Corporeal dif-
ferences, along with their fraught histories, are cherished. New children
must be rare and precious, and they must have the robust company of
other young and old ones of many kinds. Kin relations can be formed
at any time in life, and so parents and other sorts of relatives can be
added or invented at significant points of transition. Such relationships
enact strong lifelong commitments and obligations of diverse kinds. Kin
making as a means of reducing human numbers and demands on the
earth, while simultaneously increasing human and other critters’ flour-
ishing, engaged intense energies and passions in the dispersed emerging
worlds. But kin making and rebalancing human numbers had to happen
in risky embodied connections to places, corridors, histories, and on-
going decolonial and postcolonial struggles, and not in the abstract and
not by external fiat. Many failed models of population control provided
strong cautionary tales.
   Thus the work of these communities was and is intentional kin
making across deep damage and significant difference. By the early
twenty-first century, historical social action and cultural and scientific
knowledges—much of it activated by anticolonial, antiracist, proqueer

138   chapter eight
8.2. Make Kin Not Babies. Sticker, 2 = 3 in., made by Kern Toy, Beth Stephens,
Annie Sprinkle, and Donna Haraway.



feminist movement—had seriously unraveled the once-imagined natu-
ral bonds of sex and gender and race and nation, but undoing the wide-
spread destructive commitment to the still-conceived natural necessity
of the tie between kin making and a treelike biogenetic reproductive
genealogy became a key task for the Children of Compost.
   The decision to bring a new human infant into being is strongly struc-
tured to be a collective one for the emerging communities. Further, no
one can be coerced to bear a child or punished for birthing one outside
community auspices.7 The Children of Compost nurture the born ones
every way they can, even as they work and play to mutate the appara-
tuses of kin making and to reduce radically the burdens of human num-
bers across the earth. Although discouraged in the form of individual
decisions to make a new baby, reproductive freedom of the person is
actively cherished.
   This freedom’s most treasured power is the right and obligation of
the human person, of whatever gender, who is carrying a pregnancy to
choose an animal symbiont for the new child.8 All new human members
of the group who are born in the context of community decision making
come into being as symbionts with critters of actively threatened spe-

                                                  the camille stories            139
cies, and therefore with the whole patterned fabric of living and dying
of those particular beings and all their associates, for whom the possi-
bility of a future is very fragile. Human babies born through individual
reproductive choice do not become biological symbionts, but they do
live in many other kinds of sympoiesis with human and nonhuman crit-
ters. Over the generations, the Communities of Compost experienced
complex difficulties with hierarchical caste formations and sometimes
violent clashes between children born as symbionts and those born as
more conventional human individuals. Syms and non-syms, sometimes
literally, did not see eye to eye easily.
    The animal symbionts are generally members of migratory species,
which critically shapes the lines of visiting, working, and playing for all
the partners of the symbiosis. The members of the symbioses of the
Children of Compost, human and nonhuman, travel or depend on asso-
ciates that travel; corridors are essential to their being. The restoration
and care of corridors, of connection, is a central task of the communities;
it is how they imagine and practice repair of ruined lands and waters and
their critters, human and not.9 The Children of Compost came to see
their shared kind as humus, rather than as human or nonhuman. The
core of each new child’s education is learning how to live in symbiosis so
as to nurture the animal symbiont, and all the other beings the symbiont
requires, into ongoingness for at least five human generations. Nurtur-
ing the animal symbiont also means being nurtured in turn, as well as
inventing practices of care of the ramifying symbiotic selves. The human
and animal symbionts keep the relays of mortal life going, both inher-
iting and inventing practices of recuperation, survival, and flourishing.
    Because the animal partners in the symbiosis are migratory, each
human child learns and lives in nodes and pathways, with other peo-
ple and their symbionts, in the alliances and collaborations needed to
make ongoingness possible. Literally and figurally, training the mind
to go visiting is a lifelong pedagogical practice in these communities.
Together and separately, the sciences and arts are passionately practiced
and enlarged as means to attune rapidly evolving ecological naturalcul-
tural communities, including people, to live and die well throughout the
dangerous centuries of irreversible climate change and continuing high
rates of extinction and other troubles.
    A treasured power of individual freedom for the new child is to choose
a gender—or not—when and if the patterns of living and dying evoke
that desire. Bodily modifications are normal among Camille’s people;

140   chapter eight
and at birth a few genes and a few microorganisms from the animal
symbiont are added to the symchild’s bodily heritage, so that sensitivity
and response to the world as experienced by the animal critter can be
more vivid and precise for the human member of the team. The animal
partners are not modified in these ways, although the ongoing relation-
ships with lands, waters, people and peoples, critters, and apparatuses
render them newly capable in surprising ways too, including ongoing
EcoEvoDevo biological changes.10 Throughout life, the human person
may adopt further bodily modifications for pleasure and aesthetics or
for work, as long as the modifications tend to both symbionts’ well-
being in the humus of sympoiesis.
    Camille’s people moved to southern West Virginia in the Appalachian
Mountains on a site along the Kanawha River near Gauley Mountain,
which had been devastated by mountaintop removal coal mining. The
river and tributary creeks were toxic, the valleys filled with mine debris,
the people used and abandoned by the coal companies. Camille’s people
allied themselves with struggling multispecies communities in the rug-
ged mountains and valleys, both the local people and the other critters.11
Most of the Communities of Compost that became most closely linked
to Camille’s gathering lived in places ravaged by fossil fuel extraction
or by mining of gold, uranium, or other metals. Places eviscerated by
deforestation or agriculture practiced as water and nutrient mining and
monocropping also figured large in Camille’s extended world.
    Monarch butterflies frequent Camille’s West Virginia community
in the summers, and they undertake a many-thousand-mile migration
south to overwinter in a few specific forests of pine and oyamel fir in
central Mexico, along the border of the states of Michoacán and Méx-
ico.12 In the twentieth century, the monarch was declared the state insect
of West Virginia; and the Sanctuarío de la Biosfera Mariposa Monarca
(Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve), a unesco World Heritage Site
after 2008, was established in the ecoregion along the Trans-Mexican
Volcanic Belt of surviving woodlands.
    Throughout their complex migrations, the monarchs must eat, breed,
and rest in cities, ejidos, indigenous lands, farms, forests, and grasslands
of a vast and damaged landscape, populated by people and peoples living
and dying in many sorts of contested ecologies and economies. The lar-
vae of the leap-frogging spring eastern monarch migrations from south
to north face the consequences of genetic and chemical technologies of
mass industrial agriculture that make their indispensable food—the

                                             the camille stories        141
leaves of native, local milkweeds—unavailable along most of the routes.
Not just the presence of any milkweed, but the seasonal appearance of lo-
cal milkweed varieties from Mexico to Canada, is syncopated in the flesh
of monarch caterpillars. Some milkweed species flourish in disturbed
land; they are good pioneer plants. The common milkweed of central
and eastern North America, Asclepias syriaca, is such an early successional
plant. Milkweeds thrive on roadsides and between crop furrows, and
these are the milkweeds that are especially susceptible to herbicides like
Monsanto’s glyphosphate-containing herbicide, Roundup. Another milk-
weed is also important to the eastern migration of monarchs, namely the
climax prairie species native to grasslands in later successional stages.
With the nearly complete destruction of climax prairies across North
America, this milkweed, Asclepias meadii, is fiercely endangered.13
    Throughout the spring, summer, and fall, a large variety of early,
midseason, and late flowering plants, including milkweed blossoms,
produce the nectar sucked greedily by monarch adults. On the southern
journey to Mexico, the future of the North American eastern migration
is threatened by loss of the habitats of nectar-producing plants to feed
the nonbreeding adults flying to overwinter in their favorite roosting
trees in mountain woodlands. These woodlands in turn face natural-
cultural degradation in complex histories of ongoing state, class, and
ethnic oppression of campesinos and indigenous peoples in the region,
for example, the Mazahuas and Otomi.14
    Unhinged in space and time and stripped of food in both directions,
larvae starve and hungry adults grow sluggish and fail to reach their
winter homes. Migrations fail across the Americas. The trees in cen-
tral Mexico mourn the loss of their winter shimmying clusters, and the
meadows, farms, and town gardens of the United States and southern
Canada are desolate in summer without the flitting shimmer of orange
and black.
    For the child’s symbionts, Camille 1’s birthing parent chose monarch
butterflies of North America, in two magnificent but severely damaged
streams, from Canada to Mexico, and from the state of Washington,
along California, and across the Rocky Mountains. Camille’s gestational
parent exercised reproductive freedom with wild hope, choosing to bond
the soon-to-be-born fetus with both the western and eastern currents
of this braid of butterfly motion. That meant that Camille of the first
generation, and further Camilles for four more human generations at
least, would grow in knowledge and know-how committed to the on-

142   chapter eight
goingness of these gorgeous and threatened insects and their human
and nonhuman communities all along the pathways and nodes of their
migrations and residencies in these places and corridors, not all the time
everywhere. Camille’s community understood that monarchs as a wide-
spread global species are not threatened; but two grand currents of a
continental migration, a vast connected sweep of myriad critters living
and dying together, were on the brink of perishing.
   The child-bearing parent who chose the monarch butterfly as Camille’s
symbiont was a single person with the response-ability to exercise potent,
noninnocent, generative freedom that was pregnant with consequences
for ramifying worlds across five generations. That irreducible singular-
ity, that particular exercise of reproductive choice, set in train a several-
hundred-year effort, involving many actors, to keep alive practices of mi-
gration across and along continents for all the migrations’ critters. The
Communities of Compost did not align their children to “endangered
species” as that term had been developed in conservation organizations
in the twentieth century. Rather, the Communities of Compost under-
stood their task to be to cultivate and invent the arts of living with and
for damaged worlds in place, not as an abstraction or a type, but as and
for those living and dying in ruined places. All the Camilles grew rich
in worldly communities throughout life, as work and play with and for
the butterflies made for intense residencies and active migrations with
a host of people and other critters. As one Camille approached death, a
new Camille would be born to the community in time so that the elder,
as mentor in symbiosis, could teach the younger to be ready.15
   The Camilles knew the work could fail at any time. The dangers
remained intense. As a legacy of centuries of economic, cultural, and
ecological exploitation both of people and other beings, excess extinc-
tions and exterminations continued to stalk the earth. Still, successfully
holding open space for other critters and their committed people also
flourished, and multispecies partnerships of many kinds contributed to
building a habitable earth in sustained troubled times.


The Camille Stories
The story I tell below tracks the five Camilles along only a few threads and knots
of their lifeways, between the birth of Camille 1 in 2025 and the death of Camille 5
in 2425. The story I tell here cries out for collaborative and divergent story-making
practices, in narrative, audio, and visual performances and texts in materialities

                                                   the camille stories           143
from digital to sculptural to everything practicable. My stories are suggestive
string figures at best; they long for a fuller weave that still keeps the patterns
open, with ramifying attachment sites for storytellers yet to come. I hope readers
change parts of the story and take them elsewhere, enlarge, object, flesh out, and
reimagine the lifeways of the Camilles.
   The Camille Stories reach only to five generations, not yet able to fulfill the
obligations that the Haudenosaunee Confederacy imposed on themselves and so
on anyone who has been touched by the account, even in acts of unacknowledged
appropriation, namely, to act so as to be response-able to and for those in the
seventh generation to come.16 The Children of Compost beyond the reach of the
Camille Stories might become capable of that kind of worlding, which somehow
once seemed possible, before the Great Acceleration of the Capitalocene and the
Great Dithering.
   Over the five generations of the Camilles, the total number of human beings
on earth, including persons in symbiosis with vulnerable animals chosen by their
birth parent (syms) and those not in such symbioses (non-syms), declined from
the high point of 10 billion in 2100 to a stable level of 3 billion by 2400. If the
Communities of Compost had not proved from their earliest years so successful
and so infectious among other human people and peoples, the earth’s population
would have reached more than 11 billion by 2100. The breathing room provided by
that difference of a billion human people opened up possibilities for ongoingness
for many threatened ways of living and dying for both human and nonhuman
beings.17


                                   CAMILLE 1

                 Born 2025. Human numbers are 8 billion.
                 Died 2100. Human numbers are 10 billion.

In 2020, about three hundred people with diverse class, racial, religious,
and regional heritages, including two hundred adults of the four major
genders practiced at the time18 and one hundred children under the age
of eighteen, built a town where the New River and Gauley River flowed
together to form the Kanawha River in West Virginia. They named the
settlement New Gauley to honor the lands and waters devastated by
mountaintop removal coal mining. Historians of this time have sug-
gested that the period between about 2000 and 2050 on earth should
be called the Great Dithering.19 The Great Dithering was a time of inef-
fective and widespread anxiety about environmental destruction, un-

144   chapter eight
8.3. Monarch butterfly caterpillar Danaus plexippus on a milkweed pod.
Photograph by Singer S. Ron, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.


mistakable evidence of accelerating mass extinctions, violent climate
change, social disintegration, widening wars, ongoing human popula-
tion increase due to the large numbers of already-born youngsters (even
though birth rates most places had fallen below replacement rate), and
vast migrations of human and nonhuman refugees without refuges.
   During this terrible period, when it was nonetheless still possible for
concerted action to make a difference, numerous communities emerged
across the earth. The English-language name for these gatherings was
the Communities of Compost; the people called themselves compostists.
Many other names in many languages also proposed the string figure
game of collective resurgence. These communities understood that the
Great Dithering could end in terminal crises; or radical collective action
could ferment a turbulent but generative time of reversals, revolt, revo-
lution, and resurgence.
   For the first few years, the adults of New Gauley did not birth any
new children, but concentrated on building culture, economy, rituals,
and politics in which oddkin would be abundant, and children would
be rare but precious.20 The kin-making work and play of the commu-
nity built capacities critical for resurgence and multispecies flourishing.
In particular, friendship as a kin-making practice throughout life was

                                                 the camille stories     145
elaborated and celebrated. In 2025, the community felt ready to birth
their first new babies to be bonded with animal symbionts. The adults
judged that most of their already-born children, who had helped found
the community, were ready and eager to be older siblings to the coming
symbiont youngsters. Everybody believed that this kind of sympoiesis
had not been practiced anywhere on earth before. People knew it would
not be simple to learn to live collectively in intimate and worldly care-
taking symbiosis with another animal as a practice of repairing damaged
places and making flourishing multispecies futures.
    Camille 1 was born among a small group of five children, and per21 was
the only youngster linked to an insect. Other children in this first co-
hort became symbionts with fish (American eel, Anguilla rostrata), birds
(American kestrel, Falco sparverius), crustaceans (the Big Sandy crayfish,
Cambarus veteranus), and amphibians (streamside salamander, Ambys-
toma barbouri).22 Beginning with vulnerable bats, mammal symbioses
were undertaken in the second wave of births about five years later. It
was often easier to identify migratory threatened insects, fish, mammals,
and birds as potential symbionts for new children than reptiles, amphibi-
ans, and crustaceans. The preference for migratory symbionts was often
relaxed, especially since corridor conservation of all kinds was ever more
urgent as rising temperatures due to climate change forced many usu-
ally nonmigratory species outside their previous ranges. Although their
first loves remained traveling critters and far-flung pathways—mostly
because their own small human communities were made geographically
and culturally more worldly through cultivating the linkages required to
take care of their partners in symbiosis—some members of the Com-
munities of Compost committed themselves to critters in tiny remnant
habitats, as well as to those whose finicky ecological requirements and
love of home tied them tightly to particular places only.23
    Over the first hundred years, New Gauley welcomed 100 new births
with babies joined to animal symbionts, 10 births to single parents or
couples who declined the three-parent model and whose offspring did
not receive these sorts of symbionts, 200 deaths, 175 in-migrants, and
50 out-migrants. The scientists of the Communities of Compost found it
impossible to establish successful animal-human symbioses with adults;
the critical receptive times for humans were fetal development, nursing,
and adolescence. During the times that they contributed cellular or mo-
lecular materials for modifying the human partner, the animal partners
also had to be in a period of transformation, such as hatching, larval

146   chapter eight
ecdysis, or metamorphosis. The animals themselves were not modified
with human material; their roles in the symbioses were to teach and to
flourish in every way possible in dangerous and damaged times.
   Almost everywhere, the Communities of Compost committed them-
selves to maintaining their size or to growing through immigration,
while keeping their own new births at a level compatible with the earth’s
overall human numbers eventually declining by two-thirds. If new in-
migrants accepted the basic practices of the Communities of Compost,
upon request they received permanent residency and citizenship rights
as compostists in inventive and usually raucous kin-making ceremonies.
Nonresident visitors were always welcome; hospitality was regarded as
both a basic obligation and source of mutual renewal. Visitors’ lengths
of stay could become a contentious matter and was even known to break
up kin affiliations and sometimes entire compostist communities.
   If many more in-migrants wanted to join Communities of Compost
than were possible to accommodate, new settlements formed with men-
tors from the seed towns. In-migrants in the early centuries often came
from ruined areas elsewhere, and their seeking both refuge and belong-
ing in the Communities of Compost—themselves committed to the arts
of living in damaged places—was an act of both desperation and faith.
The original founders of the Communities of Compost quickly realized
that in-migrants from desperate situations brought with them not only
trauma, but also extraordinary insight and skill for the work to be done.
Resettlement in still other ruined sites and establishment of alliances
and collaborations with people and other critters in those areas required
the best abilities of the mentors and the in-migrants. Plant symbionts
were not joined to babies in the Communities of Compost for several gen-
erations, although recognizing profuse sympoiesis—world making—
with plants was fundamental for all compostists.
   New Gauley decided to emphasize in-migration of people over new
births for the first three generations, and after that time there was both
more flexibility and the need to recalibrate births and deaths. In- and
out-migration tended to equalize as more places on earth restored con-
ditions for modest resurgence and reasons for seeking new homes rested
much less on war, exploitation, genocide, and ecological devastation,
and much more on adventure, curiosity, desire for new kinds of abun-
dance and skill, and the old habits of human beings to move, including
hunter-gatherers, pastoralists, and farm-and-town-living people. Oppor-
tunistic social species tend to move around a lot; human beings outside

                                            the camille stories       147
captivity have always been extraordinary ecosocial opportunists, travel-
ers, and path makers. Added to that, by 2300, more than a billion human
beings on earth had themselves been born into new kinds of symbiotic
relationships with other critters, in addition to the much older multispe-
cies associations that characterized human people as well as every other
sort of living being throughout ecological, evolutionary, developmental,
historical, and technological histories.
   Before birth, Camille 1 was given a suite of pattern-forming genes ex-
pressed on monarch surfaces over their transformations from caterpillar
to winged adult. Camille 1 also received genes allowing per to taste in
the wind the dilute chemical signals crucial to adult monarchs selecting
diverse nectar-rich flowers and the best milkweed leaves for depositing
their eggs. Camille 1’s gut and mouth microbiomes were enhanced to
allow per to safely savor milkweed plants containing the toxic alkaloids
that the monarchs accumulate in their flesh to deter predators. As an
infant, Camille 1’s oral satisfactions with fragrant mammalian milk were
laced with the bitter tastes of cardiac glycosides, tastes that the human
parent nursing per dared not share. In per’s maturing mindful body, Ca-
mille 1 had to learn to become in symbiosis with an insect composed as
five caterpillar instars before metamorphosis into a flying adult, which
in turn experienced seasonally alternating sexually excited phases and
sexually quiet diapause. The symbiogenetic join of Camille and mon-
archs also had to accommodate the diverse parasitic and beneficial asso-
ciates of the butterfly holobiont, as well as pay attention to the genetics
of the migrating populations.24
   The compostists did not attempt to introduce into Camille 1’s already
complicated symbiotic reformatting any of the genes and timing pat-
terns that the butterflies use to utterly disassemble and recompose their
entire being in the chrysalis before emerging as winged imagos. Nor
did the parents attempt to alter Camille’s visual capacities and neural
arrangements to perceive physically in the butterfly color spectrum, or
to see as if Camille had the compound eyes of an insect. Mimesis was
not the point of the alterations, but fleshly suggestions braided through
innovative pedagogical practices of naturalsocial becoming-with that
could help the symbiosis thrive through five human generations com-
mitted to healing damaged human and nonhuman lives and places. In
its most reductive expression, the point was to give the butterflies and
their people—to give the Migrations—a chance to have a future in a
time of mass extinctions.

148   chapter eight
    By five years of age, Camille 1’s skin was brilliantly banded and col-
ored in yellow and black like a late-stage monarch caterpillar, increasing
in intensity until age ten. But by initiation into adult responsibilities
at age fifteen, Camille 1’s skin had the muted tones and patterns of the
monarch chrysalis. As an adult, Camille 1 gradually acquired the pattern
and coloration of a vibrant orange and black adult butterfly. Camille 1’s
adult body was more androgynous in appearance than that of sexually
dimorphic monarch adults.
    All of the symbiont children developed both visible traits and sub-
tle sensory similarities to their animal partners in early childhood. Al-
though they should not have been surprised, the consequences of this
developmental fact blindsided the adult compostists, as the first serious
conflicts in New Gauley erupted in the learning groups of the young.
Five youngsters who were bonded to animal symbionts, two children
born to dissenting parents, and so not bonded with such symbionts, and
five in-migrant children without symbionts made up the first cohort of
little ones. The symbiotic young were struggling to integrate mindful
bodies unimaginable to their parents. In addition, each symbiosis was
the only one of its kind in these early generations.
    Camille 1 formed fierce friendships, especially with Kess, the young-
ster bonded with the American kestrels; but each symbiotic child was
acutely aware of their irreducible difference. Kess and Camille gravitated
to each other partly because they knew kestrels ate butterflies, and both
of their threatened animal symbionts flourished best in fields, meadows,
roadsides, pastures, and mixed woodlands full of a myriad of flowering
plants. From the beginning, the symbiont children developed a com-
plex subjectivity composed of loneliness, intense sociality, intimacy with
nonhuman others, specialness, lack of choice, fullness of meaning, and
sureness of future purpose. This landscape of converging and diverg-
ing feelings tended to grade into arrogance and exceptionalism toward
the nonsymbiotic children, and even toward their parents and other
nonsymbiotic adults of New Gauley. Because symbionts were still rare
in the overall population of an area in the initial generations after the
first Communities of Compost were established, in vulnerable moments
nonsymbiotic children and adults could and did feel the symbionts were
freaks, both more-than- and other-than-human, and seriously threat-
ening. Remembering that humanity meant humus, and not Anthro-
pos or Homo, did not come easily in the webs of Western cultures that
predominated in New Gauley. Determined to help youngsters through

                                            the camille stories       149
the mazes of self-preoccupation, social enthusiasm, playfulness, pride
in each other, fear, competition, and bullying that they had known in
school, the New Gauley adults and their young were faced with quite
another challenge in the emerging community of both symbiotic and
nonsymbiotic children.
   New Gauley compostists soon found that storytelling was the most
powerful practice for comforting, inspiring, remembering, warning, nur-
turing compassion, mourning, and becoming-with each other in their
differences, hopes, and terrors. Of course, the Communities of Compost
emphasized a deep and wide range of approaches to educating both
young and old, and the sciences and arts were especially elaborated and
cherished. For youngsters and adults of most species in the communi-
ties, play was the most powerful and diverse activity for rearranging old
things and proposing new things, new patterns of feeling and action,
and for crafting safe enough ways to tangle with each other in conflict
and collaboration.25 The practice of friendship and the practice of play,
both ritualized and celebrated in small and large ways, were the core
kin-forming apparatuses. Libraries in many formats and materialities
abounded to evoke curiosities and sustain knowledge projects for learn-
ing to live and die well in the work of healing damaged places, selves,
and other beings. Decolonial multispecies studies (including diverse
and multimodal human and nonhuman languages) and an indefinitely
expandable transknowledging approach called EcoEvoDevoHistoEthno-
TechnoPsycho (Ecological Evolutionary Developmental Historical Eth-
nographic Technological Psychological studies) were essential layered
and knotted inquiries for compostists.26
   Compostists eagerly found out everything they could about experi-
mental, intentional, utopian, dystopian, and revolutionary communities
and movements across times and places. One of their great disappoint-
ments in these accounts was that so many started from the premises of
starting over and beginning anew, instead of learning to inherit without
denial and stay with the trouble of damaged worlds. Although hardly
free of the sterilizing narrative of wiping the world clean by apoca-
lypse or salvation, the richest humus for their inquiries turned out to
be sf —science fiction and fantasy, speculative fabulation, speculative
feminism, and string figures. Blocking the foreclosures of utopias, sf
kept politics alive.
   So storytelling was the seed bag for flourishing for compostists, and
Camille 1 was fed on stories. Because the brave young princess loved the

150   chapter eight
toxic forest beings, especially the despised and feared insects called the
Ohmu, Camille’s favorite story was Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind. Like
a turbo butterfly, Nausicaä could fly over the forest, fields, and towns on
her agile personal jet-powered glider. The young Camille 1 could never
resist that vivid sensation. Hayao Miyazaki’s manga and anime story is
set on a postapocalyptic earth menaced by the toxic forest’s critters, who
were defending themselves and taking revenge for the natural world’s
relentless destruction at the hands of militarized, power-mad, techno-
logical humans. Evil rulers continued to promise ultimate destruction
in their drive to exterminate the toxic forest and extract the last drams
of resources for the walled cities of privilege and exception. Through
her study of the forest’s ecology, understanding of the physiology of
the mushroomlike infected poisonous trees, and love for the danger-
ous mutant giant insects and their larvae, Nausicaä triumphed in her
efforts to save both the people and the forest. She discovered that the
trees purified the toxins and drop by drop were forming a vast under-
ground aquifer of pure water that could regenerate the biodiverse earth.
Attuned to the languages of the plants, fungi, and animals, Nausicaä
could calm the incomprehension and fear of the people who were poi-
soned by the toxic emanations of the disturbed forest. She could propose
peace between humans and other-than-humans because she befriended
the toxic forest, a practice that reached deep into the young Camille 1’s
psyche. In the dramatic concluding scenes of the story, at great risk to
herself, Nausicaä rescued a threatened larval Ohmu and so stopped the
stampede of its giant adult conspecifics in their rage at the humans’
capturing and wounding of the youngster.
   Camille 1 learned that there were many inspirations for Miyazaki’s
story,27 including a Phaecian princess from Homer’s Odyssey named
Nausicaä, who loved nature and music, cultivated a fervid imagination,
and disdained possessions. Along with European medieval accounts of
witches’ mastery of the winds, Master Windkey from Ursula Le Guin’s
Earthsea also infused the Nausicaä tale. The adult Camille 1 thought that
the most generative inspiration, however, was a Japanese story from
the Heian period, called “The Princess Who Loved Insects.”28 The prin-
cess did not beautify herself by blackening her teeth or plucking her
eyebrows, and she scorned the idea of a husband. All her passions were
for the caterpillars and creeping crawling critters disdained by others.29
   Nausicaä had a companion animal, really a symbiont, a fierce and
gentle little fox squirrel. In per’s memoir, the elder Camille 1 described

                                             the camille stories        151
Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind as a fable of great danger and great
companionship. Unlike conventional heroes, Nausicaä accompanied by
animals, is a girl child and healer, whose courage matures in thick con-
nection with many others and many kinds of others. Nausicaä cannot
act alone, and also her personal response-ability and actions have great
consequences for herself and for myriad human and nonhuman beings.
Nausicaä’s connections and corridors are practical and material, as well
as fabulous and enspirited in bumptious animist fashion. Hers are the
arts of living on a damaged planet. This twentieth-century Japanese
anime child sustained Camille 1 in symbiosis with the monarchs for a
lifetime.


                               CAMILLE 2

             Born in 2085. Human numbers are 9.5 billion.
              Died in 2185. Human numbers are 8 billion.

At initiation at age fifteen, as a coming-of-age gift the second Camille
decided to ask for chin implants of butterfly antennae, a kind of tentac-
ular beard, so that more vivid tasting of the flying insects’ worlds could
become the heritage of the human partner too, helping in the work and
adding to the corporeal pleasures of becoming-with.30 Proud of this vi-
brant sign of the lived symbiosis now in its second generation, once the
procedures were complete the adolescent Camille 2 undertook a trip to
the overwintering habitat of the eastern migration to meet with indig-
enous people and campesinos who were rehabilitating damaged lands
and waters along the transvolcanic belt between the states of México
and Michoacán.
   Camille 1 had been Camille 2’s mentor, and over the first fifteen years
of the new child’s life Camille 1 tried to prepare the second-generation
New Gauley human-butterfly symbiont for sustained visiting as the
guest of the diverse communities of Michoacán. But Camille 1’s life-
work had been almost entirely along the corridors and in the towns,
fields, mines, woods, coasts, mountains, deserts, and cities of the great
eastern and western monarch migrations that are north of Mexico, into
southern Canada on the east and into Washington and the Northern
Rockies on the west. Camille 1 worked, played, and struggled primarily
with midwestern and southern farmers, agribusiness scientists, energy
companies and their ruthless lawyers, mine workers, unemployed peo-

152   chapter eight
8.4. Monarch butterfly resting on fennel in the Pismo Butterfly Grove near the
entrance to Pismo Beach State Park, November 15, 2008. Photograph
by docentjoyce / Wikimedia Commons.



ple, nature lovers, gardeners, corridor ecologists, insect specialists, and
climate scientists, as well as artists performing with and for nonhuman
critters. Although based in New Gauley and attuned especially to the
ravaged landscapes and peoples of coal country there and across the
continent,31 Camille 1 also sojourned with the insects and their people in
the winter homes of the western migration of the monarchs, especially
along the Monterey Bay of Central California. So per understood the
biological, cultural, historical worlds of these clusters of monarchs cling-
ing to their local Monterey pines and crucial (if never really accepted by
ecological nativists) Australian gum trees.
   Both sym and non-sym people across this vast expanse of land expe-
rienced the sympoieses of the Children of Compost primarily through
their biological semiotic materialities. Of course, as an important compo-
nent of per’s education and working alliances as both child and adult, Ca-
mille 1 had studied with Native American, First Nation, and Métis teach-
ers, who explained and performed diverse practices and knowledges for
conjoined human and other-than-human becoming and exchange. But

                                                  the camille stories            153
Camille 1 had never deeply questioned the settler practices or catego-
ries of nature, culture, and biology that made per’s own transformative
sympoiesis with monarchs comprehensible to perself. For practical and
political, as well as ontological and epistemological, reasons, Camille 1
recognized the urgent need both to deepen and to change the terms
of the exchanges and collaborations with people, peoples, and other-
than-human critters in the southern migrations and residencies of the
monarchs in Mexico.
   And so, although well read in decolonial and postcolonial literatures
and engaged in lifelong correspondence with Mexican comrades, several
of whom had personally made the journey to New Gauley and to Cali-
fornia’s Santa Cruz to meet with the Communities of Compost there,
Camille 1 died before encountering monarch sympoiesis in material se-
miotic forms other than symbiogenesis. Then, on the first Día de los
Muertos of per’s first sojourn in Mexico after coming of age, Camille 2
was introduced to the Monarcas returning to their winter mountain
home in November as the souls of the Mazahua dead. The Monarcas
did not represent the souls of the dead; they were syms of the living but-
terflies and the human dead, in multinaturalist worldings that Camille
2 had studied but could barely recognize and did not know how to greet.
   There were Communities of Compost in Michoacán and all over Mex-
ico that had birthed symbiogenetic children for the work of rehabilitat-
ing ruined lands and waters through the coming generations. Mexicans
were as much at home in the extended apparatuses of naturalcultural,
biological knowledges and practices as their northern comrades. But
none of the Mexican Communities of Compost, no matter their set-
tler, mixed, or native heritages, had joined a human baby to migrating
endangered critters that were themselves the visiting ancestors. The
consequences of Camille 2’s powerful introduction to the Monarca sym-
poiesis that joined the overwintering winged insects and the visiting
ancestors reshaped the fabric of work for ecojustice that joined New
Gauley and the communities of the transvolcanic belt for the coming
three hundred years. Searching for a term they could share, Camille 2
and per’s Mazahua hosts decided to name this kind of becoming-with
“symanimagenesis.” The corridors, migrations, and contact zones of the
monarchs collect up many ways of living and dying across the Americas!
   Thus the Mazahuas of central Mexico (México, Michoacán, and Que-
retaro) became vital to Camille’s story from the second generation on.
Decolonial work on all sides of the border had to be intrinsic to every

154   chapter eight
form of sympoiesis with the monarchs.32 Struggling with the conse-
quences for the Communities of Compost of practices of conservation
and restoration inherited from Anglo and Spanish settler colonialism
and of both the Mexican and U.S. states’ ongoing suppression of and
extraction from indigenous peoples, Camille 2 no longer could not know
about the Mazahuas’ land and water struggles, migrations to near and
distant cities for ill-paid work, customary and illegal forest cutting, char-
coal making, history of acting to preserve the trees and woodlands be-
fore the butterfly migration became an international issue, history also
of old and new indigenous and outsider exploitation of the forest and
the watershed, and resistance to U.S. and other foreign scientists and
Mexican state regulations and bureaucrats that criminalize local subsis-
tence practices in the butterfly preserve that became a World Heritage
Site.
   In Camille 2’s first weeks in Mazahua monarch country, the women of
the communities in and around the butterfly reserve took per in hand.33
When the young sym arrived in autumn of 2100, the radical Mazahua
women were celebrating the ninety-sixth anniversary of the founding
of their movement. In 2004, “symbolically armed with farming tools
and wooden rifles, they formed el Ejército de Mujeres Zapatistas en De-
fensa del Agua and pledged a strategy of non-violence.”34 The Zapatista
movement had begun with a transformative armed uprising in Chiapas
on January 1, 1994, but the Zapatistas’ most important contribution to
the ongoing strategies of the Mazahuan communities was their develop-
ment of vigorous nonviolence in a broad, multigenerational opposition
front.35 Communities of Compost all over the world studied Zapatista-
held municipalities called caracoles (snail shells).
   Initiating the visiting New Gauley sym into intense relationships
with the living dead was the Mazahua women’s first priority. Politely
resisting the temptation to thread their fingers continuously though
the sensitive tentacular organs of their oddly bearded visitor, they were
charmed by the butterfly antennae on Camille 2’s chin and by per’s viv-
idly colored adult skin patterns that had gradually replaced the dramatic
caterpillar skin banding of the younger child. The Mazahuas were confi-
dent that these markings signified that the adolescent would become an
apt student of their own human-butterfly worldings, and so a useful ally.
To join in the work of human and other-than-human rehabilitation and
multispecies environmental justice in indigenous territory, which had
been dominated and drained for centuries by the state and other outside

                                              the camille stories         155
forces, Camille 2 had to study the resurgence of peoples that ignited in
the early years of the twenty-first century.
   On the night the monarchas returned in November 2100, the women
taught Camille 2 a poem, “Soy Mazahua,” composed by Julio Garduño
Cervantes, which remained vital to their work for the dead and the liv-
ing. The beautifully dressed people at the fiesta were singing the poem in
the midst of extravagant fireworks, feasting, and greeting returning kin.
The poem commemorated a Mazahua leader who had been murdered
in 1980 on the way home from a cemetery on el Día de los Muertos.
All over Mexico, this killing outraged indigenous pueblos and ignited a
movement that was stronger than ever by the time Camille 2 visited. The
women of El Ejército de Mujeres Zapatistas en Defensa del Agua taught
that butterflies drank the tears of those who mourned the murdered,
raped, and disappeared ones of every land.36
  I AM MAZAHUA

  You have wanted to deny my existence
  But I do not deny yours.
  But I exist. I am Mazahua.
  ...
  I am made of this land, the air, water and sun.
  And together we repeat, We are Mazahuas
  ...
  You have enslaved my ancestors and stolen their lands. You have
  murdered them.
  ...
  I build the house but you live in it.
  You are the criminal but I am in prison.
  We made the revolution but you took advantage of it.
  My voice rises and joins with a thousand others.
  And together we repeat, We are Mazahuas
  Our hands sowed for everyone.
  Our hands will struggle for everyone.
  I am Mazahua.
      —Julio Garduño Cervantes

Camille 2 found it difficult at first to grasp how active the dead were
across this region and how critical to the work of compostists to restore
damaged land and its human and nonhuman beings.37 Camille 2 had to

156     chapter eight
learn to let go of colonialist notions of religion and secularism to begin
to appreciate the sheer semiotic materiality of those who came before.
Until sympoiesis with the dead could be acknowledged, sympoiesis with
the living was radically incomplete. Visiting urbanites from Mexico City
were no better at seriously engaging the epistemological, ontological,
and practical demands of this aspect of indigenous cosmopolitics than
Camille 2 was. Modernity and its category work proved terribly durable
for hundreds of years after the withering critique conducted in the late
twentieth and early twenty-first centuries had made explicit adherence
to the tenets of philosophical and political modernity unthinkable for
serious people, including scientists and artists. Modernity was driven
underground, but remained undead. Making peace with this vampire
ancestor was an urgent task for the Communities of Compost.38
   In the early weeks of Camille2’s sojourn, the teenage Mazahua women
of El Ejército de Mujeres Zapatistas en Defensa del Agua undertook the
task of teaching the sym about the struggle for water and forest eco-
justice in the region. Throughout the late twentieth and twenty-first
centuries, in immense water transfer projects, Mexico City drew this
precious fluid from the lakes, rivers, and aquifers that reached across
the mountains and into the basins occupied by indigenous peoples and
other critters to the north and west.39 This practice was immensely de-
structive, a fact highlighted in a 2015 report of the Union of Scientists
Committed to Society, which argued, “Transferring water, moving large
volumes from one basin to another, is not only unsustainable and affects
the environment in the medium and long term, but also causes forced
displacements that destroy towns and communities and marginalize
people, who are obliged to move to the poverty belts of the large cities.”40
By the time of the birth of Camille 1, the Cutzamala System already
pumped 127 billion gallons per year to Mexico City and its twenty-seven
municipalities, while the Mazahua communities did not have potable
water. El Ejército de Mujeres Zapatistas en Defensa del Agua carried
out relentless demonstrations and actions in Mexico City and elsewhere
and won many partial victories. The struggle continued throughout
Camille 2’s lifetime and after. In sympoiesis, the monarch critters, hu-
man and other-than-human, drank from the healing tears of the living
and the dead.41




                                             the camille stories         157
8.5. Mural painted by youth in La Hormiga, Putumayo, in southwestern
Colombia depicting landscapes before and after aerial fumigation during the
U.S.-Colombia “War on Drugs.” Photograph by Kristina Lyons.
                               CAMILLE 3

              Born in 2170; human numbers are 8.5 billion.
               Died in 2270; human numbers are 6 billion.

By this generation, two-thirds of the residents of the Communities of
Compost around the world were symbionts engaged in intense work
and play for sustaining vulnerable beings across the hardest centuries
of planetary crisis and widespread human and other-than-human suf-
fering. A significant number of syms had decided to leave their com-
postist communities, surrendering residency rights for citizenship in
other political formations. Some humans, both in-migrants and non-
sym offspring born in the new towns, became solid compostists without
ever wanting to engage personally in symbiogenetic kin making. Allied
with diverse non-sym peoples, compostist practices of living and dying
flourished everywhere, and the people in the emerging epoch of par-
tial healing felt deeply entangled with the ongoing tentacular Chthu-
lucene. There had been great losses of kinds of living beings, as rapid
climate change and interlocked ecosystem collapses swept the earth; and
the mass extinction event of the Capitalocene and Anthropocene was
not over.
   Still, by the time Camille 3 was fifty years old, it was clear that hu-
man numbers, while still too heavy in most places for the damaged
natural, social, and technical systems of earth to sustain, were declin-
ing within a deliberate pattern of heightened environmental justice.
That pattern emphasized a preference for the poor among humans, a
preference for biodiverse naturalsocial ecosystems, and a preference
for the most vulnerable among other critters and their habitats. Much
of the most inventive work over the 150 years since the first compos-
tist communities appeared was developing the linkages of this pattern.
That work required both powerful recognition and strengthening of
inherited Chthulucene practices that had not been fully obliterated in
the Capitalocene and Anthropocene, and also newly invented ways of
linking the three critical preferences to each other. The wealthiest and
highest-consuming human populations reduced new births the most,
with the support of the Communities of Compost; but human births
everywhere were deliberately below replacement rates, so as to slowly
and effectively reach levels that made sense for distributed and diverse


                                            the camille stories        159
humanity as humus, rather than as end points of nature and culture.
Practices of making kin, not babies, had taken hold inside and outside
the Communities of Compost.
   Against all expectations in the early twenty-first century, after only
150 years sympoieses, both symbiogenetic and symanimagenic, seemed
to be making a difference in holding open time and space for many of
earth’s most vulnerable, including the monarch migrations and their
diverse human people and peoples. Forests in the transvolcanic belt of
Mexico were resurgent, and water had been restored to the pillaged aqui-
fers. People had worked out robust peace with the critters and scientists
of the Biosphere Reserve, as greater control was relocated to campes-
ino and indigenous organizations for environmental justice. Migrations
north of Mexico now could count on larval and adult food as nonmono-
cropping organic agriculture, ubiquitous gardens, and species-rich road-
side verges filled the landscape. Devastation of habitats for people and
other critters caused by Big Energy and Big Capital was not finished, but
the tide had definitively turned.
   Humus-friendly technological innovation, creative rituals and cele-
brations, profound economic restructuring, reconfiguration of political
control, demilitarization, and sustained work for connecting corridors
and for ecological, cultural, and political restoration had all made an
impact and were growing in force. While Camille 3 could not forget the
monarchs, per’s attention was turned to the fact that syms needed to
take stock of themselves collectively in unprecedented ways.
   The major events of Camille 3’s life were travels to gatherings around
the world of sym and non-sym humans in the face of general recognition
that both humanity and animality had been fundamentally transformed
by compostist practices. Of course, many peoples of earth had never di-
vided living beings into human and animal; nonetheless, they had all or-
dered things differently from what was plainly happening everywhere by
2200. It was also inescapably clear by 2200 that the changes were not the
same everywhere. Sym worlding was not one thing, and it was diverg-
ing and adapting exuberantly in EcoEvoDevoHistoTechnoEthnoPsycho
fashion. The recognition was turbulent, exhilarating, and dangerous.
The crises of bullying among the children in Camille 1’s generation were
nothing to the terrors of transition in the third generation of the Com-
munities of Compost, who would in a few more generations become the
majority of people on earth. Inventing earthwide cosmopolitics between


160   chapter eight
8.6. Kenojuak Ashevak, Animals of Land and Sea, 1991, stonecut with stencil,
25 = 30 in. (paper). Courtesy of Dorset Fine Arts.



and among syms and non-syms was the daunting task of Camille 3’s
generation.
   Peoples from every fold of earth had long been both generated and
nourished by stories, myths, performances, powers, and embodiments
of entities not divided into categories recognizable to most conventional
Western philosophy and politics. Such stories and embodiments were
also deeply embedded in the practices and accounts of both recent and
long-established peoples living throughout what was once called the
West. Camille 3’s generation found biologies and storytelling to be the
richest veins for weaving the needed fabrics to bind syms and non-syms
together.
   Coming-of-age stories in sf, from Joanna Russ’s Alyx in The Adven-
tures of Alyx to Julie Czerneda’s decidedly nonhumanoid young female
entity Esen-alit-Quar in her Web Shifters series, entranced many in Ca-
mille 3’s generation, and these tales had been carefully maintained in the


                                                 the camille stories           161
compostist archives. Camille 3 was especially drawn to Philip Pullman’s
twentieth-century stories about the young girl Lyra Belacqua and her
daemon, Pantalaimon.42 The animal daemons of human beings were ca-
pable of multiple transformations until the time of human adolescence,
when the animal stabilized into a single morph. Pullman imagined the
daemons as expressions of a tripartite human person, rather than as a
distinct beings; but compostist syms had other and better resources for
understanding the join, which did not rely on the trinary soul/body/
mind heritage that Pullman used in his war against both monotheism
and the Authority. Compostists understood the daemons in less onto-
logically purified ways, more entangled with situated animisms in di-
verse modern and traditional, past and present worlds. The bonds be-
tween human and daemon were very close to the symbiogenetic linkages
forged for the young in compostist communities. Severing such bonds
threatened persons at the deepest core of their being. Living-with was
the only possible way to live-well. Heartened by these stories between
and during endless meetings among quibbling and not infrequently
fearful syms and non-syms, the critters of earth were forging planetwide
ontological revolutions for making kin.


                               CAMILLE 4

              Born in 2255. Human numbers are 6.5 billion.
              Died in 2355. Human numbers are 3.5 billion.

After decades of heartening progress, new viral diseases afflicting soil-
based fungal symbionts of food plants needed by many species in the
subfamily Danainae to fight off their own protozoan parasites emerged
earthwide too quickly for response.43 The monarchs joined the myriad
kinds of beings that disappeared in the ongoing great extinctions
that had been unloosed by the Plantationocene, Anthropocene and
Capitalocene. Near the end of life, witnessing the loss of the great
monarch migrations across the Americas, and with them the loss of
the patterns of living and dying they sustained, Camille 4 knew that
mentoring Camille 5 would take other paths than those that had guided
Camille 3’s teaching of Camille 4.
   In a diary archived by the compostists, Camille 4 wrote about per’s
wrenching feelings in 2340 at the age of eighty-five, while watching the


162   chapter eight
8.7. The relations of infectious disease and parasitism are not the enemies of
earth’s critters; the killing of ongoingness—double death—is the crime. “When
monarch butterflies are heavily infected with the protozoan parasite Ophryocystis
elektroscirrha, they can sometimes get stuck to their chrysalis. In this case, a paper
wasp takes advantage of the situation.” Photograph and description by Jaap de
Roode, Emory University.



celebrations for fifteen-year-old Camille 5’s initiation into full sym re-
sponsibilities. Involved for decades in research on the ecologies of the
insects in their human and nonhuman holobiomes, Camille 4 had been
studying the reports from all over the earth about the rapid population
crashes of moths and butterflies, especially among the Danainae. Al-
though widespread and diverse, monarchs would be among the first to
disappear; and no one yet knew why. It was not clear that total extinc-
tion would result, but it was clear the migrations were doomed. Holding
open space would involve much different work for Camille 5 than for the
previous generations, and it was Camille 4’s hard task to take the young
sym through another sort of initiation before dying in 2355. Of course,
Camille 4 had a great deal of experience to draw from with other syms
who had lost their critters.


                                                   the camille stories            163
8.8. Make Kin Not Babies. Design by Elaine Gan for the
exhibit dump! at Kunsthal Aarhus, 2015.



   There were thousands of Speakers for the Dead around the earth
by 2300, each tasked with bringing critters who had been irretrievably
lost into potent presence for giving knowledge and heart to all of those
continuing to work for the still diverse earth’s robust and partial re-
cuperation.44 Over three hundred years, the Communities of Compost
had built a potent earthwide network of refugia and foci of resurgent
naturalcultural diversity. The Speakers for the Dead teach practices of
remembering and mourning that enlist extinct human and nonhuman
critters in the ongoing work of cutting the shackles of Double Death,
which strangled a vast proportion of ways of living and dying in the
Plantationocene, Anthropocene and Capitalocene.45
   For help in preparing Camille 5 to take up the tasks of a Speaker for
the Dead, Camille 4 turned to the Canadian-Nunavut, nontraditional,
young Inuk woman throat singer Tanya Tagaq and her 2014 album
Animism, which had been so powerful in strengthening Inuit and also
other situated resurgence in the twenty-first century. Tagaq practiced
what a twenty-first-century anthropologist, Susan Harding, tentatively
called “experimental animism.”46 In Animism, Tagaq and her partners,


164   chapter eight
violinist Jesse Zubot and drummers Jean Martin and DZ Michael Red,
performed a musical argument for and about continuities, transforma-
tions, contradictions, and sf visual and acoustic kinetic interconver-
sions of human and animal beings in situated worlds. Hunting, eating,
living-with, dying-with, and moving-with in the turbulent folds and ed-
dies of a situated earth: these were the affirmations and controversies
of Tagaq’s singing and website texts and interviews. Tagaq embraced
oppositions and conflicts, not to purify them, but to live inside com-
plexities of shared flesh, casting herself for some worlds and not others.
At her Polaris Music Prize performance in September 2014, the names
of murdered and missing Aboriginal women scrolled behind Tagaq. The
last track of Animism was titled “Fracking”; the first was “Caribou.” She
wore seal fur cuffs during her Polaris performance; she affirmed the
natural world and hunting by her people. Her risk-taking animism per-
formed materialist worlds—gone, here, and to come. Proclaiming, “I
want to live in worlds that are not supposed to be,” she affirmed that
such worlds already are, have been, and will be.47 The music was utterly
contemporary, and many mobile identities were in play and at risk. The
work reached out to unexpected techniques and audiences; and it was
unapologetically rooted in specific places, peoples, and critters.
    Tagaq’s practices of transforming sound, flesh, and kind were animist
in old and new Inuit terms and in the related sense proposed by the
anthropologist Eduardo Viveiros de Castro. Viveiros de Castro studied
with Brazilian Amerindians, with whom he learned to theorize the rad-
ical conceptual realignment he called multinaturalism and perspectiv-
ism. “Animism is the only sensible version of materialism.”48 It matters
which concepts conceptualize concepts. Materialist, experimental ani-
mism is not a New Age wish nor a neocolonial fantasy, but a powerful
proposition for rethinking relationality, perspective, process, and reality
without the dubious comforts of the oppositional categories of modern/
traditional or religious/secular. Human-animal knots do something dif-
ferent in this world.
    It matters which worlds world worlds. It matters who eats whom
and how. It remains a material question for cosmopolitical critters in
the Communities of Compost. For these reasons, Camille 4 invoked
Tanya Tagaq to share her power more than two hundred years after her
death.



                                             the camille stories       165
                               CAMILLE 5

                 Born 2340. Human numbers are 4 billion.
                Died in 2425. Human numbers are 3 billion.
      One billion human-critter symbionts inhabit the earth in 2425.
                    Two billion humans are not syms.
            Over 50 percent of all critter species living in 2015
                          have vanished by 2425.
           Millions of kinds of critters are syms with humans.
       The animal sym partners remain unaltered by human genes.
              The human syms take on ever more properties
                         of their animal partners.
               Many humans are syms with extinct partners.

  STARHAWK’S SONG, TAUGHT BY THE SPEAKERS FOR THE DEAD

  Breathe deep.
  Feel the pain
  where it lives deep in us
  for we live, still,
  in the raw wounds
  and pain is salt in us, burning.
  Flush it out.
  Let the pain become a sound,
  a living river on the breath.
  Raise your voice.
  Cry out. Scream. Wail.
  Keen and mourn
  for the dismembering of the world.49
And so the fifth Camille inherited a powerful task from per’s mentor—to
become a Speaker for the Dead, to bring into ongoing presence, through
active memory, the lost lifeways, so that other symbiotic and sympoie-
tic commitments would not lose heart. Crucial to the work was not to
forget the stink in the air from the burning of the witches, not to forget
the murders of human and nonhuman beings in the Great Catastrophes
named the Plantationocene, Anthropocene, Capitalocene, to “keen and
mourn for the dismembering of the world.” Moving through mourning
to represencing, to the practice of vital memory, was the work of the
Speakers for the Dead. Their task was to strengthen the healing that was
gaining momentum across the earth. The fourth and fifth Camilles both

166   chapter eight
8.9. Monarch butterfly caterpillars regularly have to share
their milkweed food plants with oleander aphids (Aphis nerii).
© Jaap de Roode, Emory University.



traveled widely, drawing from their heritage of monarch symbioses, to
teach and learn how to practice healing and ongoingness in the cyclones
of continuing damage and partial resurgence.
   Before taking up the tasks of the Speaker for the Dead, remembering
the bonds formed more than two hundred years earlier, Camille 5 again
sought help from the evolving, historically situated, symanimagenic kin-
making practices of twenty-fourth-century Mazahuas. Camille 5 began
per’s work with a year-long residence in Michoacán studying with the over-
lapping indigenous-scientific-activist communities that continued to heal
damaged lives and lands there. The Mazahuas also mourned the loss of
the living monarchs, and they were deeply worried how this extinction
would reshape their own symanimagenic relations with their dead. By
Camille 5’s generation, there were millions of vanished species, vanished
kinds of critters both human and other-than-human, and so much for
the Speakers for the Dead to do to replenish heart and mind for and
with those who continue to stay with the trouble. And to stay with the
ragged joy of ordinary living and dying, up to and beyond the year 2400.
The monarchs’ people decided that this Speaker for the Dead should
itself be a new kind of sym, joining the symbiogenetic Camille 5 with
symanimagenic persons from the transvolcanic belt. Such persons had

                                                  the camille stories   167
been friends and coworkers before; now they were to undertake another
experimental and risky sympoiesis for unfurling times.
   The Speakers for the Dead are also tasked with bringing into mind
and heart the new things of earth, not only the symbionts and sym-
animants and their communities and corridors, but also the emerging
kinds of beings and ways of life of an always evolving home world. The
Speakers for the Dead seek and release the energies of the past, pres-
ent, and future Chthulucene, with its myriad tentacles of opportunistic,
dangerous, and generative sympoiesis. The Children of Compost would
not cease the layered, curious practice of becoming-with others for a
habitable, flourishing world.
PROLOGUE


			I LOOKED UP TOWARD the top of the tree. Ferns and orchids sprouted from its trunk, which vanished into a tangle of lianas in the canopy. High above me, a toucan flapped off its perch with a croak, and a troupe of howler monkeys worked themselves into a slow roar. The rain had only just stopped, and the leaves above me shed heavy drops of water in sudden showers. A low mist hung over the ground.

			The tree’s roots wound outward from the base of its trunk, soon vanishing into the thick drifts of fallen leaves that covered the floor of the jungle. I used a stick to tap the ground for snakes. A tarantula scuttled off, and I knelt, feeling my way down the tree’s trunk and along one of its roots into a mass of spongy debris where the finer roots matted into a thick red and brown tangle. A rich smell drifted upward. Termites clambered through the labyrinth, and a millipede coiled up, playing dead. My root vanished into the ground, and with a trowel I cleared the area around the spot. I used my hands and a spoon to loosen the top layer of earth and dug as gently as I could, slowly uncovering it as it ranged out from the tree and twisted along just below the surface of the soil.

			After an hour, I had traveled about a meter. My root was now thinner than string and had started to proliferate wildly. It was hard to keep track of as it knotted with its neighbors, so I lay down on my stomach and lowered my face into the shallow trench I had made. Some roots smell sharp and nutty and others woody and bitter, but the roots of my tree had a spicy resinous kick when I scratched them with a fingernail. For several hours I inched along the ground, scratching and sniffing every few centimeters to make sure I hadn’t lost the thread.

			 			As the day went on, more filaments sprang out from the root I’d uncovered and I chose a few of them to follow all the way to the tips, where they burrowed into fragments of rotting leaf or twig. I dipped the ends in a vial of water to wash off the mud and looked at them through a loupe. The rootlets branched like a small tree and their surface was covered with a filmy layer that appeared fresh and sticky. It was these delicate structures I wanted to examine. From these roots, a fungal network laced out into the soil and around the roots of nearby trees. Without this fungal web my tree would not exist. Without similar fungal webs no plant would exist anywhere. All life on land, including my own, depended on these networks. I tugged lightly on my root and felt the ground move.





INTRODUCTION


			WHAT IS IT LIKE TO BE A FUNGUS?




There are moments in moist love when heaven is jealous of what we on earth can do.

					—HAFIZ





			FUNGI ARE EVERYWHERE but they are easy to miss. They are inside you and around you. They sustain you and all that you depend on. As you read these words, fungi are changing the way that life happens, as they have done for more than a billion years. They are eating rock, making soil, digesting pollutants, nourishing and killing plants, surviving in space, inducing visions, producing food, making medicines, manipulating animal behavior, and influencing the composition of the Earth’s atmosphere. Fungi provide a key to understanding the planet on which we live, and the ways that we think, feel, and behave. Yet they live their lives largely hidden from view, and over ninety percent of their species remain undocumented. The more we learn about fungi, the less makes sense without them.

			Fungi make up one of life’s kingdoms—as broad and busy a category as “animals” or “plants.” Microscopic yeasts are fungi, as are the sprawling networks of honey fungi, or Armillaria, which are among the largest organisms in the world. The current record holder, in Oregon, weighs hundreds of tons, spills across ten square kilometers, and is somewhere between two thousand and eight thousand years old. There are probably many larger, older specimens that remain undiscovered.

			 			Many of the most dramatic events on Earth have been—and continue to be—a result of fungal activity. Plants only made it out of the water around five hundred million years ago because of their collaboration with fungi, which served as their root systems for tens of million years until plants could evolve their own. Today, more than ninety percent of plants depend on mycorrhizal fungi—from the Greek words for fungus (mykes) and root (rhiza)—which can link trees in shared networks sometimes referred to as the “wood wide web.” This ancient association gave rise to all recognizable life on land, the future of which depends on the continued ability of plants and fungi to form healthy relationships.

			Plants may have greened the planet, but if we could cast our eyes back to the Devonian period, four hundred million years ago, we’d be struck by another life-form: Prototaxites. These living spires were scattered across the landscape. Many were taller than a two-story building. Nothing else got anywhere close to this size: Plants existed but were no more than a meter tall, and no animal with a backbone had yet moved out of the water. Small insects made their homes in the giant trunks, chewing out rooms and corridors. This enigmatic group of organisms—thought to have been enormous fungi—were the largest living structures on dry land for at least forty million years, twenty times longer than the genus Homo has existed.

			To this day, new ecosystems on land are founded by fungi. When volcanic islands are made or glaciers retreat to reveal bare rock, lichens (pronounced LY ken)—a union of fungi and algae or bacteria—are the first organisms to establish themselves and to make the soil in which plants subsequently take root. In well-developed ecosystems soil would be rapidly sluiced off by rain were it not for the dense mesh of fungal tissue that holds it together. There are few pockets of the globe where fungi can’t be found; from deep sediments on the seafloor, to the surface of deserts, to frozen valleys in Antarctica, to our guts and orifices. Tens to hundreds of species can exist in the leaves and stems of a single plant. These fungi weave themselves through the gaps between plant cells in an intimate brocade and help to defend plants against disease. No plant grown under natural conditions has been found without these fungi; they are as much a part of planthood as leaves or roots.

			 			The ability of fungi to prosper in such a variety of habitats depends on their diverse metabolic abilities. Metabolism is the art of chemical transformation. Fungi are metabolic wizards and can explore, scavenge, and salvage ingeniously, their abilities rivaled only by bacteria. Using cocktails of potent enzymes and acids, fungi can break down some of the most stubborn substances on the planet, from lignin, wood’s toughest component, to rock; crude oil; polyurethane plastics; and the explosive TNT. Few environments are too extreme. A species isolated from mining waste is one of the most radiation-resistant organisms ever discovered and may help to clean up nuclear waste sites. The blasted nuclear reactor at Chernobyl is home to a large population of such fungi. A number of these radio-tolerant species even grow toward radioactive “hot” particles, and appear to be able to harness radiation as a source of energy, as plants use the energy in sunlight.



* * *



			—

			MUSHROOMS DOMINATE THE popular fungal imagination, but just as the fruits of plants are one part of a much larger structure that includes branches and roots, so mushrooms are only the fruiting bodies of fungi, the place where spores are produced. Fungi use spores like plants use seeds: to disperse themselves. Mushrooms are a fungus’s way to entreat the more-than-fungal world, from wind to squirrel, to assist with the dispersal of spores, or to prevent it from interfering with this process. They are the parts of fungi made visible, pungent, covetable, delicious, poisonous. However, mushrooms are only one approach among many: The overwhelming majority of fungal species release spores without producing mushrooms at all.

			We all live and breathe fungi, thanks to the prolific abilities of fungal fruiting bodies to disperse spores. Some species discharge spores explosively, which accelerate ten thousand times faster than a space shuttle directly after launch, reaching speeds of up to a hundred kilometers per hour—some of the quickest movements achieved by any living organism. Other species of fungi create their own microclimates: Spores are carried upward by a current of wind generated by mushrooms as water evaporates from their gills. Fungi produce around fifty megatons of spores each year—equivalent to the weight of five hundred thousand blue whales—making them the largest source of living particles in the air. Spores are found in clouds and influence the weather by triggering the formation of the water droplets that form rain and the ice crystals that form snow, sleet, and hail.



				 					Spores



			Some fungi, like the yeasts that ferment sugar into alcohol and cause bread to rise, consist of single cells that multiply by budding into two. However, most fungi form networks of many cells known as hyphae (pronounced HY fee): fine tubular structures that branch, fuse, and tangle into the anarchic filigree of mycelium. Mycelium describes the most common of fungal habits, better thought of not as a thing but as a process: an exploratory, irregular tendency. Water and nutrients flow through ecosystems within mycelial networks. The mycelium of some fungal species is electrically excitable and conducts waves of electrical activity along hyphae, analogous to the electrical impulses in animal nerve cells.



				 					Mycelium



			 			Hyphae make mycelium, but they also make more specialized structures. Fruiting bodies, such as mushrooms, arise from the felting together of hyphal strands. These organs can perform many feats besides expelling spores. Some, like truffles, produce aromas that have made them among the most expensive foods in the world. Others, like shaggy ink cap mushrooms (Coprinus comatus), can push their way through asphalt and lift heavy paving stones, although they are not themselves a tough material. Pick an ink cap and you can fry it up and eat it. Leave it in a jar, and its bright white flesh will deliquesce into a pitch-black ink over the course of a few days (the illustrations in this book were drawn with Coprinus ink).



				 					Shaggy ink cap mushrooms, Coprinus comatus, drawn with ink made from shaggy ink cap mushrooms



			Their metabolic ingenuity allows fungi to forge a wide variety of relationships. Whether in their roots or shoots, plants have relied on fungi for nutrition and defense for as long as there have been plants. Animals, too, depend on fungi. After humans, the animals that form some of the largest and most complex societies on Earth are leaf-cutter ants. Colonies can reach sizes of more than eight million individuals, with underground nests that grow larger than thirty meters across. The lives of leaf-cutter ants revolve around a fungus that they cultivate in cavernous chambers and feed with fragments of leaf.

			Human societies are no less entwined with fungi. Diseases caused by fungi cause billions of dollars of losses—the rice blast fungus ruins a quantity of rice large enough to feed more than sixty million people every year. Fungal diseases of trees, from Dutch elm disease to chestnut blight, transform forests and landscapes. Romans prayed to the god of mildew, Robigus, to avert fungal diseases but weren’t able to stop the famines that contributed to the decline of the Roman Empire. The impact of fungal diseases is increasing across the world: Unsustainable agricultural practices reduce the ability of plants to form relationships with the beneficial fungi on which they depend. The widespread use of antifungal chemicals has led to an unprecedented rise in new fungal superbugs that threaten both human and plant health. As humans disperse disease-causing fungi, we create new opportunities for their evolution. Over the last fifty years, the most deadly disease ever recorded—a fungus that infects amphibians—has been spread around the world by human trade. It has driven ninety species of amphibian to extinction and threatens to wipe out over a hundred more. The variety of banana that accounts for ninety-nine percent of global banana shipments, the Cavendish, is being decimated by a fungal disease and faces extinction in the coming decades.

			 			Like leaf-cutter ants, however, humans have worked out how to use fungi to solve a range of pressing problems. In fact, we have probably deployed fungal solutions for longer than we have been Homo sapiens. In 2017, researchers reconstructed the diets of Neanderthals, cousins of modern humans who went extinct approximately fifty thousand years ago. They found that an individual with a dental abscess had been eating a type of fungus—a penicillin-producing mold—implying knowledge of its antibiotic properties. There are other less ancient examples, including the Iceman, an exquisitely well-preserved Neolithic corpse found in glacial ice, dating from around five thousand years ago. On the day he died, the Iceman was carrying a pouch stuffed with wads of the tinder fungus (Fomes fomentarius) that he almost certainly used to make fire, and carefully prepared fragments of the birch polypore mushroom (Fomitopsis betulina) most probably used as a medicine.

			The indigenous peoples of Australia treated wounds with molds harvested from the shaded side of eucalyptus trees. The Jewish Talmud features a mold cure, known as “chamka,” consisting of moldy corn soaked in date wine. Ancient Egyptian papyruses from 1500 BCE refer to the curative properties of mold, and in 1640, the king’s herbalist in London, John Parkinson, described the use of molds to treat wounds. But it was only in 1928 that Alexander Fleming discovered that a mold produced a bacteria-killing chemical called penicillin. Penicillin became the first modern antibiotic and has since saved countless lives. Fleming’s discovery is widely credited as one of the defining moments of modern medicine and arguably helped to shift the balance of power in the Second World War.

			 			Penicillin, a compound that could defend fungi from bacterial infection, turned out to defend humans as well. This is not unusual: Although fungi have long been lumped together with plants, they are actually more closely related to animals—an example of the kind of category mistake that researchers regularly make in their struggle to understand fungal lives. At a molecular level, fungi and humans are similar enough to benefit from many of the same biochemical innovations. When we use drugs produced by fungi, we are often borrowing a fungal solution and rehousing it within our own bodies. Fungi are pharmaceutically prolific, and today we depend on them for many other chemicals besides penicillin: cyclosporine (an immunosuppressant drug that makes organ transplants possible), cholesterol-lowering statins, a host of powerful antiviral and anticancer compounds (including the multibillion-dollar drug Taxol, originally extracted from the fungi that live within yew trees), not to mention alcohol (fermented by a yeast) and psilocybin (the active component in psychedelic mushrooms recently shown in clinical trials to be capable of lifting severe depression and anxiety). Sixty percent of the enzymes used in industry are generated by fungi, and fifteen percent of all vaccines are produced by engineered strains of yeast. Citric acid, produced by fungi, is used in all fizzy drinks. The global market for edible fungi is booming and is projected to increase from $42 billion in 2018 to $69 billion by 2024. Sales of medicinal mushrooms are increasing yearly.

			Fungal solutions don’t stop at human health. Radical fungal technologies can help us respond to some of the many problems that arise from ongoing environmental devastation. Antiviral compounds produced by fungal mycelium reduce colony collapse disorder in honeybees. Voracious fungal appetites can be deployed to break down pollutants, such as crude oil from oil spills, in a process known as mycoremediation. In mycofiltration, contaminated water is passed through mats of mycelium, which filter out heavy metals and break down toxins. In mycofabrication, building materials and textiles are grown out of mycelium and replace plastics and leather in many applications. Fungal melanins, the pigments produced by radio-tolerant fungi, are a promising new source of radiation-resistant biomaterials.

			 			Human societies have always pivoted around prodigious fungal metabolisms. A full litany of the chemical accomplishments of fungi would take months to recite. Yet despite their promise, and central role in many ancient human fascinations, fungi have received a tiny fraction of the attention given to animals and plants. The best estimate suggests that there are between 2.2 and 3.8 million species of fungi in the world—six to ten times the estimated number of plant species—meaning that a mere six percent of all fungal species have been described. We are only just beginning to understand the intricacies and sophistications of fungal lives.



* * *



			—

			FOR AS LONG as I can remember I’ve been fascinated by fungi and the transformations they provoke. A solid log becomes soil, a lump of dough rises into bread, a mushroom erupts overnight—but how? As a teenager I dealt with my bafflement by finding ways to involve myself with fungi. I picked mushrooms and grew mushrooms in my bedroom. Later, I brewed alcohol in the hope that I might learn more about yeast and its influence on me. I marveled at the transformation of honey into mead and fruit juice into wine—and at how the product of these transformations could transform my own senses and those of my friends.

			By the time my formal study of fungi began, when I became an undergraduate at Cambridge in the Department of Plant Sciences—there is no Department of Fungal Sciences—I had become fascinated by symbiosis—the close relationships that form between unrelated organisms. The history of life turned out to be full of intimate collaborations. Most plants, I learned, depend on fungi to provide them with nutrients from the soil, such as phosphorus or nitrogen, in exchange for energy-giving sugars and lipids produced in photosynthesis—the process by which plants eat light and carbon dioxide from the air. The relationship between plants and fungi gave rise to the biosphere as we know it and supports life on land to this day, but we seemed to understand so little. How did these relationships arise? How do plants and fungi communicate with one another? How could I learn more about the lives of these organisms?

			 			I accepted the offer of a PhD to study mycorrhizal relationships in tropical forests in Panama. Soon afterward, I moved to a field station on an island run by the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute. The island and surrounding peninsulas were part of a nature reserve entirely covered by forest, apart from a clearing for dormitories, a canteen, and lab buildings. There were greenhouses for growing plants, drying cupboards filled with bags of leaf litter, a room lined with microscopes, and a walk-in freezer packed with samples: bottles of tree sap, dead bats, tubes containing ticks pulled from the backs of spiny rats and boa constrictors. Posters on the notice board offered cash rewards to anyone who could source fresh ocelot droppings from the forest.

			The jungle bristled with life. There were sloths, pumas, snakes, crocodiles; there were basilisk lizards that could run across the surface of water without sinking. In just a few hectares there lived as many woody plant species as in the whole of Europe. The diversity of the forest was reflected in the rich variety of field biologists who came there to study it. Some climbed trees and observed ants. Some set out at dawn every day to follow the monkeys. Some tracked the lightning that struck trees during tropical storms. Some spent their days suspended from a crane measuring ozone concentrations in the forest canopy. Some warmed up the soil using electrical elements to see how bacteria might respond to global heating. Some studied the way beetles navigate using the stars. Bumblebees, orchids, butterflies—there seemed to be no aspect of life in the forest that someone wasn’t observing.

			 			I was struck by the creativity and humor of this community of researchers. Lab biologists spend most of their time in charge of the pieces of life they study. Their own human lives are lived outside the flasks that contain their subject matter. Field biologists rarely have so much control. The world is the flask and they’re inside it. The balance of power is different. Storms wash away the flags that mark their experiments. Trees fall on their plots. Sloths die where they planned to measure the nutrients in the soil. Bullet ants sting them as they crash past. The forest and its inhabitants dispel any illusions that scientists are in charge. Humility quickly sets in.

			The relationships between plants and mycorrhizal fungi are key to understanding how ecosystems work. I wanted to learn more about the way nutrients passed through fungal networks, but I became dizzy when I thought about what was going on underground. Plants and mycorrhizal fungi are promiscuous: many fungi can live within the roots of a single plant, and many plants can connect with a single fungal network. In this way a variety of substances, from nutrients to signaling compounds, can pass between plants via fungal connections. In simple terms, plants are socially networked by fungi. This is what is meant by the “wood wide web.” The tropical forests I worked in contained hundreds of plant and fungal species. These networks are inconceivably complicated, their implications huge and still poorly understood. Imagine the puzzlement of an extraterrestrial anthropologist who discovered, after decades of studying modern humanity, that we had something called the Internet. It’s a bit like that for contemporary ecologists.

			In my efforts to investigate the networks of mycorrhizal fungi that strung their way through the soil, I collected thousands of soil samples and tree-root trimmings and mashed them into pastes to extract their fats, or DNA. I grew hundreds of plants in pots with different communities of mycorrhizal fungus and measured how big their leaves grew. I sprinkled thick rings of black pepper around the greenhouses to deter cats from creeping in and bringing with them rogue fungal communities from outside. I dosed plants with chemical labels and traced these chemicals through roots and into the soil so that I might measure how much must have passed to their fungal associates—more mashing and more pastes. I spluttered around the forested peninsulas in a small motorboat that often broke down, climbed up waterfalls looking for rare plants, trudged for miles down muddy paths carrying a backpack full of waterlogged soil, and drove trucks into drifts of thick red jungle mud.

			 			Of the many organisms that lived in the rainforest, I was most enthralled by a species of small flower that sprouted from the ground. These plants were the height of a coffee cup, their stalks spindly and pale white with a single bright blue flower balanced on top. They were a species of jungle gentian called Voyria, and had long ago lost the ability to photosynthesize. In doing so, they had lost their chlorophyll, the pigment that makes photosynthesis possible and gives plants their green color. I was perplexed by Voyria. Photosynthesis is one of the things that makes plants plants. How could these plants survive without it?

			I suspected Voyria’s relationships with their fungal partners were unusual, and I wondered whether these flowers might tell me something about what was going on below the surface of the soil. I spent many weeks searching for Voyria in the jungle. Some flowers grew in open stretches of the forest and were easy to spot. Others hid, tucked behind buttressed tree roots. Within plots a quarter the size of a football field there could be hundreds of flowers, and I had to count them all. The forest was rarely open or flat, so this meant scrambling and stooping. In fact, it meant almost anything but walking. Each evening I returned to the field station filthy and exhausted. Over supper my Dutch ecologist friends cracked jokes about my cute blossoms with their frail stems. They studied the ways that tropical forests stored carbon. While I scuffed along squinting at the ground in search of tiny flowers, they measured the girth of trees. In a carbon budget of the forest, Voyria were inconsequential. My Dutch friends teased me about my small ecology and my dainty fascinations. I teased them about their brute ecology and their machismo. At dawn the next day, I would set off once again, peering at the floor in the hope that these curious plants could help me find my way underground, into this hidden, teeming world.



* * *



			—

			 			WHETHER IN FORESTS, labs, or kitchens, fungi have changed my understanding of how life happens. These organisms make questions of our categories, and thinking about them makes the world look different. It was my growing delight in their power to do so that led me to write this book. I have tried to find ways to enjoy the ambiguities that fungi present, but it’s not always easy to be comfortable in the space created by open questions. Agoraphobia can set in. It’s tempting to hide in small rooms built from quick answers. I have done my best to hold back.

			A friend of mine, the philosopher and magician David Abram, used to be the house magician at Alice’s Restaurant in Massachusetts (made famous by the Arlo Guthrie song). Every night he passed around the tables; coins walked through his fingers, reappeared exactly where they shouldn’t, disappeared again, divided in two, vanished into nothing. One evening, two customers returned to the restaurant shortly after leaving and pulled David aside, looking troubled. When they left the restaurant, they said, the sky had appeared shockingly blue and the clouds large and vivid. Had he put something in their drinks? As the weeks went by, it continued to happen—customers returned to say the traffic had seemed louder than it was before, the streetlights brighter, the patterns on the sidewalk more fascinating, the rain more refreshing. The magic tricks were changing the way people experienced the world.

			David explained to me why he thought this happened. Our perceptions work in large part by expectation. It takes less cognitive effort to make sense of the world using preconceived images updated with a small amount of new sensory information than to constantly form entirely new perceptions from scratch. It is our preconceptions that create the blind spots in which magicians do their work. By attrition, coin tricks loosen the grip of our expectations about the way hands and coins work. Eventually, they loosen the grip of our expectations on our perceptions more generally. On leaving the restaurant, the sky looked different because the diners saw the sky as it was there and then, rather than as they expected it to be. Tricked out of our expectations, we fall back on our senses. What’s astonishing is the gulf between what we expect to find and what we find when we actually look.

			 			Fungi, too, trick us out of our preconceptions. Their lives and behaviors are startling. The more I’ve studied fungi, the more my expectations have loosened and the more familiar concepts have started to appear unfamiliar. Two fast-growing fields of biological inquiry have helped me both navigate these states of surprise and provide frameworks that have guided my exploration of the fungal world.

			The first is a growing awareness of the many sophisticated, problem-solving behaviors that have evolved in brainless organisms outside the animal kingdom. The best-known examples are slime molds, such as Physarum polycephalum (though they are amoeba, not fungi, as true molds are). As we’ll see, slime molds have no monopoly on brainless problem-solving, but they are easy to study and have become poster organisms that have opened up new avenues of research. Physarum form exploratory networks made of tentacle-like veins and have no central nervous system—nor anything that resembles one. Yet they can “make decisions” by comparing a range of possible courses of action and can find the shortest path between two points in a labyrinth. Japanese researchers released slime molds into petri dishes modeled on the Greater Tokyo area. Oat flakes marked major urban hubs and bright lights represented obstacles such as mountains—slime molds don’t like light. After a day, the slime mold had found the most efficient route between the oats, emanating into a network almost identical to Tokyo’s existing rail network. In similar experiments, slime molds have re-created the motorway network of the United States and the network of Roman roads in central Europe. A slime-mold enthusiast told me about a test he had performed. He frequently got lost in IKEA stores and would spend many minutes trying to find the exit. He decided to challenge his slime molds with the same problem and built a maze based on the floor plan of his local IKEA. Sure enough, without any signs or staff to direct them, the slime molds soon found the shortest path to the exit. “You see,” he said with a laugh, “they’re cleverer than me.”

			 			Whether one calls slime molds, fungi, and plants “intelligent” depends on one’s point of view. Classical scientific definitions of intelligence use humans as a yardstick by which all other species are measured. According to these anthropocentric definitions, humans are always at the top of the intelligence rankings, followed by animals that look like us (chimpanzees, bonobos, etc.), followed again by other “higher” animals, and onward and downward in a league table—a great chain of intelligence drawn up by the ancient Greeks, which persists one way or another to this day. Because these organisms don’t look like us or outwardly behave like us—or have brains—they have traditionally been allocated a position somewhere at the bottom of the scale. Too often, they are thought of as the inert backdrop to animal life. Yet many are capable of sophisticated behaviors that prompt us to think in new ways about what it means for organisms to “solve problems,” “communicate,” “make decisions,” “learn,” and “remember.” As we do so, some of the vexed hierarchies that underpin modern thought start to soften. As they soften, our ruinous attitudes toward the more-than-human world may start to change.

			The second field of research that has guided me in this inquiry concerns the way we think about the microscopic organisms—or microbes—that cover every inch of the planet. In the last four decades, new technologies have granted unprecedented access to microbial lives. The outcome? For your community of microbes—your “microbiome”—your body is a planet. Some prefer the temperate forest of your scalp, some the arid plains of your forearm, some the tropical forest of your crotch or armpit. Your gut (which if unfolded would occupy an area of thirty-two square meters), ears, toes, mouth, eyes, skin, and every surface, passage, and cavity you possess teem with bacteria and fungi. You carry around more microbes than your “own” cells. There are more bacteria in your gut than stars in our galaxy.

			For humans, identifying where one individual stops and another starts is not generally something we think about. It is usually taken for granted—within modern industrial societies, at least—that we start where our bodies begin and stop where our bodies end. Developments in modern medicine, such as organ transplants, worry these distinctions; developments in the microbial sciences shake them at their foundations. We are ecosystems, composed of—and decomposed by—an ecology of microbes, the significance of which is only now coming to light. The forty-odd trillion microbes that live in and on our bodies allow us to digest food and produce key minerals that nourish us. Like the fungi that live within plants, they protect us from disease. They guide the development of our bodies and immune systems and influence our behavior. If not kept in check, they can cause illnesses and even kill us. We are not a special case. Even bacteria have viruses within them (a nanobiome?). Even viruses can contain smaller viruses (a picobiome?). Symbiosis is a ubiquitous feature of life.

			 			I attended a conference in Panama on tropical microbes, and along with many other researchers spent three days becoming increasingly bewildered by the implications of our studies. Someone got up to talk about a group of plants that produced a certain group of chemicals in their leaves. Until then, the chemicals had been thought of as a defining characteristic of that group of plants. However, it transpired that the chemicals were actually made by fungi that lived in the leaves of the plant. Our idea of the plant had to be redrawn. Another researcher interjected, suggesting that it may not be the fungi living inside the leaf that produced these chemicals but the bacteria living inside the fungus. Things continued along these lines. After two days, the notion of the individual had deepened and expanded beyond recognition. To talk about individuals made no sense anymore. Biology—the study of living organisms—had transformed into ecology—the study of the relationships between living organisms. To compound matters, we understood very little. Graphs of microbial populations projected on a screen had large sections labeled “unknown.” I was reminded of the way that modern physicists portray the universe, more than ninety-five percent of which is described as “dark matter” and “dark energy.” Dark matter and energy are dark because we don’t know anything about them. This was biological dark matter, or dark life.

			 			Many scientific concepts—from time to chemical bonds to genes to species—lack stable definitions but remain helpful categories to think with. From one perspective, “individual” is no different: just another category to guide human thought and behavior. Nonetheless, so much of daily life and experience—not to mention our philosophical, political, and economic systems—depends on individuals that it can be hard to stand by and watch the concept dissolve. Where does this leave “us”? What about “them”? “Me”? “Mine”? “Everyone”? “Anyone”? My response to the discussions at the conference was not just intellectual. Like a diner at Alice’s Restaurant, I felt different: The familiar had become unfamiliar. The “loss of a sense of self-identity, delusions of self-identity and experiences of ‘alien control,’ ” observed an elder statesman in the field of microbiome research, are all potential symptoms of mental illness. It made my head spin to think of how many ideas had to be revisited, not least our culturally treasured notions of identity, autonomy, and independence. It is in part this disconcerting feeling that makes the advances in the microbial sciences so exciting. Our microbial relationships are about as intimate as any can be. Learning more about these associations changes our experience of our own bodies and the places we inhabit. “We” are ecosystems that span boundaries and transgress categories. Our selves emerge from a complex tangle of relationships only now becoming known.



* * *



			—

			THE STUDY OF relationships can be confusing. Almost all are ambiguous. Have leaf-cutter ants domesticated the fungus that they depend on, or has the fungus domesticated the ants? Do plants farm the mycorrhizal fungi that they live with, or do the fungi farm the plants? Which way does the arrow point? This uncertainty is healthy.

			I had a professor called Oliver Rackham, an ecologist and historian, who studied the ways that ecosystems have shaped—and been shaped by—human cultures for thousands of years. He took us to nearby forests and told us about the history of these places and their human inhabitants by reading the twists and splits in the branches of old oak trees, by observing where nettles thrived, by noting which plants did or didn’t grow in a hedgerow. Under Rackham’s influence, the clean line I had imagined dividing “nature” and “culture” started to blur.

			 			Later, doing fieldwork in Panama, I came across many complicated relationships between field biologists and the organisms they studied. I joked with the bat scientists that in staying up all night and sleeping all day they were learning bat habits. They asked how the fungi were imprinting themselves on me. I’m still not sure. But I continue to wonder how, in our total dependence on fungi—as regenerators, recyclers, and networkers that stitch worlds together—we might dance to their tune more often than we realize.

			If we do, it’s easy to forget. Too often, I become detached and see the soil as an abstract place, a vague arena for schematic interactions. My colleagues and I say things like: “So-and-so reported an approximate twenty-five percent increase in soil carbon from one dry season to the next wet season.” How can we not? We have no way to experience the wilds of the soil and the countless lives that froth away within it.

			With the available tools, I tried. Thousands of my samples passed through expensive machines that whisked, irradiated, and blasted the contents of the tubes into strings of numbers. I spent whole months staring into a microscope, immersed in rootscapes filled with winding hyphae frozen in ambiguous acts of intercourse with plant cells. Still, the fungi I could see were dead, embalmed, and rendered in false colors. I felt like a clumsy sleuth. While I crouched for weeks scraping mud into small tubes, toucans croaked, howler monkeys roared, lianas tangled, and anteaters licked. Microbial lives, especially those buried in soil, were not accessible like the bristling charismatic aboveground world of the large. Really, to make my findings vivid, to allow them to build and contribute to a general understanding, imagination was required. There was no way around it.

			In scientific circles imagination usually goes by the name of speculation and is treated with some suspicion; in publications it is usually served up with a mandatory health warning. Part of writing up research is scrubbing it clean of the flights of fancy, idle play, and the thousand trials and errors that give rise to even the smallest of findings. Not everyone who reads a study wants to push their way through the fuss. Besides, scientists have to appear credible. Sneak backstage and one might not find people at their most presentable. Even backstage, in the most nocturnal musings I shared with colleagues, it was unusual to get into the details of how we had imagined—accidentally or deliberately—the organisms we studied, whether fish, bromeliad, liana, fungus, or bacterium. There was something embarrassing about admitting that the tangle of our unfounded conjectures, fantasies, and metaphors might have helped shape our research. Regardless, imagination forms part of the everyday business of inquiring. Science isn’t an exercise in cold-blooded rationality. Scientists are—and have always been—emotional, creative, intuitive, whole human beings, asking questions about a world that was never made to be catalogued and systematized. Whenever I asked what these fungi were doing and designed studies to try and understand their behaviors, I necessarily imagined them.

			 			An experiment forced me to peer into the deeper recesses of my scientific imagination. I signed up to take part in a clinical study into the effects of LSD on the problem-solving abilities of scientists, engineers, and mathematicians. The study was part of the wide revival of scientific and medical interest in the untapped potential of psychedelic drugs. The researchers wanted to know if LSD could grant scientists access to their professional unconscious and help them approach familiar problems from new angles. Our imaginations, usually brushed aside, were to be the stars of the show, the phenomena being observed and potentially even measured. An eclectic group of young researchers had been enlisted through posters in science departments around the country (“Do you have a meaningful problem that needs solving?”). It was a brave study. Creative breakthroughs are notoriously hard to facilitate anywhere, let alone in the clinical-drug-trial unit of a hospital.

			The researchers running the experiment had arranged psychedelic hangings on the walls, set up a sound system for music to be piped in, and lit the room with colored “mood lights.” Their attempts to declinicalize the setting made it seem more artificial: an admission of the impact that they—the scientists—might have on their subject matter. It was an arrangement that made visible many of the healthy insecurities faced by researchers on a day-to-day basis. If only the subjects of all biological experiments were provided with their equivalent of mood lighting and relaxing music, how differently they might behave.

			 			The nurses made sure I drank the LSD at exactly nine AM. They watched me closely until I had swallowed all the liquid, which had been mixed in a small wineglass worth of water. I lay down on the bed in my hospital room and the nurses sucked a sample of blood through the cannula in my forearm. Three hours later, when I had reached “cruising altitude,” I was gently encouraged by my assistant to start thinking about my “work-related problem.” Amid the battery of psychometric tests and personality assessments we had completed before the trip, we had been asked to describe our problems in as much detail as possible—those knots in our inquiries that we might be fumbling with. Soaking the knots in LSD might help them loosen. All my research questions were fungal ones, and I was comforted by the knowledge that LSD was originally derived from a fungus that lives within crop plants; a fungal solution to my fungal problems. What would happen?

			I wanted to use the LSD trial to think more broadly about the lives of the blue flowers, Voyria, and their fungal relationships. How did they live without photosynthesis? Almost all plants sustain themselves by drawing minerals from mycorrhizal fungal networks in the soil; so did Voyria, judging by the tousled mass of fungi that crowded into their roots. But without photosynthesis, Voyria had no way to make the energy-rich sugars and lipids they needed to grow. Where did Voyria get their energy from? Could these flowers draw substances from other green plants via the fungal networks? If so, did Voyria have anything to give back to their fungal partners in exchange, or were they just parasites—hackers of the wood wide web?

			I lay on the hospital bed with my eyes closed and wondered what it was like to be a fungus. I found myself underground, surrounded by growing tips surging across one another. Schools of globular animals grazing—plant roots and their hustle—the Wild West of the soil—all those bandits, brigands, loners, crapshooters. The soil was a horizonless external gut—digestion and salvage everywhere—flocks of bacteria surfing on waves of electrical charge—chemical weather systems—subterranean highways—slimy infective embrace—seething intimate contact on all sides. As I followed a fungal hypha into a cavernous root, I was struck by the sanctuary it offered. Very few other types of fungi were present; certainly no worms or insects. There was less bustle and hassle. It was a haven I could imagine paying for. Perhaps that was what the blue flowers offered the fungi in return for their nutritional support? Shelter from the storm.

			 			I make no claims about the factual validity of these visions. They are at best plausible and at worst delirious nonsense. Not even wrong. Nonetheless, I learned a valuable lesson. The way I had grown accustomed to thinking about fungi involved abstract “interactions” between organisms that actually looked like the diagrams schoolteachers drew on the board: semiautomatic entities that behaved according to an early-nineties Game Boy logic. However, the LSD had forced me to admit that I had an imagination and I now saw fungi differently. I wanted to understand fungi, not by reducing them to ticking, spinning, bleeping mechanisms, as we so often do. Rather, I wanted to let these organisms lure me out of my well-worn patterns of thought, to imagine the possibilities they face, to let them press against the limits of my understanding, to give myself permission to be amazed—and confused—by their entangled lives.

			Fungi inhabit enmeshed worlds; countless threads lead through these labyrinths. I have followed as many as I can, but there are crevices I haven’t been able to squeeze through no matter how hard I’ve tried. Despite their nearness, fungi are so mystifying, their possibilities so other. Should this scare us off? Is it possible for humans, with our animal brains and bodies and language, to learn to understand such different organisms? How might we find ourselves changed in the process? In optimistic moods, I’ve imagined this book to be a portrait of this neglected branch of the tree of life, but it’s more tangled than that. It is an account both of my journey toward understanding fungal lives, and of the imprint fungal lives have left on me and the many others I’ve met along the road, human or otherwise. “What shall I do with the night and the day, with this life and this death?” writes the poet Robert Bringhurst. “Every step, every breath rolls like an egg toward the edge of this question.” Fungi roll us toward the edge of many questions. This book comes from my experience of peering over some of these edges. My exploration of the fungal world has made me reexamine much of what I knew. Evolution, ecosystems, individuality, intelligence, life—none are quite what I thought they were. My hope is that this book loosens some of your certainties, as fungi have loosened mine.





1.


			A LURE




Who’s pimping who?

					—PRINCE





			A HEAP OF PIEDMONT white truffles (Tuber magnatum) sat on the scales on a check-patterned rag. They were scruffy, like unwashed stones; irregular, like potatoes; socketed, like skulls. Two kilograms: €12,000. Their sweet funk filled the room, and in this aroma was their value. It was unabashed and quite unlike anything else: a lure, thick and confusing enough to get lost in.

			It was early November, the height of truffle season, and I had traveled to Italy to join two truffle hunters working out of the hills around Bologna. I was lucky. A friend of a friend knew a man who dealt truffles. The dealer had agreed to set me up with his two best hunters, who in turn had consented to let me go out with them. White-truffle hunters are famously secretive. These fungi have never been domesticated and can only be found in the wild.

			Truffles are the underground fruiting bodies of several types of mycorrhizal fungi. For most of the year, truffle fungi exist as mycelial networks, sustained in part by the nutrients they obtain from the soil and also by the sugars they draw from plant roots. However, their subterranean habitat confronts them with a basic problem. Truffles are spore-producing organs, analogous to the seed-producing fruit of a plant. Spores evolved to allow fungi to disperse themselves, but underground their spores can’t be caught by air currents and are invisible to the eyes of animals.

			 			Their solution is to smell. But to smell above the olfactory racket of a forest is no small task. Forests are crisscrossed with smells, each a potential fascination or distraction to an animal nose. Truffles must be pungent enough for their scent to penetrate the layers of soil and enter the air, distinctive enough for an animal to take note amid the ambient smellscape, and delicious enough for that animal to seek it out, dig it up, and eat it. Every visual disadvantage that truffles face—being entombed in the soil, difficult to spot once unearthed, and visually unappealing once spotted—they make up for with smell.

			Once eaten, a truffle’s job is done: An animal has been lured into exploring the soil and recruited to carry the fungus’s spores off to a new place and deposit them in its feces. A truffle’s allure is thus the outcome of hundreds of thousands of years of evolutionary entanglement with animal tastes. Natural selection will favor truffle fungi that match the preferences of their finest spore dispersers. Truffles with better “chemistry” will attract animals more successfully than those with worse. Like the orchids that mimic the appearance of sexually receptive female bees, truffles provide a depiction of animal tastes—an evolutionary portrait in scent of animal fascination.

			I was in Italy because I wanted to be drawn underground by a fungus into the chemical world in which it lived. We are ill-equipped to participate in the chemical lives of fungi, but ripe truffles speak a language so piercing and simple that even we can understand it. In doing so, these fungi include us for a moment within their chemical ecology. How should we think about the torrents of interaction that occur between organisms underground? How should we understand these spheres of more-than-human communication? Perhaps running after a dog hot on the trail of a truffle and burying my face in the soil was as close as I could get to the chemical tug and promise that fungi use to conduct so many aspects of their lives.



				 					Piedmont white truffle, Tuber magnatum





* * *



			—

			THE HUMAN SENSE of smell is extraordinary. Our eyes can distinguish several million colors, our ears can distinguish half a million tones, but our noses can distinguish well over a trillion different odors. Humans can detect virtually all volatile chemicals ever tested. We outperform rodents and dogs in detecting certain odors, and we can follow scent trails. Smells feature in our choice of sexual partners and in our ability to detect fear, anxiety, or aggression in others. And smell is woven into the fabric of our memories; it is common for people suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder to have olfactory flashbacks.

			Noses are finely tuned instruments. Your olfactory sense can split complex mixtures into their constituent chemicals, just as a prism can split white light into its constituent colors. To do this, it must detect the precise arrangement of atoms within a molecule. Mustard smells mustardy because of bonds between nitrogen, carbon, and sulfur. Fish smells fishy because of bonds between nitrogen and hydrogen. Bonds between carbon and nitrogen smell metallic and oily.

			The ability to detect and respond to chemicals is a primordial sensory ability. Most organisms use their chemical senses to explore and make sense of their environment. Plants, fungi, and animals all use similar types of receptors to detect chemicals. When molecules bind to these receptors, they trigger a signaling cascade: One molecule triggers a cellular change, which triggers a bigger change, and so on. In this way, small causes can ripple into large effects: Human noses can detect some compounds at as low a concentration as thirty-four thousand molecules in one square centimeter, the equivalent of a single drop of water in twenty thousand Olympic swimming pools.

			 			For an animal to experience a smell, a molecule must land on their olfactory epithelium. In humans, this is a membrane up and behind the nose. The molecule binds to a receptor, and nerves fire. The brain gets involved as chemicals are identified or trigger thoughts and emotional responses. Fungi are equipped with different kinds of bodies. They don’t have noses or brains. Instead, their entire surface behaves like an olfactory epithelium. A mycelial network is one large chemically sensitive membrane: A molecule can bind to a receptor anywhere on its surface and trigger a signaling cascade that alters fungal behavior.

			Fungi live their lives bathed in a rich field of chemical information. Truffle fungi use chemicals to communicate to animals their readiness to be eaten; they also use chemicals to communicate with plants, animals, other fungi—and themselves. It isn’t possible to understand fungi without exploring these sensory worlds, but they are hard for us to interpret. Perhaps it doesn’t matter. Like fungi, we spend much of our lives being drawn toward things. We know what it is to be attracted or repelled. Through smell, we can participate in the molecular discourse fungi use to organize much of their existence.



* * *



			—

			IN HUMAN HISTORY, truffles have long been associated with sex. The word for truffle in many languages translates to “testicle,” as in the old Castilian turmas de tierra, or Earth’s testicles. Truffle fungi have evolved to make animals giddy because their lives depend on it. As I spoke with Charles Lefevre, a truffle scientist and cultivator in Oregon, about his work with the Périgord black truffle, he broke off: “Funny—as I’m saying this I am ‘bathing’ in the virtual aroma of Tuber melanosporum. It’s as if a cloud of it is filling my office, but there are currently no truffles here. These olfactory flashbacks are common with truffles in my experience. They can even include visual and emotional memories.”



* * *



			—



				 					Périgord black truffle, Tuber melanosporum



			In France, Saint Anthony—the patron saint of lost objects—is regarded as the patron saint of truffles, and truffle masses are celebrated in his honor. Prayers do little to stop the skulduggery. Cheap truffles are stained or flavored to pass them off as their more valuable cousins. Prized truffle forests are targeted by truffle poachers. Expertly trained dogs worth thousands of euros are stolen. Poisoned meat is strewn around woods to kill the dogs of rival hunters. In 2010, in a crime of passion, a French truffle farmer, Laurent Rambaud, shot dead a truffle thief he encountered while patrolling his truffle orchards during the night. Following his arrest, two hundred and fifty supporters marched in support of Rambaud’s right to defend his crop, angry at the rise in thefts of both truffles and truffle dogs. The deputy head of the Tricastin truffle growers’ union told La Provence newspaper that he had advised fellow producers never to patrol their fields with a gun because “the temptation is too high.” Lefevre put it well: “Truffles bring out the dark side of people. It’s like money lying on the ground, but it’s perishable and mercurial.”

			 			Truffles are not the only fungi to attract animal attention. On the West Coast in North America, bears upend logs and dig out ditches looking for the prized matsutake mushroom. Oregon mushroom hunters have reported elk with noses bloodied in their hunt for matsutake in sharp pumice soils. Some species of tropical rainforest orchid have evolved to mimic the smell, shape, and color of mushrooms to attract mushroom-loving flies. Mushrooms and other fruit bodies are fungi at their most conspicuous, but mycelium, too, can be a lure. A friend of mine who studies tropical insects showed me a video of orchid bees crowding around a crater in a rotting log. Male orchid bees collect scents from the world and amass them into a cocktail that they use to court females. They are perfume makers. Mating takes seconds, but gathering and blending their scents takes their entire adult lives. Although he hadn’t yet tested the hypothesis, my friend had a strong hunch that the bees were harvesting fungal compounds to add to their bouquets. Orchid bees are known to have a taste for complex aromatic chemicals, many of which are produced by fungi that break down wood.

			 			Humans wear perfumes produced by other organisms and it is not uncommon for fungal aromas to be incorporated into our own sexual rituals. Agarwood, or oudh, is a fungal infection of Aquilaria trees found in India and Southeast Asia and one of the most valuable raw materials in the world. It is used to make a scent—dank nuts, dark honey, rich wood—and has been coveted at least since the time of the ancient Greek physician Dioscorides. The best oudh is worth more, gram for gram, than gold or platinum—as much as $100,000 per kilogram—and the destructive harvest of Aquilaria trees has driven them to near extinction in the wild.

			The eighteenth-century French physician Théophile de Bordeu asserted that each organism “does not fail to spread exhalations, an odor, emanations around itself…These emanations have taken on its style and its demeanor; they are, in fact, genuine parts of itself.” A truffle’s fragrance and an orchid bee’s perfume may circulate beyond the flesh of each organism, but these fields of odor make up a part of their chemical bodies that overlap with one another like ghosts at a disco.



* * *



			—

			I SPENT SEVERAL minutes in the truffle weighing room, lost in the aroma. My reverie was interrupted when my host, Tony, the truffle dealer, bustled in with one of his clients. He closed the door behind him, sealing in the smell. The client inspected the heap of truffles on the scales and cast an eye over the bowls of unsorted and uncleaned specimens ranged across a grubby workbench. He nodded to Tony, who tied up the corners of the rag. They walked out into the yard, shook hands, and the client drove off in a smart black car.

			It had been a dry summer, which had resulted in a poor truffle harvest. The price reflected the scarcity. Bought directly from Tony, a kilogram would set you back €2,000. The same kilogram purchased at a market or restaurant would cost as much as €6,000. In 2007, a single 1.5 kilogram truffle was sold at auction for £165,000—like diamonds, the price of truffles increases nonlinearly with their size.

			 			Tony had a warm manner and a dealer’s bravado. He seemed surprised that I would want to join his hunters and didn’t get my hopes up about our chances of finding any truffles. “You can go out with my guys, but you probably won’t find anything. And it’s hard work. Up and down. Through bushes. Through mud. Through streams. Are those the only shoes you have?” I assured him I didn’t mind.

			Truffle hunters have their turf, sometimes legal, sometimes not. When I arrived, both truffle hunters—Daniele and Paride—were wearing camouflage. I asked whether it helped them to sneak up on the truffles, and they responded in earnest. It allowed them to hunt for truffles without being followed by other truffle hunters. Truffle hunters are in the business of knowing where to look. Their knowledge has value, and, like truffles themselves, can be stolen.

			Paride was the friendlier of the two and met me outside with Kika, his favorite truffle dog. He had five dogs of various ages and states of training, each a specialist in either black or white truffles. Kika was charming, and Paride introduced her proudly. “My dog is very clever, but I am more clever.” Kika’s breed—the Lagotto Romagnolo—is one of the most commonly used for truffle hunting. She was knee-height, and with hair that fell over her eyes in shaggy ringlets, she resembled a truffle. Indeed, after a morning smelling truffles, meeting a litter of truffle-dog puppies, talking truffles, witnessing truffle deals, and eating truffles, even the rounded rocky hills had started to look like truffles. Paride spoke about the subtle cues he and Kika used to communicate with each other. They had learned to read and interpret the tiniest shifts in the other’s behavior and could coordinate their movements in near-total silence. Truffles had evolved to communicate to animals their readiness to be eaten. Humans and dogs had developed ways to communicate with one another about truffles’ chemical propositions.

			A truffle’s aroma is a complex trait and seems to emerge out of the relationships the truffle maintains with its community of microbes, and the soil and climate it lives within—its terroir. Truffle fruiting bodies house thriving communities of bacteria and yeasts—between a million and a billion bacteria per gram of dry weight. Many members of truffles’ microbiomes are able to produce the distinctive volatile compounds that contribute to truffles’ aromas, and it is likely that the cocktail of chemicals that reaches your nose is the work of more than a single organism.

			 			The chemical basis of truffles’ allure remains uncertain. In 1981, a study published by German researchers found that both Piedmont white truffles (Tuber magnatum) and Périgord black truffles (Tuber melanosporum) produced androstenol—a steroid with a musky scent—in non-negligible quantities. In pigs, androstenol functions as a sex hormone. It is produced by males and prompts the mating posture in sows. This finding triggered speculation that androstenol might explain the impressive abilities of sows to find truffles buried deep underground. A study published nine years later cast doubt on this possibility. Researchers buried black truffles, a synthetic truffle flavoring, and androstenol five centimeters underground, and challenged a pig and five dogs—including the champion of the local county truffle-dog contest—to find the samples. All the animals detected the real truffles and the synthetic truffle flavoring. None detected the androstenol.

			In a series of further tests, the researchers narrowed truffles’ allure down to a single molecule: dimethyl sulfide. It was a neat study, but unlikely to be the whole truth. The smell of a truffle is made up of a flock of different molecules drifting in formation—more than a hundred in white truffles and around fifty in the other most popular species. These elaborate bouquets are energetically costly and are unlikely to have evolved unless they served some purpose. What’s more, animal tastes are diverse. Certainly, not all truffle species are attractive to humans and some are even mildly poisonous. Of the thousand-odd species of truffle in North America, only a handful are of culinary interest. Even these aren’t of interest to everyone. As Lefevre explained, a large number of people are offended by the aroma of the otherwise prized species. Some species smell outright repulsive. He told me about Gautieria, a genus that produces truffles with a foul stench—like “sewer gas” or “baby diarrhea.” His dogs love them, but his wife won’t let him bring any into the house, even for taxonomic purposes.

			 			However they do it, truffles create nested layers of attraction around themselves: Humans train dogs to find truffles because pigs are so attracted to them that they devour the truffles they find rather than turn them over to their minders. Restaurateurs from New York and Tokyo travel to Italy to build relationships with truffle dealers. Exporters have developed sophisticated chilled packing systems to maintain truffles at optimal conditions as they are washed, packed, hand-delivered to the airport, flown around the world, collected from the airport, carried through customs, repacked, and distributed to consumers—all within forty-eight hours. Truffles, like matsutake mushrooms, must arrive fresh on a plate within two to three days of harvest. Truffles’ aromas are made in an active process by living, metabolizing cells. A truffle’s odor increases as its spores develop, and its aroma ceases when its cells die. You can’t dry a truffle and expect to taste it later, as you can with some types of mushroom. They are chemically loquacious, vociferous even. Stop the metabolism, and you stop the smell. For this reason, in many restaurants, fresh truffles are grated onto your food before your eyes. Few other organisms are so good at persuading humans to disperse them with such urgency.



				 					Truffle spore





* * *



			—

			WE PILED INTO Paride’s car and drove up a valley on a narrow country road, through the damp yellows and browns of the oak woods that covered the hills. Paride talked about the weather and cracked jokes about dog training and the pros and cons of working with a “bandit” like Daniele. After a few minutes, we turned down a track and pulled over. Kika jumped out of the trunk, and we walked along a meadow and into a wood. Daniele had already arrived and was hovering furtively with his dog. There was another truffle hunter nearby, he explained, and we had to be quiet. Daniele’s dog was tousled and unkempt and had twigs caught in its curls. It didn’t have a name, although Paride said that he had heard Daniele call it Diavolo (Devil) earlier that morning. Unlike Kika, who was affectionate and friendly, Diavolo had a tendency to snap and snarl. Paride explained why. Whereas he trained his dogs to hunt for truffles as if it were a game, Daniele trained his by hunger. “Look,” Paride pointed at Diavolo, “it’s desperate, it’s eating acorns.” They bantered for a while. Daniele argued that his dogs were more effective truffle hunters than Paride’s well-fed and well-loved “pets.” Paride stuck up for the reformed school of truffle-dog training, summing it up neatly: “Daniele hunts truffles at night, and I hunt them in the day. He is nervous, and I am not. His dog bites, and mine is friendly. His dog is slim, and mine is not slim. He is bad, and I am good.”

			 			All of a sudden, Diavolo darted off. We followed him, Paride providing a commentary as we scrambled along. “There may be a truffle. Or a mouse. Either way the dog’s happy.” We found Diavolo digging and snorting halfway up a muddy bank. Daniele caught up and cleared away the brambles. At this point, Paride explained, the truffle hunter had to read the dog’s body language closely. A wagging tail promised truffles, a still tail suggested otherwise. A two-pawed dig indicated white truffles, a one-pawed dig black. The signs looked good, and Daniele began to loosen the soil with a blunt, flat-tipped tool like a giant screwdriver, smelling pinches of soil as he got deeper. He and the dog took it in turns, though he was careful to stop Diavolo digging too vigorously. Paride smiled over at us: “A hungry dog eats the truffle.”

			Finally, about a foot and a half down, Daniele found it lodged in the damp soil. With his fingers and a small metal hook, he pulled away the mud. The truffle’s aroma strayed upward from the hole, brighter and more saturated than in the weighing room. This was its natural habitat, and its scent drifted in easy harmony with the dampness of the ground and the fraying of leaf mold. I imagined being sensitive enough to notice the truffle’s aroma at a distance and compelled enough to drop everything to pursue it. Inhaling its emanations I recalled the passage in Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World where he describes the performance of a scent organ, an instrument able to give olfactory recitals in the way a musical instrument might. It is a concept easily adapted for truffles—scent organs in a different sense—that perform, in their way, suites of volatile compounds.

			 			How well it had worked. Here we all were, tousled and muddy, standing around a truffle. It had triggered a signaling cascade, tugging a troupe of animals toward it—first a dog, then a truffle-hunting human, then his slower-footed associates. As Daniele picked up the truffle, the ground around it collapsed. “Look!” Paride cleared the soil aside. “The house of a mouse.” We had not been the first to arrive.



* * *



			—

			WHEN WE SMELL a truffle’s aroma, we receive a one-way transmission from truffle to world. The process is comparatively nuance-free. To attract an animal the aroma has to be curious, and delicious—yes. But most of all it has to be penetrating and strong. It doesn’t really matter whether their spores are scattered by a wild boar or a flying squirrel, so why be picky? Most hungry animals will chase a delicious smell. Moreover, a truffle doesn’t change its aroma in response to your immediate attentions. It can excite, but it isn’t excitable. Its signal billows out loud and clear, and once begun, it is always on. A ripe truffle broadcasts an unambiguous summons in chemical lingua franca, a pop scent with mass appeal that could cause Daniele, Paride, two dogs, a mouse, and me to converge at a single point under a bramble bush on a muddy bank in Italy.

			Truffles—like many other highly prized fungal fruiting bodies—are their parent fungus’s least sophisticated channels of communication. Much of fungal life, including the growth of mycelium, depends on subtler forms of allure. There are two key moves by which fungal hyphae become a mycelial network. First, they branch. Second, they fuse. (The process by which hyphae merge with each other is known as “anastomosis,” which in Greek means “to provide with a mouth.”) If hyphae couldn’t branch, one hypha could never become many. If hyphae couldn’t fuse with one another, they would not be able to grow into complex networks. However, before they fuse, hyphae must find other hyphae, which they do by attracting one another, a phenomenon known as “homing.” Fusion between hyphae is the linking stitch that makes mycelium mycelium, the most basic networking act. In this sense, the mycelium of any fungus arises from its ability to attract itself to itself.



				 					Mycelium growing outward from a spore. Redrawn from Buller, 1931.



			However, much as a given mycelial network is able to encounter itself, it is able to encounter another. How do fungi maintain a sense of a body subject to continual revision? Hyphae must be able to tell if they are bumping into a branch of themselves or another fungus entirely. If another, they need to be able to tell whether it is a different—potentially hostile—species, or a sexually compatible member of its own, or neither. Some fungi have tens of thousands of mating types, approximately equivalent to our sexes (the record holder is the split gill fungus, Schizophyllum commune, which has more than twenty-three thousand mating types, each of which is sexually compatible with nearly every one of the others). The mycelium of many fungi can fuse with other mycelial networks if they are genetically similar enough, even if they aren’t sexually compatible. Fungal self-identity matters, but it is not always a binary world. Self can shade off into otherness gradually.

			 			Allure underpins many types of fungal sex, including that of truffle fungi. Truffles themselves are the outcome of a sexual encounter: For a truffle fungus like Tuber melanosporum to fruit, the hyphae of one mycelial network must fuse with those of a separate, sexually compatible network and pool genetic material. For most of their lives, as mycelial networks, truffle fungi live as separate mating types, whether “-” or “+”—by fungal standards, their sexual lives are straightforward. Sex happens when a - hypha attracts and fuses with a + hypha. One partner plays a paternal role, providing genetic material only. The other plays a maternal role, providing genetic material and growing the flesh that matures into truffles and spores. Truffles differ from humans in that either + or - mating types can be maternal or paternal—it is as if all humans were both male and female and equally able to play the part of a mother or a father, provided we could have sex with a partner of the opposite mating type. How the sexual attraction between truffle fungi plays out remains unknown. Closely related fungi use pheromones to attract mates, and researchers have a strong suspicion that truffles, too, use a sex pheromone for this purpose.

			Without homing, there could be no mycelium. Without mycelium, there could be no attraction between - and + mating types. Without sexual attraction there could be no sex. And without sex, there could be no truffle. However, the relationships between truffle fungi and their partner trees are just as important, and their chemical interactions must be intricately managed. The hyphae of young truffle fungi will soon die unless they find a plant to partner with. Plants must admit into their roots the fungal species that will form a mutually beneficial relationship, as opposed to the many that will cause disease. Both fungal hyphae and plant roots face the challenge of finding one another amid the chemical babble in the soil where countless other roots, fungi, and microbes course and engage.

			It is another case of attraction and allure, of chemical call-and-response. Both plant and fungus use volatile chemicals to make themselves attractive to one another, just as truffles make themselves attractive to animals in a forest. Receptive plant roots produce plumes of volatile compounds that drift through the soil and cause spores to sprout and hyphae to branch and grow faster. Fungi produce plant growth hormones that manipulate roots, causing them to proliferate into masses of feathery branches—with a greater surface area, the chances of an encounter between root tips and fungal hyphae become more likely. (Many fungi produce plant and animal hormones to alter the physiology of their associates.)

			 			More than the architecture of roots has to change for a fungus to bond with a plant. In response to each other’s distinctive chemical profiles, signaling cascades ripple through plant and fungal cells, activating suites of genes. Both reorient their metabolisms and developmental programs. Fungi release chemicals that suspend their plant partners’ immune responses, without which they can’t get close enough to form symbiotic structures. Once established, mycorrhizal partnerships continue to develop. Connections between hyphae and roots are dynamic, formed and reformed as root tips and fungal hyphae get old and die. These are relationships that ceaselessly remodel themselves. If you could place your olfactory epithelium into the soil, it would feel like the performance of a jazz group, with the players listening, interacting, responding to one another in real time.

			Piedmont white truffles and other prized mycorrhizal fungi, such as porcini, chanterelle, and matsutake, have never been domesticated in part because of the fluidity of their relationships with plants, and in part because of the intricacies of their sex lives. There are too many gaps in our understanding of how basic fungal communication happens. Some truffle species can be cultivated, such as the Périgord black, but trufficulture is immature by comparison with the venerable craft surrounding most human agricultural efforts, and even the success of seasoned cultivators can vary wildly. At Lefevre’s New World Truffieres, the proportion of seedlings that grow successfully with the mycelium of the Périgord black truffle hovers around thirty percent. One year, with no deliberate change in method, he achieved a one hundred percent success rate. “I have not been able to reproduce that result,” he told me. “I don’t know what I did right.”

			 			To cultivate truffles effectively, you have to understand the quirks and needs not only of the fungi—with their idiosyncratic reproductive systems—but also of the trees and bacteria they live with. Moreover, you have to understand the importance of subtle variations in the surrounding soil, season, and climate. “It is an intellectually stimulating field because it’s so interdisciplinary,” Ulf Büntgen, a professor of geography at Cambridge, and the first to report the fruiting of a Périgord black truffle in the British Isles, told me. “It is microbiology, physiology, land management, agriculture, forestry, ecology, economy, and climate change. You really have to take a holistic perspective.” Truffles’ affairs quickly unspool into entire ecosystems. Scientific understanding hasn’t yet caught up.



* * *



			—

			FOR SOME ATTRACTED by fungal chemical allure, the outcome is simpler: death.

			Among the most impressive sensory feats are those performed by predatory fungi that trap and consume nematode worms. Hundreds of species of worm-hunting fungi can be found all over the world. Most spend their lives decomposing plant matter and only start to hunt when there is insufficient material to eat. But they’re subtle predators: Unlike truffles, whose scent, once begun, is always on, nematode-eating fungi only produce worm-hunting organs and issue a chemical summons when they sense nematodes are close by. If there is plenty of material to rot, they don’t bother, even if worms abound. To behave in this way, nematode-eating fungi must be able to detect the presence of worms with exquisite sensitivity. Nematodes all depend on the same class of molecule to serve a number of purposes, from regulating their development to attracting mates. In turn, fungi use these chemicals to eavesdrop on their prey.

			The methods fungi use to hunt nematodes are grisly and diverse. It is a habit that has evolved multiple times—many fungal lineages have reached a similar conclusion but in different ways. Some fungi grow adhesive nets, or branches to which nematodes stick. Some use mechanical means, producing hyphal nooses that inflate in a tenth of a second when touched, ensnaring their prey. Some—including the commonly cultivated oyster mushroom (Pleurotus ostreatus)—produce hyphal stalks capped with a single toxic droplet that paralyzes nematodes, giving the hypha enough time to grow through their mouth and digest the worm from the inside. Others produce spores that can swim through the soil, chemically drawn toward nematodes, to which they bind. Once attached, the spores sprout and the fungus harpoons the worm with specialized hyphae known as “gun cells.”

			 			Fungal worm-hunting is a variable behavior: Different individuals of a given species can respond idiosyncratically, producing different types of trap, or positioning traps in distinctive ways. One species—Arthrobotrys oligospora—behaves like a “normal” decomposer in the presence of plenty of organic material and, if needs be, can produce nematode traps in its mycelium. It can also coil around the mycelium of other types of fungi, starving them, or develop specialized structures to penetrate and feed off plant roots. How it chooses between its many options remains unknown.



				 					Nematode worm being devoured





* * *



			—

			HOW SHOULD WE talk about fungal communication? In Italy, as we crowded around the hole in the muddy bank, peering in, I tried to imagine the scene from the truffle’s point of view. In the excitement, Paride offered a lyrical interpretation. “The truffle and its tree are like lovers, or husband and wife,” he crooned. “If the threads are broken, there can be no going back. The bond is gone forever. The truffle was born from the root of the tree, defended by the wild rose.” He gestured to the brambles. “It lay inside, protected by the thorns like Sleeping Beauty, waiting to be kissed by the dog.”

			 			The prevailing scientific view is that it is a mistake to imagine that there is anything deliberate about most nonhuman interactions. Truffle fungi are not articulate. They don’t speak. Like many of the animals and plants they depend on, truffle fungi react to their environment automatically, based on robotic routines that maximize their chance of survival. In stark contrast is the vivid experience of human life, where the quantity of a stimulus glides seamlessly into the quality of sensation; where stimuli are felt and arouse emotion; where we are affected.

			I balanced on the muddy slope and suspended my nose over the pungent clod of fungus. No matter how hard I tried to reduce the truffle to an automaton, it kept springing to life in my mind.

			When trying to understand the interactions of nonhuman organisms, it is easy to flip between these two perspectives: that of the inanimate behavior of preprogrammed robots on the one hand, and that of rich, lived human experience on the other. Framed as brainless organisms, lacking the basic apparatus required to have even a simple kind of “experience,” fungal interactions are no more than automatic responses to a series of biochemical triggers. Yet the mycelium of truffle fungi, like that of most fungal species, actively senses and responds to its surroundings in unpredictable ways. Their hyphae are chemically irritable, responsive, excitable. It is this ability to interpret the chemical emissions of others that allows fungi to negotiate a series of complex trading relationships with trees; to knead away at stores of nutrients in the soil; to have sex; to hunt; or to fend off attackers.

			Anthropomorphism is usually thought of as an illusion that arises like a blister in soft human minds: untrained, undisciplined, unhardened. There are good reasons for this: When we humanize the world, we may prevent ourselves from understanding the lives of other organisms on their own terms. But are there things this stance might lead us to pass over—or forget to notice?

			 			The biologist Robin Wall Kimmerer, a member of the Citizen Potawatomi Nation, observes that the indigenous Potawatomi language is rich in verb forms that attribute aliveness to the more-than-human world. The word for “hill,” for example, is a verb: to be a hill. Hills are always in the process of hilling, they are actively being hills. Equipped with this “grammar of animacy,” it is possible to talk about the life of other organisms without either reducing them to an “it” or borrowing concepts traditionally reserved for humans. By contrast, in English, writes Kimmerer, there is no way to recognize the “simple existence of another living being.” If you’re not a human subject, by default you’re an inanimate object: an “it,” a “mere thing.” If you repurpose a human concept to help make sense of the life of a nonhuman organism, you’ve tumbled into the trap of anthropomorphism. Use “it,” and you’ve objectified the organism and fallen into a different kind of trap.

			Biological realities are never black-and-white. Why should the stories and metaphors we use to make sense of the world—our investigative tools—be so? Might we be able to expand some of our concepts, such that speaking might not always require a mouth, hearing might not always require ears, and interpreting might not always require a nervous system? Are we able to do this without smothering other life-forms with prejudice and innuendo?

			Daniele wrapped up the truffle and carefully filled in the hole, pulling the clump of brambles back over the turned earth. Paride explained that it was to avoid disturbing the fungus’s relationship with its tree’s roots. Daniele said that it was to prevent other truffle hunters from following in our tracks. We strolled back through the field. The truffle’s smell was less vivid by the time we arrived at the car and more muted still by the time we got back to the weighing room. I wondered how faint it would be by the time it was grated onto a plate in Los Angeles.



* * *



			—

			SOME MONTHS LATER, in the wooded hills outside Eugene, Oregon, I went out truffle hunting with Lefevre and his Lagotto Romagnolo, Dante. Dante is what Lefevre calls a diversity dog. Production dogs—like Kika and Diavolo—are trained to find large amounts of a particular species; diversity dogs are trained to go after anything that smells interesting. This allows them to find species of truffle they have never smelled before. As a result Dante sometimes chases things that aren’t truffles—pungent millipedes, for instance—but he has also unearthed four undescribed species of truffle. This is not so uncommon. Mike Castellano, a renowned truffle expert with a species named after him—he has described two new orders, more than two dozen new genera, and some two hundred new species of truffle—reports routinely discovering new species of truffle when collecting in California, a reminder of how much remains unknown.

			 			As we ambled through the Douglas firs and sword ferns, Lefevre explained that humans have been cultivating truffles unintentionally for centuries. Truffles thrive in the disturbed environments that humans make. In Europe, truffle production plummeted during the twentieth century as the truffle-growing heartlands of managed woodland were either cleared for agriculture or abandoned and left to grow into mature forests. Neither are good for truffle production. For Lefevre, the resurgence of trufficulture is exciting because it is a way to produce a cash crop from a forested landscape and divert private capital into environmental restoration. To grow truffles, you have to grow trees. You have to acknowledge that the soil is full of life. You can’t cultivate truffles without thinking at the level of the ecosystem.

			Dante zigzagged around, sniffing. Lefevre told me about the theory that manna—the providential food that sustained the Israelites during their passage through the desert—was in fact the desert truffle, a delicacy that erupts without warning from arid ground across much of the Middle East. He told me about his unsuccessful attempts to cultivate the evasive white truffle and how little we understand about its relationship to its host trees. I thought of the many ways that fungi respond to changing environments and find new ways to live alongside the plants and animals on which they depend.

			Back in a forest, hunting for truffles, I found myself once again searching for language to describe the lives of these remarkable organisms. Perfumers and wine tasters use metaphors to articulate differences in aromas. A chemical becomes “cut grass,” “sweaty mango,” “grapefruit and hot horses.” Without these references, we would be unable to imagine it. Cis-3-hexenol smells like cut grass. Oxane smells like sweaty mango. Gardamide smells like grapefruit and hot horses. This is not to say oxane is sweaty mango, but if I were to pass you an open vial you’d almost certainly recognize the smell. Correlating human language with an odor involves judgment and prejudice. Our descriptions warp and deform the phenomena we describe, but sometimes this is the only way to talk about features of the world: to say what they are like but are not. Might this also be the case when we talk about other organisms?

			 			Boil it down and there aren’t many other options. Fungi may not have brains, but their many options entail decisions. Their fickle environments entail improvisation. Their trials entail errors. Whether in the homing response of hyphae within a mycelial network, the sexual attraction between two hyphae in separate mycelial networks, the vital fascination between a mycorrhizal hypha and a plant root, or the fatal attraction of a nematode to a fungal toxic droplet, fungi actively sense and interpret their worlds, even if we have no way of knowing what it is like for a hypha to sense or interpret. Perhaps it isn’t so strange to think of fungi as articulating themselves using a chemical vocabulary, arranged and rearranged in such a way that it might be interpreted by other organisms, whether nematode, tree root, truffle dog, or New York restaurateur. Sometimes—as with truffles—these molecules might translate into a chemical language we can, in our way, understand. The vast majority will always pass over our heads, or under our feet.

			Dante started digging furiously. “It looks like a truffle,” Lefevre said, reading the dog’s body language, “but it’s deep.” I asked whether he ever worried about Dante’s nose or feet getting hurt from all the frantic digging. “Oh he does keep injuring his pads,” Lefevre admitted. “I keep meaning to get him some booties.” Dante snorted and scraped, but to no avail. “I feel bad not rewarding him for his efforts when he’s unsuccessful”—Lefevre crouched down and ruffled his curls—“but I haven’t found a treat that’s worth more to him than a truffle. Truffles trump everything.” He grinned up at me. “For Dante, God lives just below the surface of the soil.”





2.


			LIVING LABYRINTHS




I am so happy in the silky damp dark of the labyrinth and there is no thread.

					—HÉLÈNE CIXOUS





			IMAGINE THAT YOU could pass through two doors at once. It’s inconceivable, yet fungi do it all the time. When faced with a forked path, fungal hyphae don’t have to choose one or the other. They can branch and take both routes.

			One can confront hyphae with microscopic labyrinths and watch how they nose their way around. If obstructed, they branch. After diverting themselves around an obstacle, the hyphal tips recover the original direction of their growth. They soon find the shortest path to the exit, just as my friend’s puzzle-solving slime molds were able to find the quickest way out of the IKEA maze. If one follows the growing tips as they explore, it does something peculiar to one’s mind. One tip becomes two, becomes four, becomes eight—yet all remain connected in one mycelial network. Is this organism singular or plural, I find myself wondering, before I’m forced to admit that it is somehow, improbably, both.

			Watching a hypha explore a single clinical maze is bewildering, but scale up: Imagine millions of hyphal tips, each navigating a different maze at the same time within a tablespoon of soil. Scale up again: Imagine billions of hyphal tips exploring a patch of forest the size of a football field.

			 			Mycelium is ecological connective tissue, the living seam by which much of the world is stitched into relation. In school classrooms children are shown anatomical charts, each depicting different aspects of the human body. One chart reveals the body as a skeleton, another the body as a network of blood vessels, another the nerves, another the muscles. If we made equivalent sets of diagrams to portray ecosystems, one of the layers would show the fungal mycelium that runs through them. We would see sprawling, interlaced webs strung through the soil, through sulfurous sediments hundreds of meters below the surface of the ocean, along coral reefs, through plant and animal bodies both alive and dead, in rubbish dumps, carpets, floorboards, old books in libraries, specks of house dust, and in canvases of old master paintings hanging in museums. According to some estimates, if one teased apart the mycelium found in a gram of soil—about a teaspoon—and laid it end to end, it could stretch anywhere from a hundred meters to ten kilometers. In practice, it is impossible to measure the extent to which mycelium perfuses the Earth’s structures, systems, and inhabitants—its weave is too tight. Mycelium is a way of life that challenges our animal imaginations.



* * *



			—

			LYNNE BODDY, A professor of microbial ecology at Cardiff University, has spent decades studying the foraging behavior of mycelium. Her elegant studies illustrate the problems that mycelial networks are able to solve. In one experiment, Boddy allowed a wood-rotting fungus to grow within a block of wood. She then placed the block on a dish. Mycelium spread radially outward from the block in all directions, forming a fuzzy white circle. Eventually the growing network encountered a new block of wood. Only a small part of the fungus touched the wood, but the behavior of the entire network changed. The mycelium stopped exploring in all directions. It withdrew the exploratory parts of its network and thickened the connection with the newly discovered block. After a few days, the network was unrecognizable. It had completely remodeled itself.

			 			She then repeated the experiment, but with a twist. She let the fungus grow out from the original block and discover the new block of wood. However this time, before the network had time to remodel itself, she removed the original block of wood from the dish, stripped away all of the hyphae growing out of it, and placed it onto a fresh dish. The fungus grew out from the original block in the direction of the newly discovered block. The mycelium appeared to possess a directional memory, although the basis of this memory remains unclear.

			Boddy has a no-nonsense manner and talks with quiet amazement about what these fungi are able to do. Their behavior is a bit like that of slime molds, and she has tested them in similar ways. However, rather than modeling the Tokyo underground network, Boddy encouraged mycelium to work out the most efficient routes between the cities of Great Britain. She arranged soil into the shape of the British landmass and marked cities using blocks of wood colonized with a fungus (the sulfur tuft, or Hypholoma fasciculare). The size of the wood blocks was proportional to the population of the cities they represented. “The fungi grew out from the ‘cities’ and made the motorway network,” Boddy recounted. “You could see the M5, M4, M1, M6. I thought it was quite fun.”

			One way to think about mycelial networks is as swarms of hyphal tips. Insects form swarms. A murmuration of starlings is a swarm, as is a school of sardines. Swarms are patterns of collective behavior. Without a leader or command center, a swarm of ants can work out the shortest route to a source of food. A swarm of termites can build giant mounds with sophisticated architectural features. However, mycelium quickly outgrows the swarm analogy because all the hyphal tips in a network are connected to one another. A termite mound is made up of units of termites. A hyphal tip would be the closest we could come to defining the unit of a mycelial swarm, although one can’t dismantle a mycelial network hypha by hypha once it has grown, as we could pick apart a swarm of termites. Mycelium is conceptually slippery. From the point of view of the network, mycelium is a single interconnected entity. From the point of view of a hyphal tip, mycelium is a multitude.

			 			“I think there’s lots we can learn, as humans, from mycelium,” Boddy reflected. “You can’t just go and close a road to see how the traffic flow changes, but you can sever a connection in a mycelial network.” Researchers have begun to use network-based organisms like slime molds and fungi to solve human problems. The researchers who modeled the Tokyo train network using slime molds are working to incorporate slime-mold behavior into the design of urban transportation networks. Researchers at the Unconventional Computing Laboratory at the University of the West of England have used slime molds to calculate efficient fire evacuation routes from buildings. Some are applying the strategies that fungi and slime molds use to navigate labyrinths to solve mathematical problems or to program robots.

			Solving mazes and complex routing problems are nontrivial exercises. This is why mazes have long been used to assess the problem-solving abilities of many organisms, from octopuses to bees to humans. Nonetheless, mycelial fungi are maze-dwellers, and solving spatial and geometrical problems is what they have evolved to do. How best to distribute their bodies is a question fungi face on a moment-to-moment basis. By growing a dense network, mycelium can increase its capacity for transport, but dense networks aren’t good for exploring across large distances. Sparse networks are better for foraging across large areas but have fewer interconnections and so are more vulnerable to damage. How do fungi juggle this kind of trade-off while exploring a crowded rotscape in search of food?

			Boddy’s experiment with two blocks of wood illustrates a typical sequence of events. The mycelium starts in an exploratory mode, proliferating in all directions. Setting out to find water in a desert, we’d have to pick one direction to explore. Fungi can choose all possible routes at once. If the fungus discovers something to eat, it reinforces the links that connect it with the food and prunes back the links that don’t lead anywhere. One can think of it in terms of natural selection. Mycelium overproduces links. Some turn out to be more competitive than others. These links are thickened. Less competitive links are withdrawn, leaving a few mainline highways. By growing in one direction while pulling back from another, mycelial networks can even migrate through a landscape. The Latin root of the word extravagant means “to wander outside or beyond.” It is a good word for mycelium, which ceaselessly wanders outside and beyond its limits, none of which are preset as they are in most animal bodies. Mycelium is a body without a body plan.



				 					Mycelium exploring a flat surface





* * *



			—

			HOW DOES ONE part of a mycelial network “know” what is happening in a distant part of the network? Mycelium sprawls, yet must somehow be able to stay in touch—with itself.

			Stefan Olsson is a Swedish mycologist who has spent decades trying to understand how mycelial networks coordinate themselves and behave as integrated wholes. A number of years ago, he became interested in one of several species of fungus that produce bioluminescence, which causes their mushrooms and mycelium to glow in the dark and can help attract insects that disperse their spores. Coal miners in nineteenth-century England reported that bioluminescent fungi growing on wooden pit props were bright enough to “see their hands by,” and Benjamin Franklin proposed the use of the bioluminescent fungi known as “foxfire” to illuminate the compass and depth gauge of the first submarine (the Turtle—developed in 1775 during the American Revolutionary War). The species Olsson had been studying was the bitter oyster, Panellus stipticus. “You could read in the light of it when I grew it in jars,” he told me. “It was like a little lamp standing on the shelf at home. My kids loved it.”

			To monitor the behavior of Panellus mycelium, Olsson grew cultures in dishes in the lab and placed two of them, glowing, in a perfectly dark box under constant conditions. He left them alone for a week with a camera sensitive enough to detect their bioluminescence taking pictures every few seconds. In the time-lapse video, two unconnected mycelial cultures grow outward into the shape of irregular circles in their separate dishes, glowing more intensely in the middle than at their edges. After several days—about two minutes of video—there is a sudden shift. In one of the cultures, a wave of bioluminescence passes over the network from one edge to the other. A day later, a similar wave passes over the second culture. On mycelial timescales, it is high drama. In a matter of—mycelial—moments, each network flips into a different physiological state.

			 			“What the hell is that?” Olsson exclaimed to me. He jokes that left alone the fungus might have got bored, started playing, or become depressed. Although he left the cultures in the dark for several more weeks, the pulse never happened again. Years later, he still doesn’t have a good explanation for what caused it. Nor for how the mycelium was able to coordinate its behavior over such short timescales.

			Mycelial coordination is difficult to understand because there is no center of control. If we cut off our head or stop our heart, we’re finished. A mycelial network has no head and no brain. Fungi, like plants, are decentralized organisms. There are no operational centers, no capital cities, no seats of government. Control is dispersed: Mycelial coordination takes place both everywhere at once and nowhere in particular. A fragment of mycelium can regenerate an entire network, meaning that a single mycelial individual—if you’re brave enough to use that word—is potentially immortal.

			Olsson was intrigued by the spontaneous waves of bioluminescence that he had recorded and prepared another set of dishes for a follow-up experiment. He tried stabbing one side of a Panellus mycelium with the tip of a pipette. The wounded area lit up immediately. What confused him was that within ten minutes the light had spread a distance of nine centimeters across the whole network. This was far faster than a chemical signal could travel from one side to the other within the mycelium itself.

			It occurred to Olsson that the wounded hyphae could have released a volatile chemical signal into the air that spread across the network in a gaseous cloud, thus avoiding the need to travel within the network. He tested this possibility by growing two genetically identical mycelia side by side. There were no direct connections between them, but they were close enough that chemicals drifting through the air would traverse the gap. Olsson stabbed one of the networks. The light propagated across the wounded network as it had before, but the signal did not spread to its neighbor. Some kind of rapid communication system had to be operating within the network itself. Olsson became increasingly preoccupied by the question of what this might be.



* * *



			—

			 			MYCELIUM IS HOW fungi feed. Some organisms—such as plants that photosynthesize—make their own food. Some organisms—like most animals—find food in the world and put it inside their bodies, where it is digested and absorbed. Fungi have a different strategy. They digest the world where it is and then absorb it into their bodies. Their hyphae are long and branched, and only a single cell thick—between two and twenty micrometers in diameter, more than five times thinner than an average human hair. The more of their surroundings that hyphae can touch, the more they can consume. The difference between animals and fungi is simple: Animals put food in their bodies, whereas fungi put their bodies in the food.

			However, the world is unpredictable. Most animals cope with uncertainty by moving. If food can be more easily found elsewhere, they move elsewhere. But to embed oneself in an irregular and unpredictable food supply as mycelium does, one must be able to shape-shift. Mycelium is a living, growing, opportunistic investigation—speculation in bodily form. This tendency is known as developmental “indeterminism”: No two mycelial networks are the same. What shape is mycelium? It’s like asking what shape water is. We can only answer the question if we know where the mycelium happens to be growing. Compare this with humans, all of whom share a body plan and embark on similar developmental journeys. Short of an intervention, if we are born with two arms we will end up with two arms.

			Mycelium decants itself into its surroundings, but its growth pattern isn’t infinitely variable. Different fungal species form different kinds of mycelial networks. Some species have thin hyphae, some thick. Some are picky about their food, others less so. Some grow into ephemeral puffs that don’t range beyond their food source and could fit on a single speck of house dust. Other species form long-lived networks that roam over kilometers. Some tropical species don’t forage for food at all. Instead, they behave like filter-feeding animals and grow nets out of thick strands of mycelium, which they use to catch falling leaves.



				 					Different mycelial types. Redrawn after Fries, 1943.



			No matter where fungi grow, they must be able to insinuate themselves within their source of food. To do so, they use pressure. In cases where mycelium has to break through particularly tough barriers, as disease-causing fungi do when infecting plants, they develop special penetrative hyphae that can reach pressures of fifty to eighty atmospheres and exert enough force to penetrate the tough plastics Mylar and Kevlar. One study estimated that if a hypha was as wide as a human hand, it would be able to lift an eight-ton school bus.



* * *



			—

			MOST MULTICELLULAR ORGANISMS grow by laying down new layers of cells. Cells divide to make more cells which then divide again. A liver is made by piling liver cells on top of liver cells. The same goes for a muscle or a carrot. Hyphae are different; they grow by getting longer. Under the right conditions, a hypha can prolong itself indefinitely.

			 			At a molecular level, all cellular activity, whether fungal or not, is a blur of rapid activity. Even by these standards, hyphal tips are a commotion, busier than a court of ten thousand self-dribbling basketballs. The hyphae of some species grow so fast that one can watch them extend in real time. Hyphal tips must lay down new material as they advance. Small bladders filled with cellular building materials arrive at the tip from within and fuse with it at a rate of up to six hundred a second.

			In 1995, the artist Francis Alÿs walked around São Paulo carrying a can of blue paint with a hole punched in the bottom. Over many days, as he moved through the city, a continuous stream of paint dribbled onto the ground in a trail behind him. The line of blue paint made a map of his journey, a portrait of time. Alÿs’s performance illustrates hyphal growth. Alÿs himself is the growing tip. The winding trail he leaves behind him is the body of the hypha. Growth happens at the tip; if one paused Alÿs as he walked around with his can of paint, the line would cease to grow. You can think of your life like this. The growing tip is the present moment—your lived experience of now—which gnaws into the future as it advances. The history of your life is the rest of the hypha, the blue lines that you’ve left in a tangled trail behind you. A mycelial network is a map of a fungus’s recent history and is a helpful reminder that all life-forms are in fact processes not things. The “you” of five years ago was made from different stuff than the “you” of today. Nature is an event that never stops. As William Bateson, who coined the word genetics, observed, “We commonly think of animals and plants as matter, but they are really systems through which matter is continually passing.” When we see an organism, from a fungus to a pine tree, we catch a single moment in its continual development.

			Mycelium usually grows from hyphal tips, but not always. When hyphae felt together to make mushrooms, they rapidly inflate with water, which they must absorb from their surroundings—the reason why mushrooms tend to appear after rain. Mushroom growth can generate an explosive force. When a stinkhorn mushroom crunches through an asphalt road, it produces enough force to lift an object weighing 130 kilograms. In a popular fungal guidebook published in the 1860s, Mordecai Cooke reported that “some years ago the [English] town of Basingstoke was paved; and not many months afterward the pavement was observed to exhibit an unevenness which could not readily be accounted for. In a short time after, the mystery was explained, for some of the heaviest stones were completely lifted out of their beds by the growth of large toadstools beneath them. One of the stones measured twenty-two inches by twenty-one, and weighed eighty-three pounds.”

			 			If I think about mycelial growth for more than a minute my mind starts to stretch.



* * *



			—

			IN THE MID-1980S, the American musicologist Louis Sarno recorded the music of the Aka people living in the forests of the Central African Republic. One of these recordings is called “Women Gathering Mushrooms.” As they wander around collecting mushrooms, their steps tracing the underground form of a mycelial network, the women sing amid the sounds of the animals in the forest. Each woman sings a different melody; each voice tells a different musical story. Many melodies intertwine without ceasing to be many. Voices flow around other voices, twisting into and beside one another.

			“Women Gathering Mushrooms” is an example of musical polyphony. Polyphony is singing more than one part, or telling more than one story, at the same time. Unlike the harmonies in a barbershop quartet, the voices of the women never weld into a unified front. No voice surrenders its individual identity. Nor does any one voice steal the show. There is no front woman, no soloist, no leader. If the recording was played to ten people and they were asked to sing the tune back, each would sing something different.

			Mycelium is polyphony in bodily form. Each of the women’s voices is a hyphal tip, exploring a soundscape for itself. Although each is free to wander, their wanderings can’t be seen as separate from the others. There is no main voice. There is no lead tune. There is no central planning. Nonetheless, a form emerges.

			 			Whenever I listen to “Women Gathering Mushrooms,” my ears find their way into the music by choosing a single voice and riding with it, as if I were in the forest and could walk up to one of the women and stand next to her. To follow more than one line at a time is hard. It is like trying to listen to many conversations at once without flicking from one to another. Several streams of consciousness have to commingle in the mind. My attention has to become less focused and more distributed. I fail every time, but when I soften my hearing, something else happens. The many songs coalesce to make one song that doesn’t exist in any one of the voices alone. It is an emergent song that I can’t find by unraveling the music into its separate strands.

			Mycelium is what happens when fungal hyphae—streams of embodiment rather than streams of consciousness—commingle. However, as Alan Rayner, a mycologist specializing in mycelial development, reminded me, “Mycelium is not just amorphous cotton wool.” Hyphae can come together to form elaborate structures.

			When you look at mushrooms, you’re looking at fruit. Imagine bunches of grapes growing out of the ground in their place. Then imagine the vine that produced them, twisting and branching below the surface of the soil. Grapes and woody grapevines are made of different types of cell. Cut up a mushroom and you’ll see that it is made of the same type of cell as mycelium: hyphae.

			Hyphae grow into other structures besides mushrooms. Many species of fungus form hollow cables of hyphae known as “cords” or “rhizomorphs.” These range from slim filaments to strands several millimeters thick that can stretch for hundreds of meters. Given that individual hyphae are tubes, not threads—it is easy to forget about the fluid-filled space within the hyphae—cords and rhizomorphs are large pipes formed from many small tubes. They can conduct a flow thousands of times faster than through individual hyphae—nearly 1.5 meters per hour in one report—and allow mycelial networks to transport nutrients and water over large distances. Olsson told me about a forest in Sweden where he had observed a large Armillaria network that fruited over an area the size of two football fields. A small footbridge crossed a stream that flowed through the area. “I started looking more closely at the bridge,” he remembered, “and saw that the fungus had started to wind its cords under the bridge. It was actually crossing the stream using the bridge.” How fungi coordinate the growth of these structures remains a mystery.



				 					Mushrooms, like mycelium, are made of hyphae.



			Cords and rhizomorphs are a good reminder that mycelial networks are transport networks. Boddy’s mycelial road map is another good illustration. Mushroom growth is another: To push their way through asphalt, a mushroom must inflate with water. For this to happen, water must travel rapidly through the network from one place to another and flow into a developing mushroom in a carefully directed pulse.

			Over short distances, substances can be transported through mycelial networks on a network of microtubules—dynamic filaments of protein that behave like a cross between scaffolding and escalators. Transport using microtubule “motors” is energetically costly, however, and over larger distances the contents of hyphae travel on a river of cellular fluid. Both approaches allow rapid transport across mycelial networks. Efficient transport allows different parts of a mycelial network to engage in different activities. When the English country house Haddon Hall was being renovated, a fruiting body of the dry-rot fungus Serpula was found in a disused stone oven. Its mycelial connections wound back through eight meters of stonework to a rotting floor elsewhere in the building. The floor was where it fed, the oven was where it fruited.

			 			The best way to appreciate flow within mycelium is to watch its contents shuttle around the network. In 2013, a group of researchers at the University of California at Los Angeles treated mycelium so that they could visualize cellular structures moving within the hyphae. Their videos show hordes of nuclei surging along. In some hyphae they travel faster than in others, in some they travel in different directions. Sometimes traffic jams form and nuclear traffic is rerouted on hyphal slip channels. Streams of nuclei merge with each other. Rhythmic pulses of nuclei—“nuclear comets”—rush along, branching at junctions and darting down side ducts. It is a scene of “nuclear anarchy,” as one of the researchers wryly observed.



* * *



			—

			FLOW HELPS TO explain how traffic circulates within a mycelial network, but it can’t explain why fungi might grow in one direction rather than another. Hyphae are sensitive to stimuli, and at any one moment are confronted with a world of possibilities. Rather than extending in a straight line at a constant rate, hyphae steer themselves toward appealing prospects and away from unappealing ones. How?

			In the 1950s, the Nobel Prize–winning biophysicist Max Delbrück became interested in sensory behavior. He chose as his model organism the fungus Phycomyces blakesleeanus. Delbrück was fascinated by Phycomyces’s remarkable perceptual abilities. Its fruiting structures—essentially giant vertical hyphae—have a sensitivity to light similar to that of the human eye and adapt to bright or low light as our eyes do. They can detect light at levels as low as that provided by a single star, and only become dazzled when exposed to full sunlight on a bright day. To provoke a response in a plant, one would have to expose it to light levels hundreds of times higher.

			At the end of his career, Delbrück wrote that he was still convinced that Phycomyces was “the most intelligent” of the simpler multicellular organisms. Besides its exquisite sensitivity to touch—Phycomyces preferentially grows into wind at speeds as low as one centimeter per second, or 0.036 kilometers per hour—Phycomyces is able to detect the presence of nearby objects, a phenomenon known as the “avoidance response.” Despite decades of painstaking investigation, the avoidance response remains an enigma. Objects within a few millimeters cause the fruiting body of Phycomyces to bend away without ever making contact. Regardless of the object—opaque or transparent, smooth or rough—Phycomyces starts to bend away after about two minutes. Electrostatic fields, humidity, mechanical cues, and temperature have all been ruled out. Some hypothesize that Phycomyces uses a volatile chemical signal that deflects around the obstacle with tiny air currents, but this is far from proven.

			 			Although Phycomyces is an unusually sensitive species, most fungi are able to detect and respond to light (its direction, intensity, or color), temperature, moisture, nutrients, toxins, and electrical fields. Like plants, fungi can “see” color across the spectrum using receptors sensitive to blue light and red light—unlike plants, fungi also have opsins, the light-sensitive pigments present in the rods and cones of animal eyes. Hyphae can also sense the texture of surfaces; one study reports that young hyphae of the bean rust fungus can detect grooves half a micrometer deep in artificial surfaces, three times shallower than the gap between the laser tracks on a CD. When hyphae felt together to make mushrooms, they acquire an acute sensitivity to gravity. And as we’ve seen, fungi maintain countless channels of chemical communication with other organisms and with themselves: When they fuse or have sex, hyphae distinguish “self” from “other,” and between different kinds of “other.”

			Fungal lives are lived in a flood of sensory information. And somehow, hyphae—piloted by their tips—are able to integrate these many data streams and determine a suitable trajectory for growth. Humans, like most animals, use brains to integrate sensory data and decide on the best course of action. Accordingly, we tend to look for particular places where integration might take place. We like a where, but with plants and fungi, asking “where” only gets us so far. There are different parts of a mycelial network or a plant, but they aren’t unique. There are many of everything. How, then, do sensory data streams come together within a mycelial network? How do brainless organisms link perception with action?

			 			Plant scientists have wrestled with these questions for more than a century. In 1880, Charles Darwin and his son Francis published a book called The Power of Movement in Plants. In the final paragraph, they suggest that since root tips determine the trajectory for growth, it must be at the root tips that signals from different parts of the organism are integrated. Root tips, the Darwins write, act “like the brain of one of the lower animals…receiving impressions from the sense-organs, and directing the several movements.” The Darwins’ conjecture has come to be known as the “root-brain” hypothesis and is controversial, to put it mildly. This is not because anyone disputes their observations: It is clear that root tips do direct the movement of roots, just as growing tips direct the movement of shoots above ground. What divides plant scientists is the use of the word brain. For some, it is a proposition that can draw us toward a richer understanding of plant life. For others, it is preposterous to suggest that plants have anything even like a brain.

			In some sense, the word brain is a distraction. The Darwins’ main point is that growing tips—which pilot roots and shoots—must be the place where information comes together to link perception and action, and determine a suitable course for growth. The same applies to fungal hyphae. Hyphal tips are the parts of the mycelium that grow, change direction, branch, and fuse. They are the part of the mycelium that do the most. And they are numerous. A given mycelial network might have anywhere between hundreds and billions of hyphal tips, all integrating and processing information on a massively parallel basis.





* * *



			—

			 			HYPHAL TIPS MAY be the places where data streams come together to determine the speed and direction of growth, but how do tips in one part of the network “know” what tips are doing in other, more distant parts of the network? We stumble back into Olsson’s conundrum. His bioluminescent Panellus cultures were able to coordinate their behavior over time periods too short to be caused by chemicals moving from A to B through the network. The mycelium of some fungal species grows into “fairy rings” that stretch across hundreds of meters, reach hundreds of years in age, and then somehow produce a circle of mushrooms in a synchronized flush. In Boddy’s experiments with foraging mycelium, only one part of the network discovered the new block of wood, but the behavior of the entire mycelium changed, and changed rapidly. How are mycelial networks able to communicate with themselves? How does information travel across mycelial networks so quickly?

			There are a number of possibilities. Some researchers suggest that mycelial networks might transmit developmental cues using changes in pressure or flow—because mycelium is a continuous hydraulic network like a car’s braking system, a sudden change in pressure in one part could, in principle, be felt rapidly everywhere else. Some have observed that metabolic activity—such as the accumulation and release of compounds within hyphal compartments—can take place in regular pulses that could help to synchronize behavior across a network. Olsson, for his part, turned his attention to one of the few other options that remained: electricity.

			It has long been known that animals use electrical impulses, or “action potentials,” to communicate between different parts of their bodies. Neurons—the long, electrically excitable nerve cells that coordinate animal behavior—have their own field of study: neuroscience. Although electrical signaling is normally thought of as an animal talent, animals aren’t alone in producing action potentials. Plants and algae produce them, and it has been known since the 1970s that some types of fungi do also. Bacteria, too, are electrically excitable. “Cable bacteria” form long electrically conductive filaments, known as nanowires. And it has been known since 2015 that bacterial colonies can coordinate their activity using action potential–like waves of electrical activity. Nonetheless, few mycologists imagined that it could play an important role in fungal lives.

			 			In the mid-1990s in Olsson’s department at Lund University in Sweden, there was a research group working on insect neurobiology. In their experiments, they measured the activity of neurons by inserting fine glass microelectrodes into moth brains. Olsson approached them and asked if he could use their rig to ask a simple question: What would happen if he replaced the moth brains with fungal mycelium? The neuroscientists were intrigued. In principle, fungal hyphae should be well-adapted to conduct electrical impulses. They are coated with proteins that insulate them, which would allow waves of electrical activity to travel long distances without dissipating—animal nerve cells have an analogous insulating sheath. Moreover, the cells in a mycelium are continuous with one another, possibly allowing impulses initiated in one part of the network to reach another part without interruption.

			Olsson chose the species of fungus carefully. He surmised that if electrical communication systems did exist in fungi, it would be easier to detect in species with a greater need for communication over long distances. Just to be safe, he chose a honey fungus, or Armillaria—the species that forms the record-holding mycelial networks that stretch over kilometers and reach thousands of years in age.

			When Olsson inserted the microelectrodes into Armillaria’s hyphal strands, he detected regular action potential–like impulses, firing at a rate very close to that of animals’ sensory neurons—around four impulses per second, which traveled along hyphae at a speed of at least half a millimeter per second, some ten times faster than the fastest rate of fluid flow measured in a fungal hypha. This caught his attention, but in itself it didn’t suggest that the impulses formed the basis of a rapid signaling system. Electrical activity can only play a role in fungal communication if it is sensitive to stimulation. Olsson decided to measure the response of the fungus to blocks of wood, which is food for this species.

			Olsson set up the rig and placed a block of wood onto the mycelium several centimeters from the electrodes. What he found was extraordinary. When the wood came into contact with the mycelium, the firing rate of the impulses doubled. When he removed the block of wood, the firing rate returned to normal. To make sure that the fungi weren’t responding to the weight of the wooden block, he placed an inedible plastic block of the same size and weight onto the mycelium. The fungus didn’t respond.

			 			Olsson went on to test a range of other species of fungus, including a mycorrhizal fungus growing on the root system of a plant, Pleurotus (or oyster mushroom mycelium), and Serpula (the dry rot found fruiting in the oven at Haddon Hall). They all generated action potential–like impulses and were sensitive to a range of different stimuli. Olsson hypothesized that electrical signaling was a realistic way for a wide variety of fungi to send messages between different parts of themselves, messages that conveyed information about “food sources, injury, local conditions within the fungus, or the presence of other individuals around it.”



* * *



			—

			MANY OF THE neurobiologists Olsson was working with became excited that mycelial networks could be behaving like brains. “It was the first reaction from all the insect people,” Olsson recalled. “They were thinking of these big mycelial networks in the forest sending electric signals around themselves. They imagined that maybe they were just big brains lying there.” I admit that I hadn’t been able to ignore the superficial resemblance either. Olsson’s findings suggested that mycelium might form fantastically complex networks of electrically excitable cells. Brains, too, are fantastically complex networks of electrically excitable cells.

			“I don’t think they’re brains,” Olsson explained to me. “I had to hold back the brain concept. As soon as one says it, people start thinking of brains like ours where we have language and process thoughts to make decisions.” His caution is well-placed. Brain is a trigger word, burdened with concepts that spend most of their time in the animal world. “When we say ‘brain,’ ” Olsson continued, “all associations are with animal brains.” Besides, as he pointed out, brains behave like brains because of the way they’re built. The architecture of animal brains is very different from that of fungal networks. In animal brains, neurons connect with other neurons at junctions called synapses. At synapses, signals can combine with other signals. Neurotransmitter molecules pass across synapses and allow different neurons to behave in different ways—some excite other neurons, some inhibit them. Mycelial networks don’t share any of these features.

			 			But if fungi did use waves of electrical activity to transmit signals around a network, wouldn’t we think of mycelium as at least a brain-like phenomenon? In Olsson’s view, there could be other ways to regulate electrical impulses in mycelial networks to create “brain-like circuits, gates, and oscillators.” In some fungi, hyphae are divided into compartments by pores, which can be sensitively regulated. Opening or closing a pore changes the strength of the signal that passes from one compartment to another, whether chemical, pressure, or electrical. If sudden changes in the electrical charge within a hyphal compartment could open or close a pore, Olsson mused, a burst of impulses could change the way subsequent signals passed along the hypha and form a simple learning loop. What’s more, hyphae branch. If two impulses converged on one spot, they would both influence pore conductivity, integrating signals from different branches. “You do not need much knowledge of how computers work to realize that such systems can create decision gates,” Olsson told me. “If you combine these systems in a flexible and adaptable network we have the possibility for ‘a brain’ that could learn and remember.” He held the word brain at a safe distance, clamped in the forceps of quotation marks to emphasize that a metaphor was in play.

			That fungi could use electrical signaling as a basis for rapid communication has not been lost on Andrew Adamatzky, the director of the Unconventional Computing Laboratory. In 2018, he inserted electrodes into whole oyster mushrooms sprouting in clusters from blocks of mycelium and detected spontaneous waves of electrical activity. When he held a flame up to a mushroom, different mushrooms within the cluster responded with a sharp electrical spike. Shortly afterward, he published a paper called “Towards fungal computer.” In it, he proposed that mycelial networks “compute” information encoded in spikes of electrical activity. If we knew how a mycelial network would respond to a given stimulus, Adamatzky argues, we could treat it like a living circuit board. By stimulating the mycelium—for example, using a flame or a chemical—we could input data into the fungal computer.

			 			A fungal computer may sound fantastical, but biocomputing is a fast-growing field. Adamatzky has spent years developing ways to use slime molds as sensors and computers. These prototype biocomputers use slime molds to solve a range of geometrical problems. The slime mold networks can be modified—for instance, by cutting a connection—to alter the set of “logical functions” implemented by the network. Adamatzky’s idea of a “fungal computer” is just an application of slime-mold computing to another type of network-based organism.

			As Adamatzky observes, the mycelial networks of some species of fungus are more convenient for computing than slime molds. They form longer-lived networks and don’t morph into new shapes quite so quickly. They are also larger, with more junctions between hyphae. It is at these junctions—what Olsson described as “decision gates,” and what Adamatzky describes as “elementary processors”—that signals from different branches of the network would interact and combine. Adamatzky estimates that a network of honey fungus stretching over fifteen hectares would have nearly a trillion such processing units.

			For Adamatzky, the point of fungal computers is not to replace silicon chips. Fungal reactions are too slow for that. Rather, he thinks humans could use mycelium growing in an ecosystem as a “large-scale environmental sensor.” Fungal networks, he reasons, are monitoring a large number of data streams as part of their everyday existence. If we could plug into mycelial networks and interpret the signals they use to process information, we could learn more about what was happening in an ecosystem. Fungi could report changes in soil quality, water purity, pollution, or any other features of the environment that they are sensitive to.

			We’re some way off. Computing with living network-based organisms is in its infancy and many questions remain unanswered. Olsson and Adamatzky have shown that mycelium can be electrically sensitive, but they haven’t shown that electrical impulses can link a stimulus to a response. It is as if you had stuck a pin in your toe, detected the nerve impulse that traveled through your body, but hadn’t been able to measure your reaction to the pain.

			 			This is a challenge for the future. In the twenty-three years between Olsson’s study on mycelium and Adamatzky’s study on oyster mushrooms, no further research was conducted on electrical signaling in fungi. If he had the resources to pursue this line of inquiry, Olsson told me that he would try to demonstrate a clear physiological response to changes in electrical activity and decode the patterns of electrical impulses. His dream is to “hook up a fungus with a computer and communicate with it,” to use electrical signals to get the fungus to change its behavior. “All sorts of weird and wonderful experiments could be done if this turns out to be right.”



* * *



			—

			THESE STUDIES RAISE a storm of questions. Are network-based life-forms like fungi or slime molds capable of a form of cognition? Can we think of their behavior as intelligent? If other organisms’ intelligence didn’t look like ours, then how might it appear? Would we even notice it?

			Among biologists, opinion is divided. Traditionally, intelligence and cognition have been defined in human terms as something that requires at least a brain and, more usually, a mind. Cognitive science emerged from the study of humans and so naturally placed the human mind at the center of its inquiry. Without a mind, the classical examples of cognitive processes—language, logic, reasoning, recognizing oneself in a mirror—seem impossible. All require high-level mental functioning. But how we define intelligence and cognition is a question of taste. For many, the brain-centric view is too limited. The idea that a neat line can be drawn that separates nonhumans from humans with “real minds” and “real comprehension” has been curtly dismissed by the philosopher Daniel Dennett as an “archaic myth.” Brains didn’t evolve their tricks from scratch, and many of their characteristics reflect more ancient processes that existed long before recognizable brains arose.

			 			Charles Darwin, writing in 1871, took a pragmatic line. “Intelligence is based on how efficient a species becomes at doing the things they need to survive.” It is a perspective that has been echoed by many contemporary biologists and philosophers. The Latin root of the word intelligence means “to choose between.” Many types of brainless organisms—plants, fungi, and slime molds included—respond to their environments in flexible ways, solve problems, and make decisions between alternative courses of action. Complex information processing is evidently not restricted to the inner workings of brains. Some use the term “swarm intelligence” to describe the problem-solving behavior of brainless systems. Others suggest that the behavior of these network-based life-forms can be thought of as arising from “minimal” or “basal” cognition, and argue that the question we should ask is not whether an organism has cognition or not. Rather, we should assess the degree to which an organism might be cognizant. In all these views, intelligent behaviors can arise without brains. A dynamic and responsive network is all that’s needed.

			The brain has long been thought of as a dynamic network. In 1940, the Nobel Prize–winning neurobiologist Charles Sherrington described the human brain as “an enchanted loom where millions of flashing shuttles weave a dissolving pattern.” Today, “network neuroscience” is the name given to the discipline that attempts to understand how the brain’s activity emerges from the interlinked activity of millions of neurons. A single neuronal circuit within one’s brain can’t give rise to intelligent behavior, just as the behavior of a single termite can’t give rise to the intricate architecture of a termite mound. No single neuronal circuit “knows” what’s going on any more than a single termite “knows” the structure of the mound, but large numbers of neurons can build a network from which surprising phenomena can emerge. In this view, complex behaviors—including minds and the nuanced textures of lived, conscious experience—arise out of complex networks of neurons flexibly remodeling themselves.

			 			Brains are just one such network, one way of processing information. Even in animals, there is a lot that can take place without them. Researchers at Tufts University have illustrated this in striking experiments using flatworms. Flatworms are well-studied model organisms because of their ability to regenerate. If the head of a flatworm is cut off, it sprouts another head, brain and all. Flatworms can also be trained. The researchers wondered whether, if they trained a flatworm to remember features of its environment and then cut off its head, it would retain the memory when it has grown a new head and brain. Remarkably, the answer is yes. The flatworms’ memory appeared to reside in a part of their body outside the brain. These experiments suggest that even within the body of brain-dependent animals, the flexible networks that underpin complex behaviors need not be limited to a small region inside the head. There are other examples. Most nerves in octopuses are not found in the brain, for instance, but are distributed throughout their bodies. A large number are found in the tentacles, which can explore and taste their surroundings without involving the brain. Even when amputated, tentacles are able to reach and grasp.

			Many types of organisms, then, have evolved flexible networks to help solve the problems that life presents. Mycelial organisms appear to be some of the first to do so. In 2017, researchers at the Swedish Royal Museum of Natural History published a report in which they describe fossilized mycelium preserved in the fractures of ancient lava flows. The fossils show branching filaments that “touch and entangle each other.” The “tangled network” they form, the dimensions of the hyphae, the dimensions of spore-like structures, and the pattern of its growth all closely resemble modern-day fungal mycelium. It is an extraordinary discovery because the fossils date from 2.4 billion years ago, more than a billion years before fungi were thought to have branched off the tree of life. There is no way to identify the organism with certainty, but whether or not it was a true fungus, it clearly had a mycelial habit. It is a finding that makes mycelium one of the earliest known gestures toward complex multicellular life, an original tangle, one of the first living networks. Remarkably unchanged, mycelium has persisted for more than half of the four billion years of life’s history, through countless cataclysms and catastrophic global transformations.



* * *



			—

			 			BARBARA MCCLINTOCK, WHO won the Nobel Prize for her work on maize genetics, described plants as extraordinary “beyond our wildest expectations.” Not because they have found ways to do what humans can do but because a life lived rooted to one spot has coaxed them to evolve countless “ingenious mechanisms” to deal with challenges that animals might avoid by simply running away. We could say the same of fungi. Mycelium is one such ingenious solution, a brilliant reply to some of life’s most basic challenges. Mycelial fungi don’t do as we do, and contain flexible networks that ceaselessly remodel themselves. They are flexible networks that ceaselessly remodel themselves.

			McClintock emphasizes how important it is to acquire “a feeling for the organism,” to develop the patience to “hear what the material has to say to you.” When it comes to fungi, do we really stand a chance? Mycelial lives are so other, their possibilities so strange. But perhaps they aren’t quite so remote as they seem at first glance. Many traditional cultures understand life to be an entangled whole. Today, the idea that all things are interconnected has been so well-used that it has collapsed into a cliché. The idea of the “web of life” underpins modern scientific conceptions of nature; the school of “systems theory,” which arose during the twentieth century, understands all systems—from traffic flows to governments to ecosystems—to be dynamic networks of interaction; the field of “artificial intelligence” solves problems using artificial neural networks; many aspects of human life are continuous with the digital networks of the Internet; network neuroscience invites us to understand ourselves as dynamic networks. Like a well-exercised muscle, “network” has hypertrophied into a master concept. It is hard to think of a subject that networks aren’t used to make sense of.

			Yet we still struggle to make sense of mycelium. I asked Boddy what aspects of mycelial lives remain most mysterious. “Ah…that’s a good question.” She faltered. “I really don’t know. There are just so many things. How do mycelial fungi work as networks? How do they sense their environment? How do they send messages back to other parts of themselves? How are those signals then integrated? These are all huge questions which hardly anyone seems to be thinking about. Yet understanding these things is crucial to understanding how fungi do almost everything that they do. We have techniques to do this work, but who is looking at basic fungal biology? Not many people. I think it’s a very worrying situation. We haven’t put together many of the things we’ve found into an overall understanding.” She laughed. “The field is ripe for picking! But I don’t think there are many people out there doing the picking.”

			 			In 1845, Alexander von Humboldt observed that “Each step that we make in the more intimate knowledge of nature leads us to the entrance of new labyrinths.” Polyphonic songs like “Women Gathering Mushrooms” emerge from the entangling of voices; mycelium emerges from the entangling of hyphae. A sophisticated understanding of mycelium is yet to emerge. We are standing at the entrance to one of the oldest of life’s labyrinths.





3.


			THE INTIMACY OF STRANGERS




The problem was that we did not know whom we meant when we said “we.”

					—ADRIENNE RICH





			ON JUNE 18, 2016, the descent module of a Soyuz spacecraft landed on a bleak steppe in Kazakhstan. Three people were pulled safely from the scorched capsule following a stint at the International Space Station (ISS). The astronauts weren’t alone as they plummeted to Earth. Under their seats were hundreds of living organisms packed tightly in a box.

			Among the samples were several species of lichen that had been sent into space for one and a half years as part of the Biology and Mars Experiment. BIOMEX is an international consortium of astrobiologists who use trays mounted on the outside of the ISS—a piece of apparatus known as the EXPOSE facility—to incubate biological specimens in extraterrestrial conditions. “Let’s hope they have a safe return,” Natuschka Lee, one of the BIOMEX lichen team, remarked to me a few days before the landing was scheduled. I wasn’t sure who she meant by “they,” but soon afterward Lee got in touch to say that all was well. She had received an e-mail from a lead researcher at the German Aerospace Center in Berlin, and read out the subject line, relieved: “EXPOSE trays back on Earth…” “Soon,” Lee smiled, “we will have our samples back.”

			 			A number of organisms with extreme tolerances have been sent into orbit, from bacterial spores, to free-living algae, to rock-dwelling fungi, to tardigrades—microscopic animals known as “water bears.” Some can survive if shielded from the damaging effects of solar radiation. But few, apart from a handful of lichen species, are able to survive in full space conditions, drenched in unfiltered cosmic rays. So remarkable are these lichens’ abilities that they have become model life-forms for astrobiological research, ideal organisms “to discern,” as one researcher writes, “the limits and limitations of terrestrial life.”

			It isn’t the first time lichens have helped humans to fathom the limits of life as we know it. Lichens are living riddles. Since the nineteenth century, they have provoked fierce debate about what constitutes an autonomous individual. The closer we get to lichens, the stranger they seem. To this day, lichens confuse our concept of identity and force us to question where one organism stops and another begins.



* * *



			—

			IN HIS LAVISHLY illustrated book Art Forms in Nature (1904), the biologist and artist Ernst Haeckel vividly portrays a variety of lichen forms. His lichens sprout and layer deliriously. Veined ridges give way to smooth bubbles; stalks elaborate into prongs and dishes. Rugged coastlines meet unearthly pavilions, their forms lined with nooks and crannies. It was Haeckel who, in 1866, had coined the word ecology. Ecology describes the study of the relationships between organisms and their environments: both the places where they live and the thicket of relationships that sustain them. Inspired by the work of Alexander von Humboldt, the study of ecology emerged from the idea that nature is an interconnected whole, “a system of active forces.” Organisms could not be understood in isolation.

			Three years later, in 1869, the Swiss botanist Simon Schwendener published a paper advancing the “dual hypothesis of lichens.” In it, he presented the radical notion that lichens were not a single organism, as had long been assumed. Instead, he argued that they were composed of two quite different entities: a fungus and an alga. Schwendener proposed that the lichen fungus (known today as the “mycobiont”) offered physical protection and acquired nutrients for itself and for the algal cells. The algal partner (known today as the “photobiont,” a role sometimes played by photosynthetic bacteria) harvested light and carbon dioxide to make sugars that provided energy. In Schwendener’s view, the fungal partners were “parasites, although with the wisdom of statesmen.” The algal partners were “its slaves…which it has sought out…and forced into its service.” Together they grew into the visible body of the lichen. In their relationship, both partners were able to make a life in places where neither could survive alone.

			 			Schwendener’s suggestion was vehemently opposed by his fellow lichenologists. The idea that two different species could come together in the building of a new organism with its own separate identity was shocking to many. “A useful and invigorating parasitism?” one contemporary snorted. “Who ever before heard of such a thing?” Others dismissed it as a “sensational romance,” an “unnatural union between a captive Algal damsel and a tyrant Fungal master.” Some were more moderate. “You see,” wrote the English mycologist Beatrix Potter, best known for her children’s books, “we do not believe in Schwendener’s theory.”

			Most worrisome for taxonomists—working hard to order life into neat lines of descent—was the prospect that a single organism could contain two separate lineages. Following Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection, first published in 1859, species were understood to arise by diverging from one another. Their evolutionary lineages forked, like the branches of a tree. The trunk of the tree forked into branches, which forked into smaller branches, which forked into twigs. Species were the leaves on the twigs of the tree of life. However, the dual hypothesis suggested that lichens were bodies composed of organisms with quite different origins. Within lichens, branches of the tree of life that had been diverging for hundreds of millions of years were doing something entirely unexpected: converging.

			Over the following decades a growing number of biologists adopted the dual hypothesis, but many disagreed with Schwendener’s portrayal of the relationship. These were not sentimental concerns: Schwendener’s choice of metaphor obstructed the larger questions raised by the dual hypothesis. In 1877, the German botanist Albert Frank coined the word symbiosis to describe the living together of fungal and algal partners. In his study of lichens, it had become clear to him that a new word was required, one that didn’t prejudice the relationship it described. Shortly afterward, the biologist Heinrich Anton de Bary adopted Frank’s term and generalized it to refer to the full spectrum of interactions between any type of organism, stretching from parasitism at one pole, to mutually beneficial relationships at the other.

			 			Scientists made a number of major new symbiotic claims in the years that followed, including startling suggestions from Frank that fungi might help plants to obtain nutrients from the soil (1885). All cited the dual hypothesis of lichens in support of their ideas. When algae were found living inside corals, sponges, and green sea slugs, they were described by one researcher as “animal lichens.” Several years later, when viruses were first observed within bacteria, their discoverer described them as “microlichens.”

			Lichens, in other words, quickly grew into a biological principle. They were a gateway organism to the idea of symbiosis, an idea that ran against the prevailing currents in evolutionary thought in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries, best summed up in Thomas Henry Huxley’s portrayal of life as a “gladiator’s show…whereby the strongest, the swiftest, and the cunningest live to fight another day.” In the wake of the dual hypothesis, evolution could no longer be thought of solely in terms of competition and conflict. Lichens had become a type case of inter-kingdom collaboration.



				 					Lichen: Niebla





* * *



			—

			 			LICHENS ENCRUST AS much as eight percent of the planet’s surface, an area larger than that covered by tropical rainforests. They clad rocks, trees, roofs, fences, cliffs, and the surface of deserts. Some are a drab camouflage. Some are lime green or electric yellow. Some look like stains, others like small shrubs, others like antlers. Some leather and droop like bat wings, others, as the poet Brenda Hillman writes, are “hung in hashtags.” Some live on beetles, whose lives depend on the camouflage the lichens provide. Untethered lichens—known as “vagrants” or “erratics”— blow around and don’t live their lives on anything in particular. Against the “plain story” of their surroundings, observes Kerry Knudsen, the curator of lichens at the herbarium at the University of California, Riverside, lichens “look like fairy tales.”

			I have been most captivated by lichens on the islands off the coast of British Columbia, on the west coast of Canada. Seen from above, the coastline frays into the ocean. There is no hard edge. The land comes undone gradually into inlets and sounds, and then into channels and passages. Hundreds of islands scatter off the coast. Some are no bigger than a whale; the largest, Vancouver Island, is half the length of Britain. Most of the islands are solid granitic rock, the tops of submarine hills and valleys worn smooth by glaciers.

			For a few days every year, I and a handful of friends pile onto a twenty-eight-foot sailboat and set off around the islands. The boat, the Caper, has a dark green hull, no keel, and one red sail. Making our way from the Caper onto land is tricky. We paddle in an unstable dinghy with oars that slip their rowlocks at every other stroke. Pulling up to the shore is an art form. Waves shrug the dinghy onto the rocks and tug it away from our feet as we clamber out. But once on shore, the lichens begin. I’ve spent hours absorbed in the worlds that they make—islands of life in a sea of rock. The names used to describe lichens sound like afflictions, words that get stuck in your teeth: crustose (crusty), foliose (leafy), squamulose (scaly), leprose (dusty), fruticose (branched). Fruticose lichens drape and tuft; crustose and squamulose lichens creep and seep; foliose lichens layer and flake. Some prefer to live on east-facing surfaces, some on the west. Some choose to live on exposed ledges, others in damp grooves. Some wage slow wars, repelling or disrupting their neighbors. Some inhabit the surfaces left exposed when other lichens have died and flaked off. They come to resemble the archipelagos and continents of an unfamiliar atlas, which is how Rhizocarpon geographicum, or the map lichen, got its name. The oldest surfaces are pitted by centuries of lichenous life and death.

			 			Lichens’ fondness for rock has changed the face of the planet and continues to do so, sometimes literally. In 2006, the faces of the presidents carved into Mount Rushmore were pressure hosed, removing more than sixty years of lichenous growth in the hope of extending the lifetime of the memorial. The presidents aren’t alone. “Every monument,” writes the poet Drew Milne, “has a lichen lining.” In 2019, the residents of Easter Island launched a campaign to scrub lichens off hundreds of monumental stone heads, or moai. Described by locals as “leprosy,” lichens are deforming the features of the statues and softening the rock to a “clay-like” consistency.

			Lichens mine minerals from rock in a twofold process known as “weathering.” First, they physically break up surfaces by the force of their growth. Second, they deploy an arsenal of powerful acids and mineral-binding compounds to dissolve and digest the rock. Lichens’ ability to weather makes them a geological force, yet they do more than dissolve the physical features of the world. When lichens die and decompose, they give rise to the first soils in new ecosystems. Lichens are how the inanimate mineral mass within rocks is able to cross over into the metabolic cycles of the living. A portion of the minerals in your body is likely to have passed through a lichen at some point. Whether on tombstones in a graveyard or encased within slabs of Antarctic granite, lichens are go-betweens that inhabit the boundary dividing life and nonlife. Looking out from the Caper at the rocky Canadian coastline, this becomes clear. Above the tideline, it is only after several meters of lichens and mosses that larger trees start to appear, rooted in crevices well beyond the water’s reach where young soils have been able to form.



* * *



			—



				 					Lichen: Ramalina



			THE QUESTION OF what is and isn’t an island is fundamental to the study of ecology and evolution. It is no less important for astrobiologists, including those on the BIOMEX team, many of whom wrestle with the question of “panspermia,” from the Greek pan meaning “all” and sperma meaning “seed.” Panspermia deals with the question of whether planets, too, are islands, and whether life can travel through space between celestial bodies. It is an idea that has circulated since antiquity, although it didn’t take on the form of a scientific hypothesis until the early twentieth century. Some advocates argue that life itself arrived from other planets. Some propose instead that life evolved on Earth and elsewhere, and periods of dramatic evolutionary novelty on Earth were triggered by the arrival of fragments of life from space. Others argue instead for a “soft-panspermia,” where life itself evolved on Earth but the chemical building blocks required for life arrived from space. There are many hypotheses as to how interplanetary transport might take place. Most are variations on a theme: Organisms get trapped within asteroids or other debris ejected from planets during collisions with meteorites, and hurtle through space before colliding with another planetary body on which they may or may not be able to make a life.

			In the late 1950s, as the United States prepared to send rockets into space, the biologist Joshua Lederberg became concerned about the prospect of celestial contamination (it was Lederberg who in 2001 coined the word microbiome). Humans were now able to spread earthly organisms to other parts of the solar system. More worrying was the thought that humans could bring back to Earth alien organisms that could cause ecological disruption—or worse, wreak havoc as diseases. Lederberg wrote urgent letters to the National Academy of Sciences to warn them of the possible “cosmic catastrophe.” They paid attention and released an official statement of concern. There was still no word to describe the science of extraterrestrial life, so Lederberg coined one: exobiology. It was the first version of the field now known as astrobiology.

			 			Lederberg was a prodigy. He enrolled at Columbia University at the age of fifteen and in his early twenties made a discovery that helped transform our understanding of the history of life. He found that bacteria could trade genes with each other. One bacterium could acquire a trait from another bacterium “horizontally.” Characteristics acquired horizontally are those that aren’t inherited “vertically” from one’s parents. One picks them up along the way. We’re used to the principle. When we learn or teach something, we’re part of a horizontal exchange of information. Much of human culture and behavior is transmitted in this fashion. However, for humans to engage in horizontal gene transfer as bacteria do is a fantastical prospect, even though it has taken place on occasion, deep in our evolutionary history. Horizontal gene transfer means that genes—and the traits they encode—are infectious. It is as if we noticed an unmarked trait lying by the side of the road, tried it on, and found that we had acquired a pair of dimples. Or perhaps we met someone on the street and swapped our straight hair for their curly hair. Or maybe we just picked up their eye color. Or brushed up against a wolfhound quite by accident and developed an urge to run fast for several hours a day.

			Lederberg’s discovery won him a Nobel Prize at the age of thirty-three. Before horizontal gene transfer was discovered, bacteria, like all other organisms, were understood to be biological islands. Genomes were closed systems. There was no way to take on new DNA midway through a lifetime, to acquire genes that had evolved “off-site.” Horizontal gene transfer changes this picture and shows bacterial genomes to be cosmopolitan places, made up of genes that had evolved separately for millions of years. Horizontal gene transfer implied, as lichens had before, that branches of the evolutionary tree that had long since diverged were able to converge within the body of a single organism.

			 			For bacteria, horizontal gene transfer is the norm—most of the genes in any given bacterium do not share an evolutionary history but are acquired piecemeal, just as objects accumulate in a home. In this way, a bacterium can acquire characteristics “ready-made,” speeding up evolution many times over. By exchanging DNA, a harmless bacterium can acquire antibiotic resistance and metamorphose into a virulent superbug in a single move. Over the last few decades it has become clear that bacteria aren’t alone in this ability, although they remain its most adept practitioners: Genetic material has been exchanged horizontally between all the domains of life.

			Lederberg’s ideas were tinged with Cold War paranoia. In his hands, panspermia came to resemble horizontal gene transfer on a cosmic scale. For the first time in history, humans were capable—in theory—of infecting Earth and other planets with organisms that had not evolved on-site. Life on Earth could no longer be considered a genetically closed system, a planetary island in an uncrossable sea. Just as bacteria could fast-forward evolution by picking up DNA horizontally, so the arrival of foreign DNA on Earth could “short-circuit” the otherwise “tortuous” process of evolution, with potentially catastrophic consequences.



* * *



			—

			ONE OF THE main objectives of BIOMEX is to find out whether life-forms can indeed survive a journey through space. Conditions outside the protective skin of the Earth’s atmosphere are hostile. Among the many hazards are massive levels of radiation from the sun and other stars; a vacuum that causes biological material, lichens included, to dry out almost immediately; and rapid cycles of freezing, thawing, and heating, with temperatures that swing from -120 to +120 degrees Centigrade and back again within twenty-four hours.

			The first attempt to send lichens into space didn’t end well. In 2002, an unmanned Soyuz rocket carrying the samples exploded and crashed seconds after liftoff from a Russian spaceport. Months after the accident, when the snow had melted, the remains of the cargo were recovered. “Curiously enough,” the lead researchers reported, “the LICHENS experiment was one of the few identifiable pieces of wreckage, and we discovered that despite the circumstances, the lichen[s]…still showed some degree of biological activity.”

			 			The capacity of lichens to survive in space has since been demonstrated in a number of studies, and the findings are broadly the same. The hardiest lichen species can recover their metabolic activity in full within twenty-four hours of being rehydrated and are able to repair much of the “space-induced” damage they may have sustained. In fact, the toughest species—Circinaria gyrosa—has such high survival rates that three recent studies decided to expose samples to even higher levels of radiation than they receive in space, to test them to their “uttermost limits of survival.” Sure enough, a dose of radiation could kill the lichens, but the amount required to disrupt their cells was enormous. Lichen samples exposed to six kilograys of gamma irradiation—six times the standard dose for food sterilization in the United States and twelve thousand times the lethal dose for humans—were entirely untroubled. When the dose was doubled to twelve kilograys—two and a half times the lethal dose for tardigrades—the lichens’ ability to reproduce was impaired, although they survived and continued to photosynthesize with no apparent problems.

			For Trevor Goward, the curator of the lichen collection at the University of British Columbia, the extreme tolerances of lichens are an example of what he calls the “lichening rod effect.” Lichens invite flashes of insight, or “supercharged understanding” in Goward’s words. The lichening rod effect describes what happens when lichens strike familiar concepts, splintering them into new forms. The idea of symbiosis is one such example. Survival in space is another, as is the threat that lichens pose to systems of biological classification. “Lichens tell us things about life,” Goward exclaimed to me. “They inform us.”

			Goward is foremost a lichen obsessive (he has contributed around thirty thousand lichen specimens to the university collection) and is no less a lichen taxonomist (he has named three genera and described thirty-six new lichen species). But he has the feel of a mystic about him. “I like to say that lichens colonized the surface of my mind many years ago,” he told me with a chuckle. He lives on the edge of a large wilderness in British Columbia and runs a website called Ways of Enlichenment. For Goward, thinking deeply about lichens changes the way we apprehend life; they are organisms that can lure us toward new questions and into new answers. “What is our relationship to the world? What are we about?” Astrobiology pitches these questions at a cosmic scale. No wonder that lichens loom—if not large, then certainly vivid—at the front and center of the panspermia debate.

			 			However, it is closer to home that lichens and the concept of symbiosis they embody have triggered the most profound existential questions. Over the twentieth century, the concept of inter-kingdom collaboration transformed scientific understanding of how complex life-forms evolved. Goward’s questions may sound theatrical, but it is precisely our relationship to the world that lichens and their symbiotic way of life have led us to reexamine.

			Life is divided into three domains. Bacteria make up one. Archaea—single-celled microbes that resemble bacteria but which build their membranes differently—make up another. Eukarya make up the third. We’re eukaryotes (pronounced you-KA-ree-otes), as are all other multicellular organisms, whether animal, plant, alga, or fungus. The cells of eukaryotes are larger than bacterial and archaeal cells, and organize themselves around a number of specialized structures. One such structure is the nucleus, which contains most of the DNA in a cell. Mitochondria—the places where energy is produced—are another. Plants and algae have a further structure: chloroplasts, where photosynthesis happens.

			In 1967, the visionary American biologist Lynn Margulis became a vocal proponent of a controversial theory that gave symbiosis a central role in the evolution of early life. Margulis argued that some of the most significant moments in evolution had resulted from the coming together—and staying together—of different organisms. Eukaryotes arose when a single-celled organism engulfed a bacterium, which continued to live symbiotically inside it. Mitochondria were the descendants of these bacteria. Chloroplasts were the descendants of photosynthetic bacteria that had been engulfed by an early eukaryotic cell. All complex life that followed, human life included, was a story of the long-lasting “intimacy of strangers.”

			 			The idea that eukaryotes had arisen “by fusion and merger” had drifted in and out of biological thought since the start of the twentieth century, but it had remained at the margins of “polite biological society.” By 1967, little had changed, and Margulis’s manuscript was rejected fifteen times before it was finally accepted. After publication, her ideas were vigorously opposed, as similar suggestions had been before. (In 1970, the microbiologist Roger Stanier waspishly remarked that Margulis’s “evolutionary speculation…can be considered a relatively harmless habit, like eating peanuts, unless it assumes the form of an obsession; then it becomes a vice.”) However, in the 1970s Margulis was proved correct. New genetic tools revealed that mitochondria and chloroplasts had indeed started off as free-living bacteria. Since then, other examples of endosymbiosis have been found. The cells of some insects, for example, are inhabited by bacteria that themselves contain bacteria.

			Margulis’s proposition amounted to a dual hypothesis of early eukaryotic life. No surprise, then, that she mobilized lichens to fight her cause—so too had the earliest proponents of her view at the turn of the twentieth century. The earliest eukaryotic cells could be thought of as “quite analogous” to lichens, she argued. Lichens continued to figure prominently in her work over the following decades. “Lichens are remarkable examples of innovation emerging from partnership,” she later wrote. “The association is far more than the sum of its parts.”

			The endosymbiotic theory, as it came to be known, rewrote the history of life. It was one of the twentieth century’s most dramatic shifts in biological consensus. The evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins went on to congratulate Margulis on “sticking by” the theory, “from unorthodoxy to orthodoxy.” “It is one of the great achievements of twentieth-century evolutionary biology,” Dawkins continued, “and I greatly admire Lynn Margulis’s sheer courage and stamina.” The philosopher Daniel Dennett described Margulis’s theory as “one of the most beautiful ideas [he’d] ever encountered,” and Margulis as “one of the heroes of twentieth-century biology.”

			 			Among the biggest implications of the endosymbiotic theory is that whole suites of abilities have been acquired in a flash, in evolutionary terms, ready-evolved, from organisms that are not one’s parents, nor one’s species, kingdom, or even domain. Lederberg demonstrated that bacteria can horizontally acquire genes. The endosymbiotic theory proposed that single-celled organisms had horizontally acquired entire bacteria. Horizontal gene transfer transformed bacterial genomes into cosmopolitan places; endosymbiosis transformed cells into cosmopolitan places. The ancestors of all modern eukaryotes horizontally acquired a bacterium with a preexisting ability to make energy from oxygen. Likewise, the ancestors of today’s plants horizontally acquired bacteria with the ability to photosynthesize, ready-evolved.

			In fact, this wording doesn’t get it quite right. The ancestors of today’s plants didn’t acquire a bacterium with the ability to photosynthesize; they emerged from the combination of organisms that could photosynthesize with organisms that couldn’t. In the two billion years that they have lived together, both have become increasingly dependent on each other to the point we find ourselves in today, where neither can live without the other. Within eukaryotic cells, distant branches of the tree of life entwine and melt into an inseparable new lineage; they fuse, or anastomose, as fungal hyphae do.

			Lichens don’t reenact the origin of the eukaryotic cell exactly, but as Goward remarks, they certainly “rhyme” with it. Lichens are cosmopolitan bodies, a place where lives meet. A fungus can’t photosynthesize by itself, but by partnering with an alga or photosynthetic bacterium it can acquire this ability horizontally. Similarly, an alga or photosynthetic bacterium can’t grow tough layers of protective tissue or digest rock, but by partnering with a fungus it gains access to these capabilities—suddenly. Together, these taxonomically remote organisms build composite life-forms capable of entirely new possibilities. By comparison with plant cells that can’t be parted from their chloroplasts, lichens’ relationships are open. This gives them flexibility. In some situations, lichens reproduce without breaking up their relationship—fragments of a lichen containing all the symbiotic partners can travel as one to a new location and grow into a new lichen. In other situations, lichen fungi produce spores that travel alone. Upon arrival in a new place, the fungus must meet a compatible photobiont and form their relationship afresh.

			 			In joining forces, the fungal partners became part photobiont and the photobionts part fungus. Yet lichens resemble neither. Just as the chemical elements of hydrogen and oxygen combine to make water, a compound entirely unlike either of its constituent elements, so lichens are emergent phenomena, entirely more than the sum of their parts. As Goward emphasizes, it is a point so simple that it is hard to grasp. “I often say that the only people who can’t see a lichen are lichenologists. It’s because they look at the parts, as scientists are trained to do. The trouble is that if you look at the parts of the lichen, you don’t see the lichen itself.”



* * *



			—

			IT IS EXACTLY the emergent forms of lichens that are interesting from an astrobiological point of view. In the words of one study, “it is hard to imagine a biological system that better summarizes the characteristics of life on Earth.” Lichens are small biospheres that include both photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic organisms, thus combining the Earth’s main metabolic processes. Lichens are, in some sense, micro-planets—worlds writ small.

			But what, exactly, do lichens do while in orbit around the Earth? To get around the problem of monitoring biological samples while they’re in space, members of the BIOMEX team harvested specimens of the hardy species Circinaria gyrosa from the arid highlands of central Spain and took them to a Mars simulation facility. By exposing the lichens to space-like conditions on Earth, they hoped to be able to measure the lichens’ activity in real time. It turned out there wasn’t much to measure. Within an hour of “turning on” Mars, the lichens had reduced their photosynthetic activity to near zero. They remained dormant for the rest of their time in the simulator and resumed their normal activity when rehydrated thirty days later.

			 			It is well-known that the ability of lichens to survive extreme conditions depends on them entering a state of suspended animation—some studies have found that they can be successfully resuscitated after ten years of dehydration. If their tissues are dehydrated then freezing, thawing, and heating don’t cause much damage. Dehydration also protects them from the most hazardous consequence of cosmic rays: highly reactive free radicals, produced when radiation cleaves water molecules in two, that damage the structure of DNA.

			Dormancy appears to be the most important survival strategy for lichens, but they have others. The hardiest lichen species have thick layers of tissue that block damaging rays. Lichens also produce more than a thousand chemicals that are not found in any other life-form, some of which act as sunscreens. A product of their innovative metabolisms, these chemicals have led lichens into all sorts of relationships with humans over the years: from medicines (antibiotics), to perfumes (oak moss), to dyes (tweeds, tartan, the pH indicator litmus), to foods—a lichen is one of the principal ingredients in the spice mix garam masala. Many fungi that produce compounds of importance to humans—including penicillin molds—lived as lichens earlier in their evolutionary history but have since ceased to do so. Some researchers suggest that a number of these compounds, penicillin included, may have originally evolved as defensive strategies in ancestral lichens and persist today as metabolic legacies of the relationship.

			Lichens are “extremophiles,” organisms able to live, from our point of view, in other worlds. The tolerances of extremophiles are inconceivable. Collect samples in volcanic springs, superheated hydrothermal vents, a kilometer under the ice in Antarctica, and you’ll find extremophilic microbes living, apparently unfazed. Recent findings from the Deep Carbon Observatory report that more than half of all Earth’s bacteria and archaea—so called “infra-terrestrials”—exist kilometers below the planet’s surface, where they live under intense pressure and extreme heat. These subsurface worlds are as diverse as the Amazon rainforest and contain billions of tons of microbes, hundreds of times the collective weight of all the humans on the planet. Some specimens are thousands of years old.

			 			Lichens are no less impressive. Indeed, their ability to survive many different types of extreme qualify them as “polyextremophiles.” In the hottest, driest parts of the world’s deserts, you’ll find lichens prospering as crusts on the scorched ground. Lichens play a critical ecological role in these environments, stabilizing the sandy surface of deserts, reducing dust storms, and preventing further desertification. Some lichens grow inside cracks or pores within solid rock. The authors of one study, reporting the presence of lichens within chunks of granite, confess that they have no idea how these lichens got there in the first place. Several species of lichen are able to make a runaway success of life in the Antarctic Dry Valleys—an ecosystem so fierce it is used to approximate conditions on Mars. Long periods of freezing temperatures, irradiation with high levels of UV, and near absence of water don’t seem to trouble them. Even after immersion in liquid nitrogen at -195 degrees Centigrade, lichens revive rapidly. And they live far longer than most organisms. The record-holding lichen lives in Swedish Lapland and is more than nine thousand years old.

			In the already curious world of extremophiles, lichens are unusual for two reasons. First, they are complex multicellular organisms. Second, they arise from a symbiosis. Most extremophiles don’t develop such sophisticated forms and enduring relationships. This is part of what makes lichens so interesting for astrobiologists. A lichen moving through space is a neat bundle of life—a whole ecosystem traveling as one. What better organisms to make interplanetary journeys?

			Although a number of studies have shown that lichens are capable of surviving in outer space, to be transported between planets, they would have to survive two additional challenges. First, the shock of their ejection from a planet by a meteorite. Second, the reentry into a planetary atmosphere. Both present considerable hazards. Nonetheless, the shock of ejection is unlikely to be too much for them. In 2007, researchers demonstrated that lichens could withstand shock waves with a pressure of 10 to 50 gigapascals, 100 to 500 times greater than the pressure at the bottom of the Mariana Trench, the deepest place on Earth. This is well within the range of shock pressures experienced by rocks catapulted by meteorites into escape velocity from the surface of Mars. Reentry into a planetary atmosphere might present more of a problem. In 2007, samples of bacteria and a rock-dwelling lichen were attached to the heat shield of a reentry capsule. As the capsule scorched through the Earth’s atmosphere, the samples were exposed to temperatures of more than two thousand degrees Centigrade for thirty seconds. In the process, the rocks partially melted and crystallized into new forms. When the remains were examined, there was no sign of any living cell whatsoever.

			 			This finding hasn’t disheartened astrobiologists. Some argue that life-forms encased deep within large meteorites would be protected from these extremes. Others point out that most of the material that arrives on Earth from space does so in the form of micro-meteorites, a type of cosmic dust. These small particles experience less friction and lower temperatures as they enter the atmosphere, and may be more likely to carry life-forms safely to Earth than rocket capsules. As a number of researchers cheerily announce, the question remains open.



* * *



			—

			NO ONE KNOWS when lichens first evolved. The earliest fossils date from just over four hundred million years ago, but it’s possible that lichen-like organisms occurred before this. Lichens have evolved independently between nine and twelve times since. Today, one in five of all known fungal species form lichens, or “lichenize.” Some fungi (such as Penicillium molds) used to lichenize but don’t anymore; they have de-lichenized. Some fungi have switched to different types of photosynthetic partner—or re-lichenized—over the course of their evolutionary histories. For some fungi, lichenization remains a lifestyle choice; they can live as lichens or not depending on their circumstances.

			It turns out that fungi and algae come together at the slightest provocation. Grow many types of free-living fungus and algae together, and they’ll develop into a mutually beneficial symbiosis in a matter of days. Different species of fungus, different species of algae—it doesn’t seem to matter. Completely new symbiotic relationships emerge in less time than it takes for a scab to heal. These remarkable findings, rare glimpses of the “birth” of new symbiotic relationships, were published in 2014 by researchers at Harvard University. When fungi were grown with algae, they coalesced into visible forms that looked like soft green balls. They weren’t the elaborate lichen forms depicted by Ernst Haeckel and Beatrix Potter. But then, they hadn’t spent millions of years in each other’s company.

			 			Not just any fungus could partner with any alga, however. One critical condition had to be fulfilled for a symbiotic relationship to arise: Each partner had to be able to do something that the other couldn’t achieve on its own. The identity of the partners didn’t matter so much as their ecological fit. In the words of the evolutionary theorist W. Ford Doolittle, it was “the song, not the singer” that appeared to be important. This finding sheds light on lichens’ ability to survive in extreme conditions. As Goward points out, lichens by their nature are a kind of “shotgun marriage” that arises in conditions too severe for either partner to survive alone. Whenever it was that lichens occurred for the first time, their very existence implies that life outside the lichen was less bearable, that together they were able to sing a metabolic “song” that neither can sing in isolation. Viewed in this way, lichens’ extremophilia, their ability to live life on the edge, is as old as lichens themselves and a direct consequence of their symbiotic way of life.

			There is no need to go to the Antarctic Dry Valleys or a Mars simulation facility to see lichen extremophilia in action. Most shorelines will do just fine. It is on the rocky coast of British Columbia that I’ve found lichens’ tenacity most eye-catching. A foot or so above the barnacles, just beyond the farthest reach of the water, is a black smear that stretches across the rock in a band about two feet high. Close up, it looks like cracked tar on a dock. It forms a ribbon that traces the line of the shore, which becomes important when we’re sailing around the islands. We use it when we anchor, to help us bet against the tide; it is a sure indicator of the limits of the water’s reach. The dry-land mark.

			The black streak is a type of lichen, though one might never guess it was a living organism. It certainly doesn’t grow into elaborate structures. Nonetheless, along much of the upper West Coast of North America this species, Hydropunctaria maura (water speckled midnight), is the first organism to live beyond the reach of the waves. Look at high-tide lines around the world and you’ll see something similar. Most rocky shorelines are rimmed with lichen. Lichens start where the seaweeds stop, and some extend down into the water. When a volcano creates a new island in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, the first things to grow on the bare rock are lichens, which arrive as spores or fragments carried by the wind or birds. Likewise when a glacier retreats. The growth of lichens on freshly exposed rock is a variation on the theme of panspermia. These bare surfaces are inhospitable islands, remote possibilities for most organisms. Barren, seared by intense radiation, and exposed to wild storms and temperature fluctuations, they may as well be other planets.



* * *



			—

			 			LICHENS ARE PLACES where an organism unravels into an ecosystem and where an ecosystem congeals into an organism. They flicker between “wholes” and “collections of parts.” Shuttling between the two perspectives is a confusing experience. The word individual comes from the Latin meaning “undividable.” Is the whole lichen the individual? Or are its constituent members, the parts, the individuals? Is this even the right question to ask? Lichens are a product less of their parts than of the exchanges between those parts. Lichens are stabilized networks of relationships; they never stop lichenizing; they are verbs as well as nouns.

			One of the people worrying these categories is a lichenologist from Montana called Toby Spribille. In 2016, Spribille and his colleagues published a paper in the journal Science that pulled the rug from underneath the dual hypothesis. Spribille described a new fungal participant in one of the major evolutionary lineages of lichens, a partner that had gone entirely undetected despite one and a half centuries of painstaking scrutiny.

			Spribille’s discovery was an accident. A friend challenged him to grind up a lichen and sequence the DNA of all its participant organisms. He expected the results to be straightforward. “The textbooks were clear,” he told me. “There could only be two partners.” However, the more Spribille looked, the less this appeared to be the case. Each time he analyzed a lichen of this type, he found additional organisms besides the expected fungus and alga. “I dealt with these ‘contaminant’ organisms for a long time,” he recalled, “until I convinced myself that there was no such thing as lichens without ‘contamination,’ and we found that the ‘contaminants’ were remarkably consistent. The more we dug in, the more they seemed to be the rule not the exception.”

			 			Researchers have long hypothesized that lichens might involve additional symbiotic partners. After all, lichens don’t contain microbiomes. They are microbiomes, packed with fungi and bacteria besides the two established players. Nonetheless, until 2016, no new stable partnerships had been described. One of the “contaminants” Spribille discovered—a single-celled yeast—turned out to be more than a temporary resident. It is found in lichens across six continents and can make such a substantial contribution to lichens’ physiology as to give them the appearance of an entirely different species. This yeast was a crucial third partner in the symbiosis. Spribille’s bombshell finding was only the beginning. Two years later, he and his team found that wolf lichens—some of the best-studied species—contain yet another fungal species, a fourth fungal partner. Lichens’ identity splintered into even smaller shards. Yet this is still an oversimplification, Spribille told me. “The situation is infinitely more complex than anything we’ve published. The ‘basic set’ of partners is different for every lichen group. Some have more bacteria, some fewer; some have one yeast species, some have two, or none. Interestingly, we have yet to find any lichen that matches the traditional definition of one fungus and one alga.”

			What do the new fungal partners actually do in the lichen, I asked. “We’re not yet sure,” Spribille replied. “Every time we go in and try to find out who’s doing what, we get confounded. Instead of finding out the roles of the players, we bump into yet more players. The deeper we dig, the more we find.”

			Spribille’s findings are troubling for some researchers because they suggest that the lichen symbiosis is not as “locked in” as it has been thought to be. “Some people think about symbiosis as being like a package from IKEA,” Spribille explained, “with clearly identified parts, and functions, and order in which it’s assembled.” His findings suggest instead that a broad range of different players might be able to form a lichen, and that they just need to “tickle each other in the right way.” It’s less about the identity of the “singers” in the lichen, and more about what they do—the metabolic “song” that each of them sings. In this view, lichens are dynamic systems rather than a catalogue of interacting components.

			 			It’s a very different picture from the dual hypothesis. Since Schwendener’s portrayal of the fungus and alga as master and slave, biologists have argued about which of the two partners is in control of the other. But now a duet has become a trio, the trio has become quartet, and the quartet sounds more like a choir. Spribille seems unperturbed by the fact that it isn’t possible to provide a single, stable definition of what a lichen actually is. It is a point Goward often returns to, relishing the absurdity: “There is an entire discipline that can’t define what it is that they study?” “It doesn’t matter what you call it,” writes Hillman on lichens. “Anything so radical & ordinary stands for something.” For more than a hundred years, lichens have stood for many things and will probably continue to challenge our understanding of what living organisms are.

			Meanwhile, Spribille is pursuing a number of promising new leads. “Lichens are completely jam-packed full of bacteria,” he told me. In fact, lichens contain so many bacteria that some researchers hypothesize—in another twist on the panspermia theme—that they act as microbial reservoirs that seed barren habitats with crucial bacterial strains. Within lichens, some bacteria provide defense; others make vitamins and hormones. Spribille suspects that they might be doing more. “I think a few of these bacteria might be necessary to tie the lichen system together and get it to form something other than a blob on a dish.”

			Spribille told me about a paper called “Queer theory for lichens.” (“It comes up as the first thing in Google when you enter ‘queer’ and ‘lichen.’ ”) Its author argues that lichens are queer beings that present ways for humans to think beyond a rigid binary framework: The identity of lichens is a question rather than an answer known in advance. In turn, Spribille has found queer theory a helpful framework to apply to lichens. “The human binary view has made it difficult to ask questions that aren’t binary,” he explained. “Our strictures about sexuality make it difficult to ask questions about sexuality, and so on. We ask questions from the perspective of our cultural context. And this makes it extremely difficult to ask questions about complex symbioses like lichens because we think of ourselves as autonomous individuals and so find it hard to relate.”

			 			Spribille describes lichens as the most “extroverted” of all symbioses. Yet it is no longer possible to conceive of any organism—humans included—as distinct from the microbial communities they share a body with. The biological identity of most organisms can’t be pried apart from the life of their microbial symbionts. The word ecology has its roots in the Greek word oikos, meaning “house,” “household,” or “dwelling place.” Our bodies, like those of all other organisms, are dwelling places. Life is nested biomes all the way down.

			We can’t be defined on anatomical grounds because our bodies are shared with microbes and consist of more microbial cells than our “own”—cows can’t eat grass, for example, but their microbial populations can, and cows’ bodies have evolved to house the microbes that sustain them. Neither can we be defined developmentally, as the organism that proceeds from the fertilization of an animal egg, because we depend, like all mammals, on our symbiotic partners to direct parts of our developmental programs. Nor is it possible to define us genetically, as bodies made up of cells that share an identical genome—many of our symbiotic microbial partners are inherited from our mothers alongside our “own” DNA, and at points in our evolutionary history, microbial associates have permanently insinuated themselves into the cells of their hosts: Our mitochondria have their own genome as do plants’ chloroplasts, and at least eight percent of the human genome originated in viruses (we can even swap cells with other humans when we grow into “chimeras,” formed when mothers and fetuses exchange cells or genetic material in utero). Nor can our immune systems be taken as a measure of individuality, although our immune cells are often thought of as answering this question for us by distinguishing “self” from “nonself.” Immune systems are as concerned with managing our relationships with our resident microbes as fighting off external attackers and appear to have evolved to enable colonization by microbes rather than prevent it. Where does this leave you? Or perhaps y’all?

			 			Some researchers use the term “holobiont” to refer to an assemblage of different organisms that behaves as a unit. The word holobiont derives from the Greek word holos, which means “whole.” Holobionts are the lichens of this world, more than the sums of their parts. Like symbiosis and ecology, holobiont is a word that does useful work. If we only have words that describe neatly bounded autonomous individuals, it is easy to think that they actually exist.

			The holobiont is not a utopian concept. Collaboration is always a blend of competition and cooperation. There are many instances where the interests of all the symbionts don’t align. A bacterial species in our gut can make up a key part of our digestive system but cause a deadly infection if it gets into our blood. We’re used to this idea. A family can function as a family, a touring jazz group can give a captivating performance, and both still be fraught with tension.

			Perhaps it isn’t so hard for us to relate to lichens after all. This sort of relationship-building enacts one of the oldest evolutionary maxims. If the word cyborg—short for “cybernetic organism”—describes the fusion between a living organism and a piece of technology, then we, like all other life-forms are symborgs, or symbiotic organisms. The authors of a seminal paper on the symbiotic view of life take a clear stance on this point. “There have never been individuals,” they declare. “We are all lichens.”



* * *



			—

			DRIFTING AROUND ON the Caper, we spend a lot of time looking at sea charts. On these maps, the familiar role of sea and land are reversed. The landmasses are blank, beige expanses. The water is busy with contours and indications, which pucker around the rocks. Faceless flakes of land are laced with branching, joining seaways. The ocean moves through the network of waterways unpredictably. Some passages can only be navigated at certain times of the day. When the tide rushes through one perilous, narrow channel, its currents course together into a five-foot-high wave that stands still, a self-supporting wall of water. In a particularly treacherous corridor between two islands, fifty-foot tidal whirlpools appear and suck down floating logs.

			 			Many of these seaways are edged with rock. Granitic bluffs tumble down to the sea. Trees lean, toppling in slow motion. Along the shore, trees, moss, and lichens are rinsed off by the tides, revealing boulders and ledges, many wearing glacial scratch marks. It is hard to forget that much of the land is solid rock, slowly falling to pieces. Uneven shelves slope their way into sheer drops. My brother and I often sleep on these ledges overnight. Lichens are everywhere and I wake up with a face full of them. For days afterward I find fragments lining my trouser pockets. I turn them out, feeling like a human meteorite, and wonder how many will make a life in the unexpected places where they now find themselves.





4.


			MYCELIAL MINDS




There is a world beyond ours…That world talks. It has a language of its own. I report what it says. The sacred mushroom takes me by the hand and brings me to the world where everything is known…I ask them and they answer me.

				—MARÍA SABINA



			ON A SCALE of one to five—one being “not at all,” and five being “extreme”—how would you rate the sense of loss of your usual identity? How would you rate your experience of pure Being? How would you rate your sense of fusion into a larger whole?

			I lay on my bed in the clinical-drug testing unit, toward the end of my LSD trip, and puzzled over these questions. The walls appeared to breathe gently, and I found it difficult to focus on the words on the screen. There was a soft murmuring around my stomach, and the willow trees outside swayed, green and vivid.

			LSD, like psilocybin—the active ingredient in many species of “magic” mushrooms—is classified as both a psychedelic (or “mind-manifesting”) and an entheogen (a substance that can elicit an experience of “the divine within”). With effects ranging from auditory and visual hallucinations and dreamlike, ecstatic states to powerful shifts in cognitive and emotional perspective and a dissolving of time and space, these chemicals loosen the grip of our everyday perceptions, reach into our consciousness, and touch us somewhere deep. Many users report mystical experiences or a connection with divine beings or entities, a feeling of oneness with the natural world, and a loss of a neatly bounded sense of self.

			 			The psychometric questionnaire I was struggling to complete had been designed to assess this kind of experience. But the more I tried to cram my sensations into a five-point scale on a page, the more confused I became. How can one measure the experience of timelessness? How can one measure the experience of unity with an ultimate reality? These are qualities, not quantities. Yet science deals in quantities.

			I squirmed, took several deep breaths, and tried to approach the questions from a different angle. How do you rate your experience of amazement? The bed seemed to sway gently, and a school of thoughts scattered through my mind like startled minnows. How do you rate your experience of infinity? I could feel the scientific procedure groaning under the strain of what seemed to be an impossible task. How do you rate the loss of your usual sense of time? I succumbed to a fit of uncontrollable laughter—a common effect of LSD, I had been warned in a preparatory risk assessment. How do you rate the loss of your usual awareness about where you are?

			I recovered from my laughter and looked up at the ceiling. Come to think of it, how had I ended up here? A fungus had evolved a chemical that had been used to make a drug. Quite by accident, this drug had been discovered to alter human experience. For seven decades or so, LSD’s peculiar effects on our minds had generated astonishment, confusion, evangelical zeal, moral panic, and everything in between. As it filtered through the twentieth century, it had left an indelible cultural residue that we still struggle to make sense of. I was lying in this hospital room as part of a clinical trial because its effects remained as bewildering as they had always been.

			No wonder I was baffled. LSD and psilocybin are fungal molecules that have found themselves entangled within human life in complicated ways exactly because they confound our concepts and structures, including the most fundamental concept of all: that of our selves. It is their ability to pull our minds into unexpected places that has caused psilocybin-producing magic mushrooms to be enveloped within the ritual and spiritual doctrines of human societies since antiquity. It is their ability to soften the rigid habits of our minds that makes these chemicals powerful medicines capable of relieving severe addictive behaviors, otherwise incurable depression, and the existential distress that can follow the diagnosis of terminal illness. And it is their ability to modify the inner experience of our minds that has helped to change the way that the very nature of mind is understood within modern scientific frameworks. Yet why certain fungal species evolved these abilities remains a source of puzzlement and speculation.

			 			I rubbed my eyes, rolled over, and plucked up the courage to look once more at the words on the screen. How do you rate your sense that the experience cannot be described adequately in words?



* * *



			—

			THE MOST PROLIFIC and inventive manipulators of animal behavior are a group of fungi that live within the bodies of insects. These “zombie fungi” are able to modify their host’s behavior in ways that bring a clear benefit: By hijacking an insect, the fungus is able to disperse its spores and complete its lifecycle.

			One of the best-studied cases is that of the fungus Ophiocordyceps unilateralis, which organizes its life around carpenter ants. Once infected by the fungus, ants are stripped of their instinctive fear of heights, leave the relative safety of their nests, and climb up the nearest plant—a syndrome known as “summit disease.” In due course the fungus forces the ant to clamp its jaws around the plant in a “death grip.” Mycelium grows from the ant’s feet and stitches them to the plant’s surface. The fungus then digests the ant’s body and sprouts a stalk out of its head, from which spores shower down on ants passing below. If the spores miss their targets, they produce secondary sticky spores that extend outward on threads that act like trip wires.

			Zombie fungi control the behavior of their insect hosts with exquisite precision. Ophiocordyceps compels ants to perform the death grip in a zone with just the right temperature and humidity to allow the fungus to fruit: a height of twenty-five centimeters above the forest floor. The fungus orients ants according to the direction of the sun, and infected ants bite in synchrony, at noon. They don’t bite any old spot on the leaf’s underside. Ninety-eight percent of the time, the ants clamp onto a major vein.

			 			How zombie fungi are able to control the minds of their insect hosts has long puzzled researchers. In 2017, a team headed by David Hughes, a leading expert on fungal manipulative behaviors, infected ants with Ophiocordyceps in the lab. The researchers preserved the ants’ bodies at the moment of their death bite, sliced them into thin pieces, and reconstructed a three-dimensional picture of the fungus living within their tissues. They found that the fungus becomes, to an unsettling degree, a prosthetic organ of ants’ bodies. As much as forty percent of the biomass of an infected ant is fungus. Hyphae wind through their body cavities, from heads to legs, enmesh their muscle fibers, and coordinate their activity via an interconnected mycelial network. However, in the ants’ brains, the fungus is conspicuous by its absence. To Hughes and his team, this was unexpected. They anticipated that the fungus would have to be present in the brain to exert such fine control over the ants’ behavior.

			Instead, the fungus’s approach appears to be pharmacological. The researchers suspect that the fungus is able to puppeteer the ants’ movements by secreting chemicals that act on their muscles and central nervous system even if the fungus does not have a physical presence in their brains. Exactly what chemicals these are isn’t known. Nor is it known whether the fungus is able to cut the ant’s brain off from its body and coordinate its muscle contractions directly. However, Ophiocordyceps is closely related to the ergot fungi, from which the Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann originally isolated the compounds used to make LSD, and is able to produce the family of chemicals that LSD derives from—a group known as “ergot alkaloids.” Inside infected ants the parts of the Ophiocordyceps genome responsible for the production of these alkaloids are activated, suggesting that they might have a role to play in the manipulation of ant behavior.

			However they do it, these fungal interventions are remarkable by any human standard. After decades of research, and many billions of dollars of investment, the ability to regulate human behavior using drugs is anything but fine-tuned. Antipsychotic drugs, for example, don’t target specific behaviors; they just tranquilize. Compare this with the ninety-eight percent success rate of Ophiocordyceps in causing an ant not just to climb upward or perform its death bite—these always happen—but to bite onto the specific part of the leaf with the best conditions for the fungus to fruit. To be fair, Ophiocordyceps, like many zombie fungi, have had a long time to fine-tune their methods. The behaviors of infected ants don’t pass without a trace. Ants’ death grips leave distinctive scars on leaf veins, and fossilized scars push the origins of this behavior back into the Eocene epoch, forty-eight million years ago. It is likely that fungi have been manipulating animal minds for much of the time that there have been minds to manipulate.



				 					Ophiocordyceps sprouting from an ant





* * *



			—

			I WAS SEVEN when I discovered that humans can alter their minds by eating other organisms. My parents took me and my brother to stay in Hawaii with a friend of theirs, the eccentric author, philosopher, and ethnobotanist Terence McKenna. His great passion was mind-altering plants and fungi. He had been a hashish smuggler in Bombay, a butterfly collector in Indonesia, and a psilocybin mushroom grower in Northern California. Now he lived in an offbeat bolt-hole called Botanical Dimensions, several kilometers up a potholed road on the slopes of the volcano Mauna Loa. He had set up the land in Hawaii as a forest garden, a living library of rare and not so rare psychoactive and medicinal plants harvested from many corners of the tropical world. To reach the outhouse, one had to walk along a winding trail through the forest, ducking under dripping leaves and lianas. A few kilometers down the road, streams of lava flowed into the sea and made it froth and boil.

			 			McKenna reserved his greatest enthusiasm for psilocybin mushrooms. He had first eaten them while traveling in the Colombian Amazon with his brother, Dennis, in the early 1970s. In the years that followed, fueled by regular “heroic” doses of mushrooms, McKenna discovered a rare gift of the gab and flair for public speaking. “I realized that my innate Irish ability to rave had been turbo-charged by years of psilocybin mushroom use,” he recalled. “I could talk to small groups of people with what appeared to be electrifying effect about…peculiarly transcendental matters.” McKenna’s bardic musings—eloquent and widely broadcast—remain celebrated and denounced in more or less equal measure.

			After a few days at Botanical Dimensions, I came down with a fever. I remember lying under a mosquito net, watching as McKenna ground up a preparation in a large pestle and mortar. I assumed it was a remedy for my sickness and asked what he was doing. In his zany metallic drawl, he explained that it was no such thing. This plant, like some types of mushroom, could make us dream. If we were lucky these organisms could even speak to us. These were powerful medicines that humans had used for a long time, but they could also be scary. He grinned a languorous smile. When I was older, he said, I could try some of the preparation—a mind-altering cousin of sage called Salvia divinorum, as it turned out. But not now. I was transfixed.

			There are many examples of intoxication in the animal world—birds eat inebriating berries, lemurs lick millipedes, moths drink the nectar of psychoactive flowers—and it is likely that we have been using mind-altering drugs for longer than we have been human. The effects of these substances are “frequently inexplicable, and indeed uncanny,” wrote Richard Evans Schultes, a professor of biology at Harvard and a leading authority on psychoactive plants and fungi. “Without any doubt, [these compounds] have been known and employed in human experience since earliest man’s experimentation with his ambient vegetation.” Many have “strange, mystical and confounding” effects, and like psilocybin mushrooms, are intimately bound up within human cultures and spiritual practices.

			 			A number of fungi have mind-altering properties. The iconic red-and-white-spotted mushroom Amanita muscaria, eaten by shamans in parts of Siberia, elicits euphoria and hallucinatory dreams. Ergot fungi induce a grisly portfolio of effects from hallucinations to convulsions to a sensation of unbearable burning. Involuntary muscle twitching is one of the primary symptoms of ergotism, and the ability of ergot alkaloids to induce muscle contractions in humans may mirror their role in ants infected by Ophiocordyceps. A number of the horrors depicted by the Renaissance painter Hieronymus Bosch are thought to have been inspired by the symptoms of ergot poisoning, and some hypothesize that the numerous outbreaks of “dancing mania” between the fourteenth and seventeenth centuries, in which hundreds of townspeople took to dancing for days without rest, were caused by convulsive ergotism.

			The longest well-documented use of psilocybin mushrooms is in Mexico. The Dominican friar Diego Durán reported that mind-altering mushrooms—known as “flesh of the gods”—were served at the coronation of the Aztec emperor in 1486. Francisco Hernández, the physician to the King of Spain, described mushrooms that “when eaten cause not death but madness that on occasion is lasting, of which the symptom is a kind of uncontrolled laughter…There are others again which, without inducing laughter, bring before the eyes all kinds of visions, such as wars and the likeness of demons.” The Franciscan friar Bernardino de Sahagún (1499–1590) provided one of the most vivid accounts of mushroom use:

			 				They ate these little mushrooms with honey, and when they began to be excited by them, they began to dance, some singing, others weeping…Some did not want to sing but sat down in their quarters and remained there as if in a meditative mood. Some saw themselves dying in a vision and wept; others saw themselves being eaten by a wild beast…When the intoxication from the little mushrooms had passed, they talked over among themselves the visions which they had seen.



			 			Unequivocal records of mushroom consumption in Central America stretch back to the fifteenth century, but the use of psilocybin mushrooms in the region almost certainly predates this. Hundreds of mushroom-shaped statues have been found, dating from the second millennium BCE, and codices from before the Spanish conquest depict mushrooms being eaten and held aloft by feathered deities.

			In McKenna’s view, human consumption of psilocybin mushrooms was an even more ancient phenomenon and lay at the root of human biological, cultural, and spiritual evolution. Evidence of religion, complex social organization, commerce, and the earliest art arises within a relatively short period in human history around fifty to seventy thousand years ago. What triggered these developments is not known. Some scholars attribute them to the invention of complex language. Others hypothesize that genetic mutations brought about changes in brain structure. For McKenna, it was psilocybin mushrooms that had ignited the first flickerings of human self-reflection, language, and spirituality, somewhere in the proto-cultural fog of the Paleolithic. Mushrooms were the original tree of knowledge.

			Cave paintings preserved by the dry heat of the Sahara desert in southern Algeria provided McKenna with the most impressive evidence for ancient mushroom consumption. Dating from between 9000 and 7000 BCE, the Tassili paintings include a figure of a deity with an animal’s head and mushroom-like forms sprouting from its shoulders and arms. As our ancestors roamed “the mushroom-dotted grasslands of tropical and subtropical Africa,” McKenna conjectured, “the psilocybin-containing mushrooms were encountered, consumed and deified. Language, poetry, ritual, and thought emerged from the darkness of the hominid mind.”

			There are many variations on the “stoned ape” hypothesis, but as with most origin stories it is difficult to prove either way. A rich bloom of speculation proliferates around psilocybin mushrooms wherever they are eaten. Surviving texts and artifacts are patchy, and almost always ambiguous. Does the Tassili painting represent a mushroom deity? It might. Then again, it might not. The evidence from Neanderthal tooth plaque, the Iceman, and other well-preserved corpses provides proof that human knowledge of mushrooms as food and medicine stretches back many thousands of years. However, none of these bodies have been found with traces of psilocybin mushrooms. A number of primate species are known to seek out and consume mushrooms as food, and there are anecdotal accounts of primates consuming psilocybin mushrooms, but no well-documented instances. Some suspect that ancient Eurasian populations used psilocybin mushrooms as part of religious ceremonies, the best-known being the Eleusinian Mysteries, secretive rites celebrated in ancient Greece and thought to have been attended by many luminaries, including Plato. But once again there’s no definitive record. And yet the absence of evidence does not provide evidence of absence. This makes speculation inevitable. And McKenna, turbo-charged by psilocybin, was a master of the art.



				 					Psilocybe cubensis





* * *



			—

			OPHIOCORDYCEPS HAS BEEN the inspiration for at least two fictional monsters: the cannibals in the video game The Last of Us and the zombies in the book The Girl with All the Gifts. It sounds like a strange but true special case—one of evolution’s left-field outcomes. However, Ophiocordyceps is just one well-studied example. This type of manipulative behavior is not exceptional. It has evolved multiple times across the fungal kingdom in unrelated lineages, and there are numerous non-fungal parasites that are also able to manipulate the minds of their hosts.

			 			Fungi use a variety of approaches to tweak the biochemical dials that regulate their hosts’ behavior. Some use immunosuppressants to override the insects’ defensive responses. Two such compounds have found their way into mainstream medicine for these very reasons. Cyclosporine is an immunosuppressant drug that makes organ transplants possible. Myriocine has become the blockbuster multiple sclerosis drug fingolimod and was originally extracted from fungus-infested wasps that are eaten in parts of China as a nostrum for eternal youth.

			In 2018, researchers at the University of California at Berkeley published a study documenting a startling technique used by Entomophthora, a mind-manipulating fungus that infects flies. There are parallels with Ophiocordyceps. Infected flies climb up high. When they extend their mouthparts to feed, a glue produced by the fungus sticks them to whatever surface they touch. When the fungus has consumed the fly’s body, starting with the fatty parts and finishing with the vital organs, it pushes a stalk out of the fly’s back and ejects spores into the air.

			The researchers were surprised to find that the Entomophthora fungus carries around a type of virus that infects insects, not fungi. The lead author of the study reported it to be “one of the whackiest discoveries” of his time in science. What’s whacky is the implication: that the fungus uses the virus to manipulate the mind of insects. It’s still a hypothesis, but it’s plausible. A number of related viruses specialize in modifying insect behavior. One such virus is injected by parasitic wasps into ladybirds, which tremble, remain rooted to the spot, and become guardians for the wasp’s eggs. Another similar virus makes honeybees more aggressive. By harnessing a mind-manipulating virus, the fungus wouldn’t have to evolve the ability to modify the mind of its insect host.

			One of the more surprising twists in the story of zombie fungi came from research carried out by Matt Kasson and his team at West Virginia University. Kasson studies the fungus Massospora, which infects cicadas and causes the rear third of their bodies to disintegrate, allowing it to discharge its spores out of their ruptured back ends. Infected male cicadas—“flying saltshakers of death,” in Kasson’s words—become hyperactive and hypersexual despite the fact that their genitals have long since crumbled away, a testament to how expertly the fungus is able to arrange their deterioration. Within their decaying bodies, their central nervous systems remain intact.

			 			In 2018, Kasson and his team analyzed the chemical profile of the “plugs” of fungus that sprout from the cicadas’ broken bodies. They were amazed to find that the fungus produced cathinone, an amphetamine in the same class as the recreational drug mephedrone. Cathinone naturally occurs in the leaves of khat (Catha edulis), a plant cultivated in the Horn of Africa and the Middle East, which has been chewed for centuries by humans for its stimulant effects. Cathinone had never before been found outside of plants. More astonishing was the presence of psilocybin, which was one of the most abundant chemicals in the fungal plugs—although one would have to eat several hundred infected cicadas to notice any effect. It’s surprising because Massospora sits in an entirely different division of the fungal kingdom from the species known to produce psilocybin, separated by a gulf of hundreds of millions of years. Few suspected that psilocybin would show up in such a distant part of the fungal evolutionary tree, playing a behavior-modifying role in a very different story.

			What exactly is Massospora able to accomplish by drugging its hosts with a psychedelic and an amphetamine? The researchers presume that these drugs play a part in the fungal manipulation of the insect. But how, exactly, isn’t known.



* * *



			—

			ACCOUNTS OF PSYCHEDELIC experiences frequently involve hybrid beings and interspecies transformations. Myths and fairy tales, too, are full of composite animals from werewolves and centaurs to sphinxes and chimeras. Ovid’s Metamorphoses is a catalogue of transformations from one creature into another and even includes a land where “men grew from rainswept fungus.” In many traditional cultures, it is believed that composite creatures exist, and that the boundaries between organisms are fluid. The anthropologist Eduardo Viveiros de Castro reports that shamans in indigenous Amazonian societies believe they can temporarily inhabit the mind and body of other animals and plants. Among the Yukaghir people in northern Siberia, writes the anthropologist Rane Willerslev, humans dress and behave like elk when they hunt elk.

			 			These accounts seem to stretch the limits of biological possibility and are rarely taken seriously within modern scientific circles. However, the study of symbiosis reveals that life is full of hybrid life-forms, such as lichens, which are composed of several different organisms. Indeed, all plants, fungi, and animals, including ourselves, are composite beings to some extent: Eukaryotic cells are hybrids, and we all inhabit bodies that we share with a multitude of microbes without which we could not grow, behave, and reproduce as we do. It’s possible that many of these beneficial microbes share some of the manipulative abilities of parasites like Ophiocordyceps. A growing number of studies have made a link between animal behavior and the trillions of bacteria and fungi that live in their guts, many of which produce chemicals that influence animal nervous systems. The interaction between gut microbes and brains—the “microbiome-gut-brain axis”—is far-reaching enough to have birthed a new field: neuromicrobiology. However, mind-manipulating fungi remain some of the most dramatic examples of composite organisms. In the words of Hughes, an infected ant is a “fungus in ant’s clothing.”

			It’s possible to make sense of this sort of shape-shifting within a scientific framework. In The Extended Phenotype, Richard Dawkins points out that genes don’t just provide the instructions to build the body of an organism. They also provide instructions to build certain behaviors. A bird’s nest is part of the outward expression of the bird’s genome. A beaver’s dam is part of the outward expression of a beaver’s genome. And an ant’s death grip is part of the outward expression of the genome of Ophiocordyceps fungi. Through inherited behaviors, Dawkins argues, the outward expression of an organism’s genes—known as its “phenotype”—extends into the world.

			Dawkins was careful to place “stringent requirements” on the idea of the extended phenotype. Although it is a speculative concept, he dutifully reminds us, it is a “tightly limited speculation.” There are three crucial criteria that have to be met to prevent phenotypes becoming too extended (if a beaver’s dam is an expression of the beaver’s genome, then what about the pond that forms upstream of the dam, and the fish that live in the pond, and…).

			 			First, extended traits must be inherited—Ophiocordyceps, for example, inherits a pharmacological talent for infecting and manipulating ants. Second, extended traits must vary from generation to generation—some Ophiocordyceps are more precise manipulators of ant behavior than others. Third, and most important, variation must affect an organism’s ability to survive and reproduce, a quality known as its “fitness”—Ophiocordyceps that can more precisely control their insect’s movements are better able to spread their spores. Provided these three conditions are met—traits must be inherited, they must vary, and their variation must affect an organism’s fitness—extended characteristics will be subject to natural selection and will evolve in an analogous way to their bodily characteristics. Beavers that make better dams are more likely to survive and pass on the ability to make better dams. But human dams—or any human building for that matter—don’t count as part of our extended phenotype because we aren’t born with an instinct to build specific structures that directly affect our fitness.

			Summit disease and the death grip, on the other hand, fully qualify as fungal behaviors, not ant behaviors. The fungus doesn’t have a twitchy, muscular, animal body with a centralized nervous system or an ability to walk, bite, or fly. So it commandeers one. It is a strategy that works so well that it has lost the ability to survive without it. For part of its life, Ophiocordyceps must wear an ant’s body. In nineteenth-century spiritualist circles, human mediums were understood to become possessed by the spirits of the dead. Lacking their own bodies or voices, spirits were said to borrow a human body to speak and act through. In an analogous way, mind-manipulating fungi possess the insects that they infect. Infected ants stop behaving like ants and become mediums for the fungi. It is in this sense that Hughes referred to an ant infected with Ophiocordyceps as a “fungus in ant’s clothing.” Impelled by the fungus, the ant veers off the tracks of its own evolutionary story—tracks that guide its behaviors and relationships to the world and other ants—and onto the tracks of the evolutionary story of Ophiocordyceps. In physiological, behavioral, and evolutionary terms, the ant becomes fungus.



* * *



			—

			 			OPHIOCORDYCEPS AND OTHER insect-manipulating fungi have evolved a remarkable ability to cause harm to the animals they influence. Psilocybin mushrooms, as a growing number of studies report, have evolved an astonishing ability to cure a wide range of human problems. In one sense, this is news: Since the 2000s, rigorously controlled trials and the latest brain-scanning techniques have helped researchers interpret psychedelic experiences using the language of modern science—it was this new wave of psychedelic research that brought me into the hospital for the LSD study. These recent findings have broadly confirmed the opinions of many researchers in the 1950s and ’60s, who came to regard LSD and psilocybin as miracle cures for a wide range of psychiatric conditions. In another sense, however, much of the research that has taken place in modern scientific contexts broadly confirms what is well-known to the traditional cultures who have used psychoactive plants and fungi as medicines and psycho-spiritual tools for an unknowably long time. From this point of view, modern science is simply catching up.

			Many recent findings are extraordinary by the standards of conventional pharmaceutical interventions. In 2016, two sister studies at New York University and Johns Hopkins University administered psilocybin alongside a course of psychotherapy to patients suffering from anxiety, depression, and “existential distress” following diagnoses with terminal cancer. After a single dose of psilocybin, eighty percent of patients showed substantial reductions in their psychological symptoms, reductions that persisted for at least six months after the dose. Psilocybin reduced “demoralization and hopelessness, improved spiritual well-being, and increased quality of life.” Participants described “exalted feelings of joy, bliss, and love,” and “a movement from feelings of separateness to interconnectedness.” More than seventy percent of participants rated their experiences as one of the top five most meaningful experiences in their lives. “You may say, what does that mean?” Roland Griffiths, a senior researcher on the study, remarked in an interview. “Initially I wondered if they had pretty dull lives. But no.” Participants compared their experiences to the birth of their first child or the death of a parent. These studies are considered to be some of the most effective psychiatric interventions in the history of modern medicine.

			 			Profound changes in people’s minds and personalities are rare; that they should happen over the course of such a short experience is striking. Nonetheless, these aren’t anomalous findings. Several recent studies report the dramatic effects of psilocybin on people’s minds, outlooks, and perspectives. Using some of the psychometric questionnaires that I had contended with, many of these studies have found that psilocybin can reliably induce experiences classified as “mystical.” Mystical experiences include feelings of awe; of everything being interconnected; of transcending time and space; of profound intuitive understanding about the nature of reality; and of deeply felt love, peace, or joy. They often include the loss of a clearly defined sense of self.

			Psilocybin can leave a lasting impression on people’s minds, like the grin on the Cheshire Cat in Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, which “remained some time after the rest of it had gone.” In one study, researchers found that a single high dose of psilocybin increased the openness to new experiences, psychological well-being, and life satisfaction of healthy volunteers, a change that persisted in most cases for more than a year. Some studies have found that experiences with psilocybin have helped smokers or alcoholics break their addictions. Other studies have reported enduring increases in subjects’ sense of connection with the natural world.

			Out of the flurry of recent research into psilocybin some themes are starting to emerge. One of the most interesting is the way that participants in psilocybin trials make sense of their experiences. As Michael Pollan reports in How to Change Your Mind, most of the people who take psilocybin don’t interpret their experiences in modern biology’s mechanistic terms, of molecules moving around their brains. Quite the opposite. Pollan found that many of those he interviewed had “started out stone-cold materialists or atheists…and yet several had had ‘mystical experiences’ that left them with the unshakable conviction that there was something more than we know—a ‘beyond’ of some kind that transcended the physical universe.” These effects pose a riddle. That a chemical can induce a profound mystical experience appears to support the prevailing scientific view that our subjective worlds are underpinned by the chemical activity of our brains; that the world of spiritual beliefs and experience of the divine can spring from a material, biochemical phenomenon. However, as Pollan points out, the very same experiences are so powerful as to convince people that a nonmaterial reality—the raw ingredient of religious belief—exists.



* * *



			—

			 			OPHIOCORDYCEPS AND GUT-DWELLING microbes influence animal minds by living inside their bodies, fine-tuning their chemical secretions in real time. This is not the case with psilocybin mushrooms. One can inject a person with synthetic psilocybin and elicit the full range of psycho-spiritual effects. How does it work?

			Once inside the body, psilocybin is converted to the chemical psilocin. Psilocin slips into the workings of the brain by stimulating receptors normally stimulated by the neurotransmitter serotonin. By mimicking one of our most widely used chemical messengers, psilocybin, like LSD, infiltrates our nervous systems, intervenes directly in the passage of electrical signals around our bodies, and can even change the growth and structure of neurons.

			How exactly psilocybin changes patterns of neuronal activity wasn’t known until the late 2000s, when researchers from the Beckley/Imperial Psychedelic Research Programme gave subjects psilocybin and monitored the activity of their brains. Their findings were surprising. The scans revealed that psilocybin didn’t increase the activity of the brain as one might expect, given its dramatic effects on people’s minds and cognition. Rather, it reduced the activity of certain key areas.

			 			The type of brain activity reduced by psilocybin forms the basis of what is termed the default mode network (DMN). When we’re not focusing on much, when our minds are wandering idly, when we’re self-reflecting, when we’re thinking of the past or making plans about the future, it’s our DMN that’s active. The DMN has been described by researchers as the “capital city” or “corporate executive” of the brain. In the riot of cerebral processes going on at any one time, the DMN is understood to keep a kind of order—a schoolteacher in a chaotic classroom.

			The study showed that subjects who reported the strongest sense of “ego-dissolution,” or loss of a sense of self, on psilocybin had the most dramatic reductions in the activity of their DMNs. Shut down the DMN, and the brain is let off the leash. Cerebral connectivity explodes, and a tumult of new neuronal pathways arise. Networks of activity previously distant from one another link up. In the terms of the metaphor used by Aldous Huxley in his seminal exploration of psychedelic experience, The Doors of Perception, psilocybin appears to shut down a “reducing valve” in our consciousness. The outcome? An “unconstrained style of cognition.” The authors conclude that psilocybin’s ability to change people’s minds is related to these states of cerebral flux.

			Brain-imaging studies provide an important description of the way that psychedelics act on our bodies, but they don’t do much to explain participants’ feelings. After all, it is people who have experiences, not brains. And it is exactly people’s experiences that seem to underpin the therapeutic effects of psilocybin. In the studies that measured the effects of psilocybin on terminally ill cancer patients, it was those who had the strongest mystical experiences who showed the most pronounced reductions in symptoms of depression and anxiety. Similarly, in a study of psilocybin and tobacco addiction, the patients with the best results were those who had undergone the most powerful mystical experiences. Psilocybin appears to take effect not by pushing a set of biochemical buttons but by opening patients’ minds to new ways of thinking about their lives and behaviors.

			It is a finding that echoes much of the research into LSD and psilocybin that took place during the first wave of modern psychedelic research in the mid-twentieth century. Abram Hoffer, a Canadian psychiatrist and researcher into the effects of LSD in the 1950s, remarked that “from the first, we considered not the chemical, but the experience as a key factor in therapy.” This may sound like common sense, but from the standpoint of mechanistic medicine at the time it was a radical notion. The conventional approach was—and remains to a large degree—to use stuff, whether drugs or a surgical tool, to treat the stuff that the body is made out of, just as we might use tools to repair a machine. Drugs are normally understood to work through a pharmacological circuit that bypasses the conscious mind entirely: A drug affects a receptor, which triggers a change in symptoms. By contrast, psilocybin—like LSD and other psychedelics—appears to act on symptoms of mental illness via the mind. The standard circuit is enlarged: A drug affects a receptor, which triggers a change of mind, which triggers a change in symptoms. Patients’ psychedelic experiences themselves appear to be the cure.

			 			In the words of Matthew Johnson, a psychiatrist and researcher at Johns Hopkins, psychedelics like psilocybin “dope-slap people out of their story. It’s literally a reboot of the system…Psychedelics open a window of mental flexibility in which people can let go of the mental models we use to organize reality.” Toughened habits, such as those that give rise to substance addiction, or those that add up to the “rigid pessimism” of depression, become more pliable. By softening the categories that organize human experience, psilocybin and other psychedelics are able to open up new cognitive possibilities.

			One of our most robust mental models is that of the self. It is exactly this sense of self that psilocybin and other psychedelics seem to disrupt. Some call it ego dissolution. Some simply report that they lost track of where they ended and their surroundings began. The well-defended “I” that humans depend on for so much can vanish entirely, or just dwindle, shading off into otherness gradually. The result? Feelings of merging with something greater, and a reimagined sense of one’s relationship to the world. In many instances—from lichens, to the boundary-stretching behavior of mycelium—fungi challenge our well-worn concepts of identity and individuality. Psilocybin-producing mushrooms, like LSD, do so too, but in the most intimate possible setting: the inside of our own minds.



* * *



			—

			 			IN THE CASE of Ophiocordyceps, an infected ant’s behavior can be thought of as fungal behavior. The death grip, summit disease—these are extended characteristics of the fungus, part of its extended phenotype. Can the alterations in human consciousness and behavior brought about by psilocybin mushrooms be thought of as part of the extended phenotype of the fungus? The extended behavior of Ophiocordyceps leaves an imprint in the world in the form of fossilized scars on the underside of leaves. Can the extended behavior of psilocybin mushrooms be thought of as leaving an imprint in the world in the form of ceremonies, rituals, chants, and the other cultural and technological outgrowths of our altered states? Do psilocybin fungi wear our minds, as Ophiocordyceps and Massospora wear insect bodies?

			Terence McKenna was a great advocate of this view. Given a sufficiently large dose, he asserted, the mushroom could be expected to speak, plainly and clearly, talking “eloquently of itself in the cool night of the mind.” Fungi have no hands with which to manipulate the world, but with psilocybin as a chemical messenger, they could borrow a human body and use its brain and senses to think and speak through. McKenna thought fungi could wear our minds, occupy our senses, and, most important, impart knowledge about the world out there. Among other things, fungi could use psilocybin to influence humans in an attempt to deflect our destructive habits as a species. For McKenna, this was a symbiotic partnership that presented possibilities “richer and even more baroque” than those available to humans or fungi alone.

			As Dawkins reminds us, how far we’re willing to go depends on how far we’re willing to speculate. How we speculate in turn depends on how we arrange our biases. “You think the world is what it looks like in fine weather at noon day,” the philosopher Alfred North Whitehead once observed to his former student Bertrand Russell. “I think it is what it seems like in the early morning when one first wakes from deep sleep.” In Whitehead’s terms, Dawkins speculates in fine weather at noon day. He takes pains to ensure that his speculation about extended phenotypes remains “disciplined” and “tightly limited.” He is clear that phenotypes can extend beyond the body, but they can’t be too extended. By contrast, McKenna speculates at dawn. His requirements are less stringent, his explanations less tightly limited. Between the two poles lies a continent of possible opinion.

			 			How do psilocybin mushrooms stand up to Dawkins’s three “stringent requirements”?

			A mushroom’s ability to produce psilocybin is certainly inherited. It is also an ability that varies from mushroom species to mushroom species, and between individual mushrooms. However, for the bemushroomed state—the visions, the mystical experiences, the ego dissolution, the loss of a sense of self—to count as part of the extended phenotype of the fungi, the final key condition must be met. Fungi that orchestrate “better” altered states—whatever that means—must pass on their genes more successfully. Fungi must differ in the ability to influence humans, and the ones that provide more fulsome and desirable experiences must benefit at the expense of those providing less desirable experiences.

			At a glance, this third requirement seems to decide the issue. Psilocybin-producing fungi may influence human behavior, but unlike Ophiocordyceps, they don’t live on within our bodies. Moreover, McKenna’s speculation is hard to reconcile with the fact that humans are latecomers to the psilocybin story. Psilocybin was produced by fungi for tens of millions of years before the genus Homo evolved—the current best estimate puts the origin of the first “magic” mushroom at around seventy-five million years ago. For more than ninety percent of their evolutionary history, psilocybin-producing fungi have lived on a human-free planet and have done just fine. If the fungi do indeed benefit from our altered states, they can’t have done so for very long.

			Then what did psilocybin do for those fungi that evolved an ability to produce it? Why bother to make it in the first place? It’s a question that has been pored over for decades by mycologists and magic-mushroom enthusiasts alike.

			 			It’s possible that psilocybin didn’t do much at all for the fungi that made it until humans came along. There are lots of compounds in fungi and plants that accumulate in biochemical backwaters playing Z-list roles as incidental metabolic by-products. Sometimes these “secondary compounds” encounter an animal that they attract, confound, or kill, at which point they might start to benefit the fungus and become an evolutionary adaptation. However, sometimes they don’t do much more than provide variations on a biochemical theme that might one day prove useful, or not.

			Two studies published in 2018 suggest that psilocybin did provide a benefit to the fungi that could make it. Analysis of the DNA of psilocybin-producing fungal species reveals that the ability to make psilocybin evolved more than once. More surprising was the finding that the cluster of genes needed to make psilocybin has jumped between fungal lineages by horizontal gene transfer several times over the course of its history. As we’ve seen, horizontal gene transfer is the process by which genes and the characteristics they underpin move between organisms without the need to have sex and produce offspring. It is an everyday occurrence in bacteria—and how antibiotic resistance can spread rapidly through bacterial populations—but it is rare in mushroom-forming fungi. It is even more rare for complex clusters of metabolic genes to remain intact as they jump between species. The fact that the psilocybin gene cluster remained in one piece as it moved around suggests that it provided a significant advantage to any fungi who expressed it. If it didn’t, the trait would have quickly degenerated.

			But what could this advantage have been? The psilocybin gene cluster jumped between species of fungus that lived similar lifestyles in rotting wood and animal dung. These habitats are also the home of numerous insects that “eat or compete” with fungi, all of whom should be sensitive to the potent neurological activity of psilocybin. It seems probable that the evolutionary value of psilocybin lay in its ability to influence animal behavior. But how, exactly, isn’t clear. Fungi and insects share a long and complicated history. Some fungi, like Ophiocordyceps or Massospora, kill. Some cooperate over immense tracts of evolutionary time, like those that live with leaf-cutter ants and termites. In either case, fungi use chemicals to change insect behavior. Massospora even goes so far as to use psilocybin to accomplish its purpose. Which way did psilocybin swing? Opinion is divided. Monitoring the effects of psilocybin on the organisms that consume it isn’t straightforward even with humans, who can at least attempt to talk about their experience and fill out psychometric questionnaires. What chance do we have of finding out what psilocybin might do to the mind of an insect? Animal studies on the subject are scarce, which makes matters worse.

			 			Could psilocybin be a deterrent produced by fungi to fuddle the wits of their insect pests? If so, it doesn’t seem to be very effective. There are species of gnat and fly that routinely make their homes within magic mushrooms. Snails and slugs devour them without apparent ill-effect. And leaf-cutter ants have been observed to actively forage for a certain type of psilocybin mushroom, carrying them back to their nests in one piece. These findings have led some to suppose that far from being a deterrent, psilocybin served as a lure, somehow changing insect behavior in ways that benefited the fungus.

			The answer probably falls somewhere in between. Psilocybin mushrooms that are toxic to some animals could still make a good meal for those able to develop resistance. Some species of fly are resistant to the poisons produced by the death cap mushroom, for instance, and have near exclusive access as a result. Could these psilocybin-tolerant insects serve the fungus by helping to spread its spores? By defending it from other pests? Once again, we’re left speculating.



* * *



			—

			WE MIGHT NOT know how psilocybin served fungal interests for the first several million years of its existence. But from our current vantage point, it is clear that the interaction of psilocybin with human minds has transformed the evolutionary fortunes of those mushrooms that produce it. Psilocybin-producing fungi develop an easy rapport with humans. Far from acting as a repellent—to stand a chance of overdosing, a human would have to eat a thousand times more mushrooms than required for an average trip—psilocybin has caused humans to seek out the mushrooms, carry them from place to place, and develop methods to cultivate them. In doing so, we have helped to spread their spores, which are both light enough to travel over great distances in the air and numerous: Left on any surface for just a few hours, a single mushroom will eject enough spores to leave a thick black smear. In colliding with a new type of animal, a chemical that might once have served to baffle and deter pests has been transformed into a glittering lure in a few swift moves. The passage of magic mushrooms from obscurity to international stardom over a few decades in the twentieth century is one of the most dramatic stories in the long history of human relationships with fungi.

			 			In the 1930s, the Harvard botanist Richard Evans Schultes read the fifteenth-century accounts of the “flesh of the gods” written by the Spanish friars and became intrigued. From the few sources that survived, it was clear that in parts of Central America psilocybin mushrooms had grown into cultural and spiritual centers of gravity. They had found their way into the hands of the local deities, and their consumption had fueled a conception of the divine in which the mushrooms themselves featured heavily.

			Could these mushrooms still be found growing in modern-day Mexico? Schultes received a tip-off from a Mexican botanist, and in 1938 set off for the remote valleys in northeastern Oaxaca to find out. (This was the same year that Albert Hofmann first isolated LSD from ergot fungi in a pharmaceutical lab in Switzerland.) Schultes found mushroom use among the Mazatec people to be alive and well. Curanderos, or healers, held regular mushroom vigils to heal the sick, locate lost property, and give advice. Mushrooms were common in the pastures surrounding the villages. Schultes collected specimens and published his findings. He reported that consumption of these mushrooms resulted in “hilarity, incoherent talking, and…fantastic visions in brilliant colors.”

			In 1952, Gordon Wasson, an amateur mycologist and a vice president of the bank J. P. Morgan, received a letter from the poet and scholar Robert Graves describing Schultes’s report. Wasson was fascinated by Graves’s news of the mind-altering “flesh of the gods” and traveled to Oaxaca in search of the mushrooms. There, Wasson met a curandera called María Sabina, who invited him to a mushroom vigil. Wasson described his experience as “soul shattering.” In 1957, he published an account of his experience in Life magazine. The article was titled “Seeking the Magic Mushroom: A New York Banker Goes to Mexico’s Mountains to Participate in the Age-Old Rituals of Indians Who Chew Strange Growths that Produce Visions.”

			 			Wasson’s article was a sensation and read by millions. By this time, the mind-altering properties of LSD had been known about for fourteen years, and there was an active community of researchers conducting studies into its effects. Nonetheless, Wasson’s was among the very first accounts of a psychedelic mind-altering substance to reach the general public. “Magic mushrooms” became a household term—and gateway concept—more or less overnight. In his autobiography, Dennis McKenna remembers his brother, Terence, then a precocious ten-year-old, “trailing our mother as she did her housework, waving the magazine demanding to know more. But of course she had nothing to add.”

			Things moved quickly. Hofmann was sent a sample of the magic mushrooms by a member of Wasson’s expedition, and had soon identified, synthesized, and named the active ingredient: psilocybin. In 1960, the well-respected Harvard academic Timothy Leary heard of the magic mushrooms through a friend and went to Mexico to try them. His experience, a “visionary voyage,” had a profound impact on him, and he returned “a changed man.” Back at Harvard, inspired by his experience with the mushrooms, Leary abandoned his research program and set up the Harvard Psilocybin Project. “Since eating seven mushrooms in a garden in Mexico,” he later wrote of his gateway experience, “I have devoted all my time and energy to the exploration and description of these strange deep realms.”

			Leary’s methods proved controversial. He left Harvard and began in earnest to promote his vision that cultural revolution and spiritual enlightenment could be attained via the consumption of psychedelics, and soon became notorious. In numerous TV and radio appearances, he evangelized about LSD and its many benefits. In an interview with Playboy he advised that on an average acid trip women could expect to have a thousand orgasms. He ran against Ronald Reagan for governor of California and lost. Fueled in part by Leary’s proselytizing, the countercultural movement of the 1960s picked up momentum. In 1967, in San Francisco, Leary, by now “High Priest” of the psychedelic movement, addressed the Human Be-In that was attended by tens of thousands. Soon afterward, in a haze of backlash and scandal, LSD and psilocybin were made illegal. By the end of the decade, almost all of the research taking place into the effects of psychedelics had been shut down or driven underground.



* * *



			—

			 			THE OUTLAWING OF psilocybin and LSD marked the start of a new chapter in the evolutionary history of psilocybin mushrooms. Most of the psychedelic research of the 1950s and ’60s had taken place with LSD or synthetic psilocybin in pill form, much of it produced by Hofmann in Switzerland. But by the early 1970s, in part because of the legal risks associated with pure psilocybin and LSD, and in part due to their scarcity, interest in magic mushrooms grew. By the mid-1970s, species of psilocybin mushrooms had been discovered growing in many parts of the world, from the United States to Australia. However, the supply of wild mushrooms is limited by seasonal conditions and location. When they returned from Colombia in the early 1970s, Terence and Dennis McKenna sought a steadier supply. Their solution was radical. In 1976, the McKennas published a short book entitled Psilocybin: Magic Mushroom Grower’s Guide. Armed with this slim volume, the brothers advised, with little more than jars and a pressure cooker, anyone could produce unlimited quantities of a powerful psychedelic from the comfort of their garden shed. The process was only a little bit more complicated than making jam, and even a novice could soon find themselves, in Terence’s words, “neck deep in alchemical gold.”

			The McKennas were not the first to cultivate psilocybin mushrooms, but they were the first to publish a reliable method for growing large quantities of mushrooms without specialist laboratory equipment. The Grower’s Guide was a runaway success and went on to sell more than a hundred thousand copies in the five years following its release. It kick-started a new field of DIY mycology and influenced a young mycologist named Paul Stamets, the discoverer of four new species of psilocybin mushroom and author of a guidebook to psilocybin mushroom identification.

			 			Stamets was already working on new ways to cultivate a range of “gourmet and medicinal” mushrooms, and in 1983, he published The Mushroom Cultivator, which simplified growing techniques even further. In the 1990s, as online forums for magic mushroom growers sprang up, Dutch entrepreneurs spotted a loophole in the law that allowed them to sell psilocybin mushrooms openly, and many Dutch growers of edible supermarket mushrooms switched over to psychedelic mushroom production. By the early 2000s, the craze had spread to England, and crates of fresh psilocybin mushrooms were being sold on London high streets. By 2004, the Camden Mushroom Company alone was shifting a hundred kilograms of fresh mushrooms a week, equivalent to about twenty-five thousand trips. Fresh psilocybin mushrooms were made illegal soon afterward, but the secret was out. Today, just-add-water kits are readily available online. Crosses between fungal strains are producing new varieties, from “Golden Teacher” to “Mc Kennai,” each with subtly different effects.

			For as long as humans have sought out psilocybin mushrooms—thus serving as enthusiastic agents of spore dispersal—the fungi have benefited from their ability to tinker with our consciousness. Since the 1930s, these benefits have multiplied many times over. Before Wasson’s trip to Mexico, few people outside indigenous communities in Central America knew of the existence of psilocybin mushrooms. Yet within two decades of their arrival in North America, a new story of domestication was underway. In cupboards, bedrooms, and warehouses, a handful of tropical fungal species found new lives in otherwise inhospitable temperate climates.

			What’s more, since Schultes’s first paper in the late 1930s, more than two hundred new species of psilocybin-producing fungi have been described, including a psilocybin-producing lichen that grows in the Ecuadorian rainforest. It turns out that there are few environments where these mushrooms don’t grow, given sufficient rainfall. As one researcher observes, psilocybin mushrooms “occur in abundance wherever mycologists abound.” Guidebooks make it possible for humans to find, identify, and pick—and thus disperse—psilocybin mushrooms that would have been off the radar a few decades ago. Several of these species seem to have a fondness for disturbed habitats and find an easy home in our messy wake. As Stamets wryly confides, many have an affection for public spaces, including “parks, housing developments, schools, churches, golf courses, industrial complexes, nurseries, gardens, freeway rest areas and government buildings—including county and state courthouses and jails.”



* * *



			—

			 			DO THE EVENTS of the last several decades bring us any closer to satisfying Dawkins’s third criterion? Can these fungi be thought of as borrowing a human brain to think with, a human consciousness to experience with? Does a human under the influence of mushrooms really fall under their influence, as an infected ant falls under the influence of Ophiocordyceps?

			For our altered states to count as an extended phenotype of the fungi, the bemushroomed human would need to serve the reproductive interests of the very fungi they had eaten. However, this doesn’t seem to be the case. Only a small number of species are cultivated, and for a large part, the decision of which fungal strains to grow is made on the basis of which are the easiest to cultivate and provide the biggest yields—it’s not clear that “better” mind-alterers are selected over “worse” mind-alterers. More problematic is that if all humans were made extinct in a single instant, most species of psilocybin mushroom would carry on untroubled. Psilocybin-producing fungi don’t depend entirely on our altered states, as Ophiocordyceps depends entirely on the altered behavior of ants. For tens of millions of years, they have grown and reproduced perfectly well without humans, and would probably continue to do so.

			Does it really matter? “One might think that with the isolation…of psilocybin and psilocin, the mushrooms of Mexico had lost their magic,” wrote Schultes and Hofmann in 1992. With the domestication of psilocybin-producing fungi, hundreds of kilograms of mushrooms can be grown in warehouses in Amsterdam. With the isolation of psilocybin, the default mode network can be disabled on demand in brain scanners. Mystical experiences, awe, and a loss of one’s sense of self can be elicited in a hospital bed. How much closer do these advances propel us toward an understanding of the way that psilocybin influences human minds?

			 			For Schultes and Hofmann, the answer was “not very.” Mystical experiences are those by definition resistant to rational explanation. They don’t readily fit within numbered scales on psychometric questionnaires. They confound and enthrall. And they undoubtedly occur. As Schultes and Hofmann observe, scientific investigation into the identity and structure of psilocybin and psilocin had “merely shown that the magic properties of the mushrooms are the properties of two crystalline compounds.” It is a finding that does little more than kick the question down the road. “Their effect on the human mind is just as inexplicable, and just as magical, as that of the mushrooms themselves.”

			The effects of psilocybin mushrooms might not count as an extended phenotype in a strict sense, but does this mean we should dismiss the speculation of Terence McKenna? Perhaps we shouldn’t be too hasty. “Our normal waking consciousness,” wrote the philosopher and psychologist William James in 1902, “is but one special type of consciousness, whilst all about it, parted from it by the filmiest of screens, there lie potential forms of consciousness entirely different.” For reasons that are poorly understood, certain fungi lead humans out of familiar stories into forms of consciousness that are entirely different, and toward the edge of new questions. “No account of the universe in its totality can be final which leaves these other forms of consciousness quite disregarded,” James concluded.

			Whether for a researcher, a patient, or just an interested bystander, the curious thing about these fungal chemicals is exactly the experiences that they elicit. McKenna’s mushroom-fueled speculation may stretch the limits of mental and biological possibility. But that is precisely the point: The effects of psilocybin on human minds stretch the limits of what seems possible. In Mazatec culture, it is self-evident that mushrooms speak; anyone who takes them can experience this for themselves. Theirs is a view shared by many traditional cultures that ritually use entheogenic plants or fungi. And it is a view commonly reported by contemporary users in nontraditional settings, many of whom report a thinning of the boundaries between “self” and “other,” and an experience of “merging” with other organisms.

			 			Is the world what it looks like in fine weather at noon day? Or is it what it seems to be at dawn when we first wake from sleep? Perhaps there are things that everyone can agree on. Whether or not fungi actually speak through humans and occupy our senses, the impact of psilocybin mushrooms on our thoughts and beliefs is real enough. If we imagined that a fungus could wear our minds and enjoyed splashing around in our consciousness, what would we expect to see? There might be songs sung about mushrooms, statues of mushrooms, paintings of mushrooms, myths and stories in which mushrooms play leading roles, ceremonies built around the celebration of mushrooms, a global community of DIY mycologists developing new ways to cultivate mushrooms in their homes, mycological evangelists like Paul Stamets talking to large audiences about how mushrooms can save the world. And people like Terence McKenna who claim to be able to speak English for fungi.



				 					Psilocybe semilanceata, or the “liberty cap”





5.


			BEFORE ROOTS




					You’ll never be free of me

					He’ll make a tree from me

					Don’t say good bye to me

					Describe the sky to me



				—TOM WAITS/KATHLEEN BRENNAN



			SOMETIME AROUND SIX hundred million years ago, green algae began to move out of shallow fresh waters and onto the land. These were the ancestors of all land plants. The evolution of plants transformed the planet and its atmosphere and was one of the pivotal transitions in the history of life—a profound breakthrough in biological possibility. Today, plants make up eighty percent of the mass of all life on Earth and are the base of the food chains that support nearly all terrestrial organisms.

			Before plants, land was scorched and desolate. Conditions were extreme. Temperatures fluctuated wildly and landscapes were rocky and dusty. There was nothing that we would recognize as soil. Nutrients were locked up in solid rocks and minerals, and the climate was dry. This isn’t to say that land was completely devoid of life. Crusts made up of photosynthetic bacteria, extremophile algae, and fungi were able to make a living in the open air. But the harsh conditions meant that life on Earth was overwhelmingly an aquatic event. Warm, shallow seas and lagoons teemed with algae and animals. Sea scorpions several meters long ranged the ocean floor. Trilobites plowed silty seabeds using spade-like snouts. Solitary corals started to form reefs. Mollusks thrived.

			 			Despite its comparatively inhospitable conditions, land provided considerable opportunities for any photosynthetic organisms that could cope. Light was unfiltered by water, and carbon dioxide was more accessible—no small incentives for organisms that make a living by eating light and carbon dioxide. But the algal ancestors of land plants had no roots, no way to store or transport water, and no experience in extracting nutrients from solid ground. How did they manage the fraught passage onto dry land?

			When it comes to piecing together origin stories it’s difficult to find agreement among scholars. Evidence is usually sparse, and what fragments there are can often be mobilized to support different points of view. And yet, amid the slow-burning disputes that surround the early history of life, one piece of academic consensus stands out: It was only by striking up new relationships with fungi that algae were able to make it onto land.

			These early alliances evolved into what we now call “mycorrhizal relationships.” Today, more than ninety percent of all plant species depend on mycorrhizal fungi. They are the rule, not the exception: a more fundamental part of planthood than fruit, flowers, leaves, wood, or even roots. Out of this intimate partnership—complete with cooperation, conflict, and competition—plants and mycorrhizal fungi enact a collective flourishing that underpins our past, present, and future. We are unthinkable without them, yet seldom do we think about them. The cost of our neglect has never been more apparent. It is an attitude we can’t afford to sustain.



* * *



			—

			AS WE’VE SEEN, algae and fungi have a tendency to partner with one another. Their association can take many forms. Lichens are one example. Seaweeds—also algae—are another; many seaweeds washed up on shorelines depend on fungi to nourish them and prevent them from drying out. And then there are the soft green balls produced in days by the Harvard researchers when they introduced free-living fungi and algae to one another. As long as fungi and algae have a good ecological fit—as long as they sing a metabolic “song” together that neither can sing alone—they will coalesce into entirely new symbiotic relationships. In this sense, the union of fungi and algae that gave rise to plants is part of a larger story, an evolutionary refrain.

			 			Whereas the partners in lichens come together to make a body altogether unlike those of their individual members, the partners in a mycorrhizal relationship do not: Plants stay recognizable as plants, and mycorrhizal fungi stay recognizable as fungi. This makes for a very different, more promiscuous type of symbiosis in which a single plant can be coupled to many fungi at once, and a single fungus can be coupled to many plants.

			For the relationship to thrive, both plant and fungus must make a good metabolic match. It is a familiar pact. In photosynthesis, plants harvest carbon from the atmosphere and forge the energy-rich carbon compounds—sugars and lipids—on which much of the rest of life depends. By growing within plant roots, mycorrhizal fungi acquire privileged access to these sources of energy: They get fed. However, photosynthesis isn’t enough to support life. Plants and fungi need more than a source of energy. Water and minerals must be scavenged from the ground—full of textures and micropores, electrically charged cavities, and labyrinthine rotscapes. Fungi are deft rangers in this wilderness and can forage in a way that plants can’t. By hosting fungi within their roots, plants gain hugely improved access to these sources of nutrients. They, too, get fed. By partnering, plants gain a prosthetic fungus, and fungi gain a prosthetic plant. Both use the other to extend their reach. It is an example of Lynn Margulis’s “long-lasting intimacy of strangers.” Except that they’re hardly strangers anymore. Look inside a root, and this becomes clear.

			Roots turn into worlds under a microscope. I’ve spent weeks immersed in them, sometimes enthralled, sometimes frustrated. Put fresh, fine roots in a dish of water and you’ll see fungal hyphae stringing off them. Boil roots in dye, squash them onto a glass slide, and you’ll see an intertwining. Fungal hyphae fork and fuse and erupt within plant cells in a riot of branching filaments. Plant and fungus clasp one another. It’s difficult to imagine a more intimate set of poses.

			 			The strangest thing I’ve seen under a microscope is germinating dust seeds. Dust seeds are the smallest plant seeds in the world. A single seed is just visible to the naked eye like a small hair or the tip of an eyelash. Orchids make them, as do some other plants. They weigh almost nothing and disperse easily with wind or rain. And they won’t germinate until they’ve met a fungus. I spent a long time trying to catch them in the act. I buried thousands of dust seeds in small bags and dug them up after a few months hoping that some would have sprouted. Under the microscope I pushed seeds around a glass dish with a needle searching for signs of life. After several days, I found what I was looking for. Some seeds had swollen into fleshy clumps tangled up in fungal hyphae, sticky streamers that trailed out into the dish. Inside the developing roots, hyphae raveled into knots and coils. This wasn’t sex: Fungal and plant cells hadn’t fused and pooled their genetic information. But it was sexy: Cells from two different creatures had met, incorporated each other, and were collaborating in the building of a new life. To imagine the future plant as separable from the fungus was absurd.



* * *



			—

			IT ISN’T CLEAR how mycorrhizal relationships first arose. Some venture that the earliest encounters were soggy, disorganized affairs: fungi seeking food and refuge within algae that washed up onto the muddy shores of lakes and rivers. Some propose instead that the algae arrived on land with their fungal partners already in tow. Either way, explained Katie Field, a professor at the University of Leeds, “they soon became dependent on each other.”

			Field is a brilliant experimentalist who has spent years studying the most ancient lineages of plants alive today. Using radioactive tracers, she measures the exchanges taking place between fungi and plants in growth chambers that simulate ancient climates. Their symbiotic manners provide clues about how plants and fungi behaved toward one another in the earliest stages of their migration onto land. Fossils, too, provide a striking glimpse of these early alliances. The finest specimens date from around four hundred million years ago and bear the unmistakable imprint of mycorrhizal fungi within them: feathery lobes that look just as they do today. “You can see the fungus actually living in the plant cells,” Field marveled.

			 			The earliest plants were little more than puddles of green tissue, with no roots or other specialized structures. Over time, they evolved coarse fleshy organs to house their fungal associates, who scavenged the soil for nutrients and water. By the time the first roots evolved, the mycorrhizal association was already some fifty million years old. Mycorrhizal fungi are the roots of all subsequent life on land. The word mycorrhiza has it right. Roots (rhiza) followed fungi (mykes) into being.

			Today, hundreds of millions of years later, plants have evolved thinner, faster-growing, opportunistic roots that behave more like fungi. But even these roots can’t outmaneuver fungi when it comes to exploring the soil. Mycorrhizal hyphae are fifty times finer than the finest roots and can exceed the length of a plant’s roots by as much as a hundred times. They came before roots, and range beyond roots. Some researchers take it further. “Plants don’t have roots,” one of my undergraduate professors confided to a class of astounded students. “They have fungus-roots, myco-rhizas.”

			Mycorrhizal fungi are so prolific that their mycelium makes up between a third and a half of the living mass of soils. The numbers are astronomical. Globally, the total length of mycorrhizal hyphae in the top ten centimeters of soil is around half the width of our galaxy (4.5 × 1017 kilometers of hyphae, versus 9.5 × 1017 kilometers of space). If these hyphae were ironed into a flat sheet, their combined surface area would cover every inch of dry land on Earth two and a half times over. However, fungi don’t stay still. Mycorrhizal hyphae die back and regrow so rapidly—between ten and sixty times per year—that over a million years their cumulative length would exceed the diameter of the known universe (4.8 × 1010 light years of hyphae, versus 9.1 × 109 light years in the known universe). Given that mycorrhizal fungi have been around for some five hundred million years and aren’t restricted to the top ten centimeters of soil, these figures are certainly underestimates.

			 			In their relationship, plants and mycorrhizal fungi enact a polarity: Plant shoots engage with the light and air, while the fungi and plant roots engage with the solid ground. Plants pack up light and carbon dioxide into sugars and lipids. Mycorrhizal fungi unpack nutrients bound up in rock and decomposing material. These are fungi with a dual niche: Part of their life happens within the plant, part in the soil. They are stationed at the entry point of carbon into terrestrial life cycles and stitch the atmosphere into relation with the ground. To this day, mycorrhizal fungi help plants cope with drought, heat, and the many other stresses life on land has presented from the very beginning, as do the symbiotic fungi that crowd into plant leaves and stems. What we call “plants” are in fact fungi that have evolved to farm algae, and algae that have evolved to farm fungi.



				 					Mycorrhizal fungus inside a plant root





* * *



			—

			THE WORD mycorrhiza was coined in 1885 by the German biologist Albert Frank—the same Albert Frank whose fascination with lichens had led him to coin the word symbiosis eight years earlier. He was subsequently employed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Domains and Forestry for the Kingdom of Prussia, to “promote the possibility of truffle cultivation,” a post that caused him to turn his attention toward the soil. As for many before and since, truffles were the lure that tugged him into a fungal underground.

			 			Frank didn’t have much success in cultivating truffles, but in his inquiries, he documented in vivid detail the entanglement between tree roots and the mycelium of truffle fungi. His diagrams portray root tips entangled within a mycelial sleeve, with hyphae writhing outward onto the page. Frank was struck by the intimacy of the association, and suggested that the relationship between plant roots and their companion fungi might be mutually beneficial rather than parasitic. As was common among scientists studying symbiosis, Frank used lichens as an analogy to make sense of the mycorrhizal association. In his view, plants and mycorrhizal fungi were bound in an “intimate, reciprocal dependence.” Mycorrhizal mycelium behaved like a “wet nurse,” and enabled “the entire nourishment of the tree from the soil.”

			Frank’s ideas were fiercely attacked, as Simon Schwendener’s dual hypothesis of lichens had been. For Frank’s critics, the idea that the symbiosis could be of mutual benefit—a “mutualism”—was a sentimental illusion. If one partner appeared to benefit, they did so at a price. Any symbiosis that appeared to be mutually beneficial was actually one of conflict and parasitism in disguise. Undeterred, Frank worked for ten years to understand plants’ relationships with their fungal “nurses.” He performed elegant experiments with pine seedlings. Some he grew in sterilized soil; some he grew in soil collected from a nearby pine forest. Those that grew in forest soil formed fungal relationships and developed into larger, healthier saplings than those grown in sterile conditions.

			Frank’s findings caught the eye of J.R.R. Tolkien, who had a well-known fondness for plants, and trees in particular. Mycorrhizal fungi soon found their way into The Lord of the Rings.

			 				“For you little gardener and lover of trees,” said the elf Galadriel to the hobbit Sam Gamgee, “I have only a small gift…In this box there is earth from my orchard…if you keep it and see your home again at last, then perhaps it may reward you. Though you should find all barren and laid waste, there will be few gardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your garden, if you sprinkle this earth there.”



			 			When he finally returned home to find a devastated Shire:

			 				Sam Gamgee planted saplings in all the places where specially beautiful or beloved trees had been destroyed, and he put a grain of the precious dust from Galadriel in the soil at the root of each…All through the winter he remained as patient as he could, and tried to restrain himself from going round constantly to see if anything was happening. Spring surpassed his wildest hopes. His trees began to sprout and grow, as if time was in a hurry and wished to make one year do for twenty.





* * *



			—

			TOLKIEN COULD HAVE been describing plant growth in the Devonian period, three hundred to four hundred million years ago. By now well-established on land, and fueled by high levels of light and carbon dioxide, plants spread across the world and evolved larger and more complex forms faster than at any time before. Meter-tall trees evolved into thirty-meter-tall trees in a few million years. Over this period, as plants boomed, the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere dropped by ninety percent, triggering a period of global cooling. Could plants and their fungal associates have played a part in this massive atmospheric transformation? A number of researchers, Field included, think it’s probable.

			“The levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere drop off dramatically at the same time as land plants are evolving increasingly complex structures,” Field explained. The surge in plant productivity in turn depended on their mycorrhizal partners. It’s a predictable sequence of events. One of the biggest limits to plant growth is a scarcity of the nutrient phosphorus. One of the things that mycorrhizal fungi do best—one of their most prominent metabolic “songs”—is to mine phosphorus from the soil and transfer it to their plant partners. If plants are fertilized with phosphorus, they grow more. The more plants grow, the more they draw down carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The more plants live, the more plants die, and the more carbon is buried in soils and sediments. The more carbon that is buried, the less there is in the atmosphere.

			 			Phosphorus is only part of the story. Mycorrhizal fungi deploy acids and high pressure to burrow into solid rock. With their help, plants in the Devonian period were able to mine minerals like calcium and silica. Once unlocked, these minerals react with carbon dioxide, pulling it out of the atmosphere. The resulting compounds—carbonates and silicates—find their way into the oceans where they are used by marine organisms to make their shells. When the organisms die, the shells sink and pile up hundreds of meters thick on the ocean floor, which becomes an enormous burial ground for carbon. Add all of this up and climates start to change.

			Is there a way to measure the impact of mycorrhizal fungi on ancient global climates, I wondered. “Yes and no,” Field replied. “I recently tried.” To do so, she collaborated with the biogeochemist Benjamin Mills, a fellow researcher at the University of Leeds, who works with computer models that give predictions about the climate and the composition of the atmosphere.

			Lots of researchers build climate models. Weather forecasters and climate scientists depend on these digital simulations to predict future scenarios. So do researchers trying to reconstruct major transitions in the planet’s past. By varying the numbers dialed into the model, one can test different hypotheses about the history of the Earth’s climate. Turn up carbon dioxide, and what happens? Turn down the amount of phosphorus that plants can access and what happens? The model can’t say what actually occurred, but it can tell us which factors are capable of making a difference.

			Before Field approached him, Mills hadn’t included mycorrhizal fungi in the model. He could vary the amount of phosphorus that plants could obtain. However, without taking account of mycorrhizal fungi, there is no way to make realistic estimates of how much phosphorus plants were able to access. Field could help. In a series of experiments, she had found that the outcome of mycorrhizal relationships varied depending on the climatic conditions in her growth chambers. Sometimes plants benefited more from the relationship, and sometimes less, a trait she terms “symbiotic efficiency.” If plants are hitched to an efficient mycorrhizal partner, they receive more phosphorus and grow more. Field was able to estimate how efficient mycorrhizal exchange would have been around 450 million years ago, when atmospheric carbon dioxide levels were several times higher than they are today.

			 			When Mills added mycorrhizal fungi to the model using Field’s measurements, he found that it was possible to change the entire global climate simply by turning the symbiotic efficiency up or down. The amount of carbon dioxide and oxygen in the atmosphere, and global temperatures—all varied according to the efficiency of mycorrhizal exchange. Based on Field’s data, mycorrhizal fungi would have made a substantial contribution to the dramatic drawdown of carbon dioxide that followed the plant boom in the Devonian period. “It’s one of those moments where you think: Wow, actually, hang on!” Field exclaimed. “Our results suggest that mycorrhizal relationships have played a role in the evolution of much of life on Earth.”



* * *



			—

			THEY CONTINUE TO do so. The book of Isaiah in the Old Testament has it that “all flesh is grass.” It is a logic that we might today describe as ecological: In animal bodies, grass becomes flesh. But why stop there? Grass only becomes grass when sustained by the fungi that live in its roots. Does this mean that all grass is fungus? If all grass is fungus, and all flesh is grass, does it follow that all flesh is fungus?

			Maybe not all, but certainly some: Mycorrhizal fungi can provide up to eighty percent of a plant’s nitrogen and as much as a hundred percent of its phosphorus. Fungi supply other crucial nutrients to plants, such as zinc and copper. They also provide plants with water, and help them to survive drought as they’ve done since the earliest days of life on land. In return, plants allocate up to thirty percent of the carbon they harvest to their mycorrhizal partners. Exactly what is taking place between a plant and mycorrhizal fungus at any given moment depends on who’s involved. There are many ways to be a plant, and many ways to be a fungus. And there are many ways to form a mycorrhizal relationship: It is a way of life that has evolved on more than sixty separate occasions in different fungal lineages since algae first migrated onto land. As with many traits that have defied the odds to evolve more than once—whether the ability to hunt nematodes, form lichens, or manipulate animal behavior—it is hard to avoid the feeling that these fungi have stumbled upon a winning strategy.

			 			A plant’s fungal partners can have a noticeable impact on its growth—and its flesh. A number of years ago, at a conference on mycorrhizal relationships, I met a researcher who had been growing strawberry plants with different communities of mycorrhizal fungus. The experiment was simple. If the same species of strawberry was grown with different species of fungus, would the flavor of the strawberries change? He conducted blind taste tests and found that different fungal communities did seem to change the flavor of the fruit. Some had more flavor, some were juicier, some were sweeter.

			When he repeated the experiment a second year running, unpredictable weather swamped the effects of mycorrhizal fungi on the taste of the strawberries, but a number of other striking effects surfaced. Bumblebees were more attracted to the flowers of strawberry plants grown with some fungal species and less attracted to others. Plants grown with some mycorrhizal species produced more berries than others. And the appearance of the berries changed depending on which fungi they partnered with. Some mycorrhizal communities made the berries look more appealing, some less so.

			Strawberries aren’t alone in being sensitive to the identity of their fungal partners. Most plants—from a potted snapdragon to a giant sequoia—will develop differently when grown with different communities of mycorrhizal fungus. Basil plants, for example, produce different profiles of the aromatic oils that make up their flavor when grown with different mycorrhizal strains. Some fungi have been found to make tomatoes sweeter than others; some change the essential oil profile of fennel, coriander, and mint; some increase the concentration of iron and carotenoids in lettuce leaves, the antioxidant activity in artichoke heads, or the concentrations of medicinal compounds in Saint-John’s-wort and echinacea. In 2013, a team of Italian researchers baked loaves of bread using wheat that had been grown with different mycorrhizal communities. The bread was subjected to testing with an electronic nose and a tasting panel consisting of ten “well-trained testers” at the University of Gastronomic Sciences in Bra, Italy. (Each tester, the authors assert reassuringly, “had a minimum of two years’ experience in sensory evaluation.”) Surprisingly, given how many stages occur between harvest and tasting—milling, mixing, and baking, besides the addition of yeast—both the panel and the electronic nose were able to tell the loaves apart. The bread grown with an enhanced mycorrhizal fungal community had a higher “flavor intensity” and improved “elasticity and crumbliness.” By smelling a flower, by chewing on twigs, leaves, or bark, by drinking a wine, how many other aspects of a plant’s mycorrhizal underground might we be able to taste? I often wonder.



				 					Mycorrhizal root tip





* * *



			—

			“HOW DELICATE IS the mechanism by which the balance of power is maintained among members of the soil population,” reflected the mycologist Mabel Rayner in Trees and Toadstools, a book on mycorrhizal relationships, published in 1945. Different species of mycorrhizal fungus might cause a basil leaf to taste different or a strawberry plant to produce more delicious-looking berries. But how? Are some fungal partners “better” than others? Are some plant partners “better” than others? Can plants and fungi tell the difference between alternative partners? Decades have elapsed since Rayner’s remark, but we are only just beginning to understand the intricate behaviors that maintain a symbiotic balance between plants and mycorrhizal fungi.

			Social interactions are demanding. According to some evolutionary psychologists, humans’ large brains and flexible intellects arose to allow us to navigate our way through complex social situations. Even the smallest interaction is embedded within a shifting social constellation. According to the Chambers Dictionary of Etymology, the word entangle was originally used to describe such human interactions, or our involvement in “complex affairs.” Not until later did the word take on other meanings. We humans became as clever as we are, so the argument goes, because we were entangled within a demanding flurry of interaction.

			 			Plants and mycorrhizal fungi don’t have recognizable brains or intellects, but they certainly live entangled lives and have had to evolve ways to manage their complex affairs. Plants’ actions are informed by what is happening in the sensory world of their fungal partners. Similarly, fungal behaviors are informed by what is happening in the sensory world of their plant partners. Using information from between fifteen and twenty different senses, a plant’s shoots and leaves explore the air and adjust their behavior based on continuous subtle changes in their surroundings. Anywhere from thousands to billions of root tips explore the soil, each able to form multiple connections to different fungal species. Meanwhile, a mycorrhizal fungus must sniff out sources of nutrients, proliferate within them, mingle with crowds of other microbes—whether fungal, bacterial, or other—absorb the nutrients, and divert them around its rambling network of a body. Information must be integrated across an immense number of hyphal tips, which at any one moment can be strung between several different plants and sprawl over tens of meters.

			Toby Kiers, a professor at Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, is one of the researchers who has done the most to investigate how plants and fungi maintain their “balance of power.” Using radioactive labels, or by attaching light-emitting tags to molecules, she and her team are able to trace the carbon that moves from plant roots into fungal hyphae, and phosphorus that moves from fungi into plant roots. By carefully measuring these fluxes, she has been able to describe some of the ways in which both partners manage their exchange. How do plants and mycorrhizal fungi navigate their demanding social landscapes, I asked Kiers. She laughed. “We really want to get our hands on the complexity of what’s happening. We know that trade is taking place. The question is whether we can predict how trading strategies change. It’s overwhelming, but why not try?”

			Kiers’s findings are surprising because they suggest that neither plant nor fungus is in complete control of the relationship. Between them, they are able to strike compromises, resolve trade-offs, and deploy sophisticated trading strategies. In one set of experiments, she found that plant roots were able to supply carbon preferentially to fungal strains that provided them with more phosphorus. In return, fungi that received more carbon from the plant supplied it with yet more phosphorus. Exchange was in some sense negotiated between the two depending on the availability of resources. Kiers hypothesized that these “reciprocal rewards” have helped to keep plant and fungal associations stable over evolutionary time. Because both partners share control of the exchange, neither partner would be able to hijack the relationship for their own exclusive benefit.

			 			Although both plants and fungi tend to benefit from the relationship overall, different species of plant and fungus have different symbiotic manners. Some fungi make more cooperative partners; some are less cooperative and will “hoard” phosphorus rather than exchange it with their plant partners. However, even a hoarder might not hoard all the time. Their behavior is flexible, a set of ongoing negotiations that depend on what is taking place around them and in other parts of themselves. We don’t know much about the workings of these behaviors, but it’s clear that at any one moment plants and fungi face a number of options. And options entail choices, however those choices turn out to be made—whether in a conscious human mind, an unconscious computer algorithm, or anything in between.

			Are plants and fungi making decisions, albeit brainless ones, I wondered. “I use the word decision all the time,” Kiers told me. “There’s a set of options, and somehow information has to be integrated and one of the options has to be chosen. I think that a lot of what we are doing is studying micro-scale decisions.” There are many ways that these choices could unfold. “Are there absolute decisions being made in every hyphal tip?” Kiers mused. “Or is it all relative, in which case what happens would depend on what else is happening across the network.”

			Intrigued by these questions, and having read Thomas Piketty’s work on wealth inequality in human societies, Kiers began thinking about the role of inequality within fungal networks. She and her team exposed a single mycorrhizal fungus to an unequal supply of phosphorus. One part of the mycelium had access to a big patch of phosphorus. Another part had access to a small patch. She was interested in how this would affect the fungus’s trading decisions in different parts of the same network. Some recognizable patterns emerged. In parts of a mycelial network where phosphorus was scarce, the plant paid a higher “price,” supplying more carbon to the fungus for every unit of phosphorus it received. Where phosphorus was more readily available, the fungus received a less favorable “exchange rate.” The “price” of phosphorus seemed to be governed by the familiar dynamics of supply and demand.

			 			Most surprising was the way that the fungus coordinated its trading behavior across the network. Kiers identified a strategy of “buy low, sell high.” The fungus actively transported phosphorus—using its dynamic microtubule “motors”—from areas of abundance, where it fetched a low price when exchanged with a plant root, to areas of scarcity, where it was in higher demand and fetched a higher price. By doing so, the fungus was able to transfer a greater proportion of its phosphorus to the plant at the more favorable exchange rate, thus receiving larger quantities of carbon in return.

			How are these behaviors controlled? Can the fungus detect differences in exchange rate across its network and actively transport phosphorus to play the system? Or does it always transport phosphorus within its network from areas of abundance to areas of scarcity, sometimes receiving a payoff from the plant, and sometimes not? We still don’t know. Nonetheless, Kiers’s studies illuminate some of the intricacies of plant and fungal exchange, and show how solutions to complex challenges are able to emerge. All of these behaviors illustrate a general pattern. How a given plant or fungus behaves depends on who they find themselves partnering with and where they happen to be. One can think of mycorrhizal relationships as stretched along a continuum, with parasites at one pole and cooperative mutualists at the other. Some plants benefit from their fungal partners under some conditions and not under others. Grow plants with plenty of phosphorus, and they might become less picky about which fungal species they partner with. Grow cooperative fungi alongside other cooperative fungi, and they might become less cooperative. Same fungus, same plant, different setting, different outcome.



* * *



			—

			 			ONE OF MY collaborators, a professor at the University of Marburg, told me about a sculpture he had seen as a child. The Vertical Earth Kilometer is a brass pole one kilometer long buried in the ground. The only visible part of it is the very end of the pole: a brass circle that lies flat on the floor and looks like a coin. He described the imaginative vertigo it had triggered in him, the sense of floating on the surface of an ocean of land, looking down into its depths. The experience inspired his lifelong fascination with roots and mycorrhizal fungi. I feel a similar sense of vertigo when I think about the complexity of mycorrhizal relationships—kilometers of entangled life—jostling beneath my feet.

			The vertigo really sets in when I try to scale from the very small to the very large, from the microscopic trading decisions taking place at a cellular level, up to the entire planet, the atmosphere, the three-trillion-odd trees that make their lives on land, and the quadrillions of miles of mycorrhizal fungi that weave them into relation with the soil. Our minds aren’t good at keeping their balance when faced with numbers this big. Yet the story of mycorrhizal relationships makes many such dizzying swoops, from very large to very small and back again.

			Scale is an issue in the field of mycorrhizal research. Mycorrhizal relationships are conducted out of sight. It is hard to experience them, to see them or touch them. Their inaccessibility means that most knowledge of mycorrhizal behavior comes from studies in controlled laboratory or greenhouse settings. Scaling up these findings to complex real-world ecosystems isn’t always possible. Much of the time we only see a small part of the picture. The result is that researchers know more about what mycorrhizal fungi are capable of doing than what they’re actually doing.

			Even in controlled settings, it’s difficult to get a feel for how mycorrhizal fungi actually behave on a moment-to-moment basis. By contrast with Kiers’s studies, there are situations in which plant and fungal exchanges don’t seem to obey what we would recognize as rational trading strategies. Is something missing from our understanding? No one can be sure. We have very little idea of exactly how the chemical exchange between plants and fungi takes place, and how it is controlled at a cellular level. “We’re trying to study how stuff moves within a network,” Kiers told me. “We’re trying to get videos of it. It’s so crazy what’s going on in there. But these studies are hard, and I can understand why people would want to work with different organisms.” Many mycologists share this combination of excitement and frustration.

			 			Are there other ways to think about these associations, other ways to quell the vertigo? Some of my colleagues find more intuitive outlets for their mycorrhizal enthusiasm. A number of them are passionate mushroom hunters. By foraging for mushrooms—from truffle to porcini to chanterelle to matsutake—they involve themselves with mycorrhizal relationships in a more spontaneous way. Others spend hours looking at mycorrhizal fungi under microscopes, which is almost the equivalent of a marine biologist going for a dive. Some of them spend hours sifting mycorrhizal spores from the soil, colorful orbs that under the microscope glisten like fish eggs. One of my colleagues in Panama was a skilled spore wrangler. Some evenings we made snacks from spores, fragments of cracker, and sour cream: tiny crumbs of mycorrhizal caviar that we had to prepare under the microscope and tweezer into our mouths. We didn’t learn much, but that wasn’t the point. It was an exercise that helped us to keep our balance as we careened from the small to the large. These were rare moments of unmediated contact with our experimental subjects, goofs to remind us that mycorrhizal fungi aren’t mechanical schematic entities—one can’t eat a machine or a concept—but living organisms engaged in lives that we still struggle to understand.



* * *



			—

			PLANTS REMAIN THE easiest way in. It is through plants that the mycorrhizal extravaganza belowground most commonly erupts into everyday human life. The countless microscopic interactions that occur between fungi and roots express themselves in the forms, growth, tastes, and smells of plants. Sam Gamgee, like Albert Frank, could see the outcome of young trees’ mycorrhizal relationships with his own eyes: The saplings “began to sprout and grow, as if time was in a hurry.” Eat a plant, and we taste the outgrowth of a mycorrhizal relationship. Cultivate plants—in a plant pot, flower bed, garden, or city park—and we cultivate mycorrhizal relationships. Scale up yet further, and the microscopic trading decisions made by plants and fungi can shape the populations of forests across entire continents.

			 			The last Ice Age ended around eleven thousand years ago. As the vast Laurentide Ice Sheet retreated, it revealed millions of square kilometers of North America. Over a period of several thousand years, forests expanded northward. Using pollen records, it is possible to reconstruct the migration timelines of different species of tree. Some—beech, alder, pine, fir, maple—moved quickly, more than a hundred meters per year. Some—plane, oak, birch, hickory—moved more slowly, around ten meters per year.

			What was it about these different species that determined their response to the changing climate? The relationship between fungi and the ancestors of plants allowed them to migrate onto dry land. Could mycorrhizal relationships have continued to play a part in plants’ movements around the planet hundreds of millions of years later? It’s possible. Neither plants nor fungi inherit each other. They inherit a tendency to associate, but they conduct what are, by the standards of many other ancient symbioses, open relationships. As in the earliest days of life on land, plants form their relationships depending on who’s around. The same goes for fungi. Though this might be a limitation—a plant seed that finds no compatible fungi is unlikely to survive—the ability to reform their relationships, or evolve entirely new ones, can allow partners to respond to changing circumstances. A study published in 2018 by researchers at the University of British Columbia found that the speed of tree migration may indeed depend on their mycorrhizal proclivity. Some species of tree are more promiscuous than others and can enter into relationships with many different fungal species. As the Laurentide Ice Sheet retreated, the species that migrated faster were the more promiscuous ones, those that stood a better chance of meeting a compatible fungus when they arrived somewhere new.

			 			The fungi that live in plant leaves and shoots—known as “endophytes”—can have similarly dramatic effects on a plant’s ability to make a life in a new place. Take a grass from salty coastal soils, grow it without its fungal endophytes, and it won’t be able to survive in its natural salty habitat. The same goes for grasses growing in hot geothermal soils. Researchers swapped the fungal endophytes that lived in each type of grass so that coastal grasses were grown with hot geothermal fungi and vice versa. The grasses’ ability to survive in each habitat switched. Coastal grasses could no longer grow in salty coastal soils but thrived in hot geothermal soils. Hot geothermal grasses could no longer grow in the hot geothermal soils but thrived in the salty coastal soils.

			Fungi can determine which plants grow where; they can even drive the evolution of new species by isolating plant populations from one another. Lord Howe Island is nine kilometers long, around a kilometer wide, and lies between Australia and New Zealand. On it grow two species of palm that have diverged from each other. One species, the Belmore sentry palm (Howea belmoreana), grows on acidic volcanic soils, while its sister species, the Kentia palm (Howea forsteriana), lives on alkaline chalky soils. What enabled the Kentia palm’s radical switch of habitats has long puzzled botanists. A study published in 2017 by researchers at Imperial College London shows that mycorrhizal fungi are largely responsible. They found that the two palm species associate with different fungal communities. The Kentia palm is able to form relationships with fungi that allow it to live on the alkaline chalky soils. However, its ability to do so makes it difficult to form relationships with the mycorrhizal fungi in the ancestral volcanic soils. This means that the Kentia palm benefits only from the fungi present in the chalky soils, whereas the Belmore sentry palm benefits only from the fungi present in the volcanic soils. Over time, living on different mycorrhizal “islands,” though sharing the same tiny geographical island, one species became two.

			The ability of plants and mycorrhizal fungi to reshape their relationships has profound implications. We are familiar with the story: Throughout human history, partnerships with other organisms have extended the reach of both humans and nonhumans. Human relationships with corn brought about new forms of civilization. Relationships with horses allowed new forms of transport. Relationships with yeast permitted new forms of alcohol production and distribution. In each case, humans and their nonhuman partners redefined their possibilities.

			 			Horses and humans remain separate organisms, as do plants and mycorrhizal fungi, but both are echoes of an ancient tendency for organisms to associate. The anthropologists Natasha Myers and Carla Hustak argue that the word evolution, which literally means “rolling outward,” doesn’t capture the readiness of organisms to involve themselves in one another’s lives. Myers and Hustak suggest that the word involution—from the word involve—better describes this tendency: a “rolling, curling, turning inward.” In their view, the concept of involution better captures the entangled pushing and pulling of “organisms constantly inventing new ways to live with and alongside one another.” It was their tendency to involve themselves in the lives of others that enabled plants to borrow a root system for fifty million years while they evolved their own. Today, even with their own root systems, almost all plants still depend on mycorrhizal fungi to manage their underground lives. Their involutionary tendencies enabled fungi to borrow a photosynthesizing alga to handle their atmospheric affairs. They still do. Mycorrhizal fungi are not built into plant seeds. Plants and fungi must constantly form and re-form their relationships. Involution is ongoing and extravagant: By associating with one another, all participants wander outside and beyond their prior limits.

			Faced with catastrophic environmental change, much of life depends on the ability of plants and fungi to adapt to new conditions, whether in polluted or deforested landscapes or in newly created environments such as urban green roofs. Increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide, changes in climate, and pollution all influence the microscopic trading decisions of plant roots and their fungal partners. As has long been the case, the influences of these trading decisions scale up and spill out over whole ecosystems and landmasses. A large study published in 2018 suggested that the “alarming deterioration” of the health of trees across Europe was caused by a disruption of their mycorrhizal relationships, brought about by nitrogen pollution. Mycorrhizal associations born of the Anthropocene will determine much of humans’ ability to adapt to the worsening climate emergency. Nowhere are the possibilities—and pitfalls—more apparent than in agriculture.



* * *



			—

			 			“ON THE EFFICIENCY of this mycorrhizal association the health and well-being of mankind must depend.” So wrote Albert Howard, a founding figure in the modern organic farming movement and a passionate spokesman for mycorrhizal fungi. In the 1940s, Howard argued that the widespread application of chemical fertilizers would disrupt mycorrhizal associations, the means by which “the marriage of a fertile soil and the tree it nourishes…is arranged.” The consequences of such a breakdown would be far-reaching. To cut these “living fungous threads” would be to reduce the health of the soil. In turn, the health and productivity of crops would suffer, as would the animals and people that consumed them. “Can mankind regulate its affairs so that its chief possession—the fertility of the soil—is preserved?” Howard challenged. “On the answer to this question the future of civilization depends.”

			Howard’s tone is dramatic, but eighty years on his questions cut deep. By some measures, modern industrial agriculture has been effective: Crop production doubled over the second half of the twentieth century. But a single-minded focus on yield has incurred steep costs. Agriculture causes widespread environmental destruction and is responsible for a quarter of global greenhouse gas emissions. Between twenty and forty percent of crops are lost each year to pests and diseases, despite colossal applications of pesticides. Global agricultural yields have plateaued, despite a seven-hundred-fold increase in fertilizer use over the second half of the twentieth century. Worldwide, thirty football fields’ worth of topsoil are lost to erosion every minute. Yet a third of food is wasted, and demand for crops will double by 2050. It is difficult to overstate the urgency of the crisis.

			 			Could mycorrhizal fungi form part of the solution? Perhaps it’s a silly question. Mycorrhizal relationships are as old as plants and have been shaping Earth’s future for hundreds of millions of years. They have forever featured in our efforts to feed ourselves, whether we’ve thought about them or not. For millennia in many parts of the world, traditional agricultural practices have attended to the health of the soil, and thus supported plants’ fungal relationships implicitly. But over the course of the twentieth century, our neglect has led us into trouble. In 1940, Howard’s greatest worry was that industrial agricultural techniques would develop without taking account of the “life of the soil.” His concern was justified. In viewing soils as more or less lifeless places, agricultural practices have ravaged the underground communities that sustain the life we eat. There are parallels with much of twentieth-century medical science, which considered “germ” and “microbe” to mean the same thing. Of course some soil organisms, like some microbes that live on your body, can cause disease. Most do quite the opposite. Disrupt the ecology of microbes that live in your gut, and your health will suffer—a growing number of human diseases are known to arise because of efforts to rid ourselves of “germs.” Disrupt the rich ecology of microbes that live in the soil—the guts of the planet—and the health of plants, too, will suffer.

			A study published in 2019 by researchers at Agroscope in Zurich measured the scale of the disruption by comparing the impact of organic and conventional “intensive” farming practices on fungal communities in the roots of crops. By sequencing fungal DNA, the authors were able to compile networks showing which fungal species associated with one another. They found “remarkable differences” between organic and conventionally managed fields. Not only was the abundance of mycorrhizal fungi higher in organically managed fields but the fungal communities were also far more complex: Twenty-seven species of fungi were identified as highly connected, or “keystone species,” compared with none in the conventionally managed fields. Many studies report similar findings. Intensive farming practices—through a combination of plowing and application of chemical fertilizers or fungicides—reduce the abundance of mycorrhizal fungi and alter the structure of their communities. More sustainable farming practices, organic or otherwise, tend to result in more diverse mycorrhizal communities and a greater abundance of fungal mycelium in the soil.

			 			Does it matter? Much of the story of agriculture is one of ecological sacrifice. Forests are cleared to make way for fields. Hedgerows are cleared to make way for bigger fields. Surely it is the same with the communities of microbes in the soil? If humans feed crops by adding fertilizer to fields, don’t we take over the job of mycorrhizal fungi? Why care about the fungi if we have made them redundant?

			Mycorrhizal fungi do more than feed plants. The researchers at Agroscope describe them as keystone organisms but some prefer the term “ecosystem engineers.” Mycorrhizal mycelium is a sticky living seam that holds soil together; remove the fungi, and the ground washes away. Mycorrhizal fungi increase the volume of water that the soil can absorb, reducing the quantity of nutrients leached out of the soil by rainfall by as much as fifty percent. Of the carbon that is found in soils—which, remarkably, amounts to twice the amount of carbon found in plants and the atmosphere combined—a substantial proportion is bound up in tough organic compounds produced by mycorrhizal fungi. The carbon that floods into the soil through mycorrhizal channels supports intricate food webs. Besides the hundreds or thousands of meters of fungal mycelium in a teaspoon of healthy soil, there are more bacteria, protists, insects, and arthropods than the number of humans who have ever lived on Earth.

			Mycorrhizal fungi can increase the quality of a harvest, as the experiments with basil, strawberries, tomatoes, and wheat illustrate. They can also increase the ability of crops to compete with weeds and enhance their resistance to diseases by priming plants’ immune systems. They can make crops less susceptible to drought and heat, and more resistant to salinity and heavy metals. They even boost the ability of plants to fight off attacks from insect pests by stimulating the production of defensive chemicals. The list goes on: The literature is awash with examples of the benefits that mycorrhizal relationships provide to plants. However, putting this knowledge into practice is not always straightforward. For one thing, mycorrhizal associations don’t always increase crop yields. In some cases, they can even reduce them.

			 			Katie Field is one of the many researchers being funded to develop mycorrhizal solutions to agricultural problems. “The whole relationship is much more plastic and affected by the environment than we thought,” she told me. “A lot of the time the fungi aren’t helping the crops take up nutrients. The results are super variable. It totally depends on the type of fungus, the type of plant, and the environment in which it’s growing.” A number of studies report similarly unpredictable outcomes. Most modern crop varieties have been developed with little thought for their ability to form high-functioning mycorrhizal relationships. We’ve bred strains of wheat to grow fast when they are given lots of fertilizer, and ended up with “spoiled” plants that have almost lost the ability to cooperate with fungi. “The fact that the fungi are colonizing these cereal crops at all is a minor miracle,” Field pointed out.

			The subtleties of mycorrhizal relationships mean that the most obvious intervention—supplementing plants with mycorrhizal fungi and other microbes—can cut two ways. Sometimes, as Sam Gamgee found, introducing plants to a community of soil microbes can support the growth of crops and trees and help restore life to devastated soils. However, the success of this approach depends on the ecological fit. Poorly matched mycorrhizal species might do more harm to plants than good. Worse, introducing opportunistic fungal species to new environments might displace local fungal strains with unknown ecological consequences. It is a fact not always taken into account by the fast-growing industry of commercial mycorrhizal products, often marketed as one-size-fits-all quick fixes. As in the ballooning market for human probiotics, many of the microbial strains sold are selected not because they are particularly suitable but because they are easy to produce in manufacturing facilities. Even if done wisely, seeding an environment with microbial strains can only do so much. Like any organism, mycorrhizal fungi must be provided with the conditions to thrive. The soil’s microbial communities live in a state of ongoing assembly and won’t hold together for long in the face of continued disruption. For microbial interventions to be effective, more profound changes to agricultural practices are required, analogous to the changes in diet or lifestyle we might make in an effort to restore health to damaged gut flora.

			 			Other researchers are approaching the problem from a different angle. If humans have unthinkingly bred varieties of crops that form dysfunctional symbioses with fungi, surely we can turn around and breed crops that make high-functioning symbiotic partners. Field is taking this approach, and hopes to develop more cooperative plant varieties, “a new generation of super crops that can form amazing associations with fungi.” Kiers, too, is interested in these possibilities but looks at the question from the fungal point of view. Rather than breed more cooperative plants, she is working on breeding fungi that behave more altruistically: strains that hoard less, and possibly even put the needs of plants above their own.



* * *



			—

			IN 1940, HOWARD professed that we lacked a “complete scientific explanation” of mycorrhizal relationships. Scientific explanations remain far from complete, but prospects for working with mycorrhizal fungi to transform agriculture and forestry and to restore barren environments have only increased as environmental crises have worsened. Mycorrhizal relationships evolved to deal with the challenges of a desolate and windswept world in the earliest days of life on land. Together, they evolved a form of agriculture, although it is not possible to say whether plants learned to farm fungi, or fungi learned to farm plants. Either way, we’re faced with the challenge of altering our behavior so that plants and fungi might better cultivate one another.

			It’s unlikely we’ll get far unless we question some of our categories. The view of plants as autonomous individuals with neat borders is causing destruction. “Consider a blind man with a stick,” wrote the theorist Gregory Bateson. “Where does the blind man’s self begin? At the tip of the stick? At the handle of the stick? Or at some point halfway up the stick?” The philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty employed a similar thought experiment nearly thirty years earlier. He concluded that a person’s stick was no longer just an object. The stick extends their senses and becomes part of their sensory apparatus, a prosthetic organ of their body. Where the person’s self begins and ends is not as straightforward a question as it might seem at first glance. Mycorrhizal relationships challenge us with a similar question. Can we think about a plant without also thinking about the mycorrhizal networks that lace outward—extravagantly—from its roots into the soil? If we follow the tangled sprawl of mycelium that emanates from its roots, then where do we stop? Do we think about the bacteria that surf through the soil along the slimy film that coats roots and fungal hyphae? Do we think about the neighboring fungal networks that fuse with those of our plant? And—perhaps most perplexing of all—do we think about the other plants whose roots share the very same fungal network?





6


			WOOD WIDE WEBS




Gradually, the observer realizes that these organisms are connected to each other, not linearly, but in a net-like, entangled fabric.

				—ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT



			IN THE PACIFIC Northwest the forests are overwhelmingly green. So I am startled by clumps of bright white plants that push their way up through the drifts of fallen fir needles. These ghost plants don’t have leaves. They look like clay tobacco pipes balanced on their ends. Small scales wrap around their stalks where their leaves ought to be. They sprout from deeply shaded parts of the forest floor where no other plant can grow and crowd in tight clusters as some mushrooms do. In fact, if they weren’t so clearly flowers one would think they were mushrooms. Their name is Monotropa uniflora, and they are plants pretending not to be.

			Monotropa—“ghost pipes”—long ago gave up their ability to photosynthesize. With it, they abandoned leaves and their green color. But how? Photosynthesis is one of the most ancient of plant habits. In most cases, it is a nonnegotiable feature of planthood. Yet Monotropa have left it behind. Imagine discovering a species of monkey that doesn’t eat, and instead harbors photosynthetic bacteria in its fur, which it uses to make energy from sunlight. It’s a radical departure.

			 			The solution is fungal. Monotropa—like the majority of green plants—depend on their mycorrhizal fungal partners to survive. However, their symbiotic manners differ. “Normal” green plants supply energy-rich carbon compounds, whether sugars or lipids, to their fungal partners in exchange for mineral nutrients from the soil. Monotropa have worked out how to sidestep the exchange part. Instead, they receive both carbon and nutrients from mycorrhizal fungi, and don’t appear to give anything back.

			Then where does Monotropa’s carbon come from? Mycorrhizal fungi obtain all their carbon from green plants. This means that the carbon that powers the life of Monotropa—the bulk of the stuff from which they are made—must ultimately come from other plants via a shared mycorrhizal network: If carbon didn’t flow from a green plant to Monotropa through shared fungal connections, Monotropa couldn’t survive.

			Monotropa have long puzzled biologists. In the late nineteenth century, a Russian botanist, wrestling with the question of how these strange plants were able to exist, was the first to suggest that substances could pass between plants via fungal connections. The idea didn’t catch on. It was a passing conjecture buried in an obscure article and it sank more or less without a trace. The Monotropa riddle moldered away for another seventy-five years before it was picked up by the Swedish botanist Erik Björkman, who in 1960 injected trees with radioactive sugars and was able to show that radioactivity accumulated in nearby Monotropa plants. It was the first demonstration that substances might pass between plants via a fungal pathway.

			Monotropa lured botanists into uncovering an entirely new biological possibility. Since the 1980s, it has become clear that Monotropa isn’t an anomaly. Most plants are promiscuous and can engage with many mycorrhizal partners. Mycorrhizal fungi, too, are promiscuous in their relationships with plants. Separate fungal networks can fuse with each other. The result? Potentially vast, complex, and collaborative systems of shared mycorrhizal networks.



* * *



			—

			“THE FACT THAT it’s connected underground wherever we walk is just mind blowing,” Toby Kiers enthused. “It’s huge. I can’t believe everybody isn’t studying it.” I share her sentiment. Lots of organisms interact. If one makes a map of who interacts with whom, one sees a network. However, fungal networks form physical connections between plants. It is the difference between having twenty acquaintances and having twenty acquaintances with whom one shares a circulatory system. These shared mycorrhizal networks—known by researchers in the field as “common mycorrhizal networks”—embody the most basic principle of ecology: that of the relationships between organisms. Humboldt’s “net-like, entangled fabric” was a metaphor he used to describe the “living whole” of the natural world—a complex of relationships in which organisms are inextricably embedded. Mycorrhizal networks make the net and fabric real.



				 					Monotropa uniflora



			One of the next people to pick up the Monotropa question and run with it was the English researcher David Read, who is among the most distinguished researchers in the history of mycorrhizal biology and a co-author of the definitive textbook on the subject. For his work on mycorrhizal associations he received a knighthood and was made a Fellow of the Royal Society. Known by his colleagues in the United States as “Sir Dude,” Read is well-known for his charm and fierce wit, and is most often described by fellow researchers as a “character.”

			In 1984, Read and his colleagues were the first to show conclusively that carbon could pass between normal green plants through fungal connections. Researchers had hypothesized that such a transfer could take place since the studies on Monotropa in the 1960s. But no one had been able to demonstrate that the sugars hadn’t leaked out of one plant’s roots, passed into the open soil, and been taken up by the other plant’s roots. No one, in other words, had shown that the carbon moved between plants through a direct fungal channel.

			 			Read devised an approach that allowed him to actually see the transfer of carbon from plant to plant. He grew “donor” and “receiver” plants next to each other, either with or without mycorrhizal fungi. After six weeks, he fed donor plants with radioactive carbon dioxide. He then harvested the plants and exposed their root systems to radiographic film. Where no mycorrhizal fungi are present, radioactivity is visible in the roots of the donor plant only. Where fungal networks are allowed to form, radioactivity is visible in the roots of the donor plant, the fungal hyphae, and the roots of the receiver plants. Read’s was a key advance. He had shown that the interplant transfer of carbon was not a habit unique to plants like Monotropa. However, larger questions remained. Read had conducted his experiments in a laboratory setting, and there was nothing to suggest that the interplant transfer of carbon could take place outside, in a natural environment.

			Thirteen years later, in 1997, a Canadian PhD student, Suzanne Simard, published the first study suggesting that carbon could pass between plants in a natural setting. Simard exposed pairs of tree seedlings growing in a forest to radioactive carbon dioxide. After two years, she found that carbon had passed from birch trees to fir trees, which shared a mycorrhizal network, but not between birch and cedar, which didn’t. The amount of carbon obtained by the fir trees—on average six percent of the labeled carbon taken up by the birch—was, by Simard’s reckoning, a meaningful transfer: Over time, one would expect this to make a difference to the life of the trees. What’s more, when fir seedlings were shaded—which limited photosynthesis and deprived them of their supply of carbon—they received more carbon from their birch donors than when they were unshaded. Carbon seemed to flow “downhill” between plants, from plenty to scarcity.

			Simard’s finding turned heads. Her study was accepted by the journal Nature, and the editor asked Read to write a commentary. In his piece—“The Ties That Bind”—Read suggested that Simard’s study should “stimulate us to examine forest ecosystems from a fresh standpoint.” Printed in large letters on the cover of the journal was a new phrase that Read had coined in his discussions with the editor of Nature: “The Wood Wide Web.”



* * *



			—

			 			BEFORE THE WORK of Read, Simard, and others in the 1980s and ’90s, plants had been thought of as more or less distinct entities. Some species of tree have long been known to form root grafts, where the roots of one tree fuse with those of another. However, root grafts had been considered a marginal phenomenon, and most plant communities were understood to be made up of individuals that competed for resources. Simard’s and Read’s findings suggested that it might not be appropriate to think of plants as such neatly separable units. As Read wrote in his commentary in Nature, the possibility that resources could pass between plants suggested “that we should place less emphasis on competition between plants, and more on the distribution of resources within the community.”

			Simard published her findings at a major moment in the development of modern network science. The network of cables and routers that comprise the Internet had been expanding since the 1970s. The World Wide Web—the system of information based on web pages and links between them, made possible by the hardware of the Internet—was invented in 1989 and became publicly available two years later. After the US National Science Foundation gave up its stewardship of the Internet in 1995, it began to expand in an uncontrolled and decentralized manner. As the network scientist Albert-László Barabási explained to me, “It was in the mid-1990s that networks started to enter the public consciousness.”

			In 1998, Barabási and his colleagues embarked on a project to map the World Wide Web. Up to this point, scientists lacked the tools to analyze the structure and properties of complex networks, despite their prevalence in human life. The branch of mathematics that models networks—graph theory—was unable to describe the behavior of most networks in the real world, and many questions remained unanswered. How could epidemics and computer viruses spread so quickly? Why could some networks continue to function despite massive disruption? Out of Barabási’s study of the World Wide Web emerged new mathematical tools. A few key principles appeared to govern the behavior of a wide range of networks, from human sexual relationships to biochemical interactions within organisms. The World Wide Web, Barabási remarked, appeared to have “more in common with a cell or an ecological system than with a Swiss watch.” Today, network science is inescapable. Pick any field of study—from neuroscience, to biochemistry, to economic systems, disease epidemics, web search engines, machine learning algorithms that underpin much of AI, to astronomy and the very structure of the universe itself, a cosmic web crisscrossed with filaments of gas and clusters of galaxies—and chances are that it makes sense of the phenomenon using a network model.

			 			As Read explained to me, inspired by Simard’s paper, and impelled by the catchy concept of the wood wide web, “The whole notion of shared mycorrhizal networks expanded prolifically”—eventually finding its way into James Cameron’s Avatar, in the form of a glowing, living network that linked plants underground. Read’s and Simard’s studies had raised a number of exciting new questions. What, apart from carbon, might pass between plants? How common was this phenomenon in nature? Could the influence of these networks extend over whole forests or ecosystems? And what difference did they make?



* * *



			—

			NO ONE DENIES that shared mycorrhizal networks are widespread in nature. They are inevitable given the promiscuity of plants and fungi, and the readiness of mycelial networks to fuse with each other. However, not everyone is convinced that they do anything important.

			On the one hand, since Simard’s 1997 paper in Nature, many studies have measured the transfer of substances between plants. Some have shown that not only carbon but also nitrogen, phosphorus, and water can pass between plants via fungal networks in meaningful quantities. A study published in 2016 found that 280 kilograms of carbon per hectare of forest could be transferred between trees via fungal connections. This is a substantial sum: four percent of the total carbon pulled out of the atmosphere in a year by the same hectare of forest, and enough carbon to power an average home for a week. These findings imply that shared mycorrhizal networks have an important ecological role.

			 			On the other hand, a number of studies have failed to observe the transfer of substances between plants. In itself, this doesn’t mean that shared mycorrhizal networks have no role to play: A germinating seedling that can plug into a large, preexisting fungal network wouldn’t have to supply the carbon needed to grow its own mycorrhizal network from scratch. Nevertheless, these findings suggest that it isn’t straightforward to generalize from one ecosystem to another, or from one type of fungus to another. There are many situations where shared mycorrhizal networks don’t seem to do much more for their plant partners than a single—“private”—mycorrhizal partner would.

			One would expect the behavior of shared mycorrhizal networks to be variable. There are many different types of mycorrhizal relationship, and different fungal groups can behave in quite different ways. Moreover, the symbiotic conduct of even a single plant and fungus can vary wildly depending on their circumstances. Nonetheless, the variety of experimental findings has given rise to a range of opinions within the research community. For some, the available evidence shows that shared mycorrhizal networks permit forms of interaction that aren’t otherwise possible and can have a profound influence on the behavior of ecosystems. Others interpret the evidence differently and conclude that shared mycorrhizal networks don’t enable unique ecological possibilities and are no more important to plants than sharing root space or air space with one another.

			Monotropa help to navigate the debate. In fact, they appear to settle it: Their dependence on shared mycorrhizal networks is total. I brought up the subject with Read, who took an unambiguous position: “The idea that interplant transfer via a fungal pathway is never of any significance is patently absurd.” Monotropa plants are full-time receivers, vivid living testaments to the fact that shared mycorrhizal networks can support a unique way of life.

			 			Monotropa are what’s known as “mycoheterotrophs.” “Myco” because they depend on a fungus for their nutrition; “heterotroph” (from “hetero,” meaning “other”; and “troph,” meaning “feeder”) because they don’t make their own energy from the sun and have to get it from somewhere else. It’s an unlovely name for such charismatic plants. In Panama, where I studied Voyria, the blue-flowered mycoheterotroph, I started calling them “mycohets” for short, though I admit, it’s not much of an improvement.

			Monotropa and Voyria aren’t alone in living this way. About ten percent of plant species share the habit. Like lichens and mycorrhizal relationships, mycoheterotrophy is an evolutionary refrain and has arisen independently in at least forty-six separate plant lineages. Some mycohets, like Monotropa and Voyria, never photosynthesize. Others behave like mycohets when they’re young but become donors when they get older and start to photosynthesize, an approach that Katie Field calls “take now, pay later.” As Read pointed out to me, all twenty-five thousand species of orchid—“the largest and arguably the most successful plant family on the surface of the Earth”—are mycohets at some stage in their development, whether they take now and pay later, or take now and continue to take later. That mycohets have repeatedly learned to hack the web for their benefit suggests it isn’t such a hard trick to pull off. Indeed, for Read and a number of others, mycohets don’t exist in an isolated category of their own. They are just the extreme pole of a symbiotic continuum; permanent takers that have lost their ability to pay later. Orchids that take now and pay later fall somewhere further toward the center of the spectrum, as do Simard’s fir seedlings.

			Mycohets are striking. Conspicuous, contrarian, they stand out from the ambient vegetation. With no reason to be green or to have leaves, they are free for evolution to carry them off in new aesthetic directions. There is a species of Voyria that is entirely yellow. The snow plant (Sarcodes sanguinea) is a brilliant red, “like a bright glowing pillar of fire,” wrote the American naturalist John Muir in 1912. It is “more admired by tourists than any other [plant] in California…Its color could appeal to one’s blood.” (Muir mused on the “thousand invisible cords” that strung Nature together, but he did not observe that this was literally the case for the snow plant.) It was Voyria’s dust seeds that had so startled me when I found them germinating into fleshy bundles under a microscope. Marc-André Selosse, a professor at the National Museum of Natural History in Paris, told me that it was the sight of a bright white mycohet orchid when he was fifteen that seeded his lifelong fascination with symbiosis. The orchid was a reminder of how inseparable plant and fungal lives were. “The memory of this plant has been with me for my whole career so far,” he reflected fondly.

			 			I find mycohets interesting because of what they indicate about fungal life underground. Amid the riot of plant life in the jungle, Voyria were a sign of functioning shared fungal networks; it is by hacking wood wide webs that mycohets are able to live. Without having to perform fiddly experiments, Voyria allowed me to gauge whether meaningful quantities of carbon were being transferred between plants. I had the idea when talking to friends in Oregon who hunted for matsutake mushrooms. Matsutake are the fruiting bodies of a mycorrhizal fungus and are sometimes picked before they have poked their way through the forest floor. There’s often a clue about where to start looking. Matsutake associate with a mycohet cousin of Monotropa that has a red-and-white-striped stem, known as “candy canes” (Allotropa virgata). Candy canes only associate with matsutake, and their presence is as sure an indicator of a thriving matsutake fungus as a matsutake mushroom itself. Candy canes, like many mycohets, serve as periscopes into the mycorrhizal underground.

			Given their allure, one might expect that mycohets have been understood to indicate something over the years. If candy canes are literal indicators, used by matsutake hunters to locate underground networks of matsutake fungi, Monotropa served as a conceptual indicator to biologists. Lichens were the gateway organism for symbiosis in general; Monotropa was the gateway organism for shared mycorrhizal networks. Its peculiar appearance implied that material might pass between plants via shared fungal connections in sufficiently large quantities to support a whole way of life.



* * *



			—

			 			IN ALL PHYSICAL systems, energy moves “downhill,” from where there is more to where there is less. Heat travels from the hot sun into cold space. A truffle’s scent drifts from areas of high concentration to lower concentration. Neither has to be actively transported. As long as there is an energetic slope, energy will move from the source (at the top) to the sink (at the bottom). What matters most is how steep the slope is between the two.

			In many cases, the transfer of resources through mycorrhizal networks occurs downhill, from larger plants to smaller plants. Larger plants tend to have more resources, more developed root systems, and more access to light. Relative to smaller plants growing in the shade with less developed root systems, these plants are sources. Smaller plants are sinks. Orchids that take now and pay later start off as sinks and switch to become sources when they get older. Mycohets like Monotropa and Voyria remain sinks forever.

			Size isn’t everything. Source–sink dynamics can switch, depending on the activity of the linked plants. When Simard shaded her fir seedlings—reducing their ability to photosynthesize and thereby making them stronger carbon sinks—they received more carbon from their birch donors. In another instance, researchers observed phosphorus to pass from the roots of dying plants to those of nearby healthy plants that shared a fungal network. The dying plants were sources of nutrients, and the living plants were sinks.

			In another study of birch and Douglas fir in Canadian forests, the direction of carbon transfer switched twice in the course of a single growing season. In the spring, when the fir—an evergreen—was photosynthesizing and the leafless birch was just bursting its buds, the birch behaved as a sink, and carbon flowed into it out of the fir. In the summer, when the birch was in full leaf, and the fir found itself in the shaded understory, the direction of carbon flow changed, moving downhill out of the birch and into the fir. In the autumn, when the birch started to drop its leaves, the trees switched roles again, and carbon moved downhill from the fir into the birch. Resources passed from areas of abundance to areas of scarcity.

			 			These behaviors present a puzzle. At its most basic, the problem is this: Why would plants give resources to a fungus that goes on to give them to a neighboring plant—a potential competitor? At first glance it looks like altruism. Evolutionary theory doesn’t cope well with altruism because altruistic behavior benefits the receiver at the cost of the donor. If a plant donor assists a competitor at a cost to itself, its genes are less likely to make it into the next generation. If the altruist’s genes don’t make it into the next generation, the altruistic behavior will soon be weeded out.

			There are a number of ways around this impasse. One relies on the idea that the costs to donor plants aren’t actually costs. Many plants have plenty of access to light. For such plants, carbon is not a limited resource. If a plant’s surplus carbon passes into a mycorrhizal network where it is enjoyed by many as a “public good,” the charge of altruism can be avoided because no one—whether donor or receiver—has incurred a cost. Another possibility is that both sender and receiver plants benefit, but at different times. An orchid might “take now,” but if it “pays later,” then no one has incurred a cost overall. A birch may benefit when it receives carbon from a fir in the spring, but the fir will surely benefit from the carbon it receives from the birch during the high summer, when it finds itself in the shaded understory.

			There are other considerations. In evolutionary terms, it might be beneficial for a plant to assist a close relative to pass on its genes even at a cost to itself—a phenomenon known as “kin selection.” Some studies have investigated this possibility by comparing the amount of carbon that passes between pairs of Douglas fir seedlings that are siblings and pairs of seedlings that are unrelated. As one would expect, carbon moved downhill, from a larger donor plant to a smaller receiver plant. But in some cases, more carbon passed between siblings than between strangers: Siblings appeared to share more fungal connections than did strangers, providing more pathways for carbon to move between them.



* * *



			—

			 			THE SWIFTEST ROUTE through the puzzle is to switch perspective. You’ll notice that in all these stories about shared mycorrhizal networks, plants have been the protagonists. Fungi have featured inasmuch as they connect plants and serve as a conduit between them. They become little more than a system of plumbing that plants can use to pump material between one another.

			This is plant-centrism in action.

			Plant-centric perspectives can distort. Paying more attention to animals than plants contributes to humans’ plant-blindness. Paying more attention to plants than fungi makes us fungus-blind. “I think many people elaborate about these networks more than they should,” Selosse told me. “Some people talk about trees benefiting from social care or retirement, describe young trees living in nurseries, and say that life is easy and cheap for trees living in a group. I don’t much like these views because they portray the fungus as a pipeline. This is not the case. The fungus is a living organism with its own interests. It is an active part of the system. Maybe it is because plants are easier to investigate than fungi that many people take a very plant-centric view of the network.”

			I agree. Surely we stumble into plant-centrism because the relevance of plants to our lives is more obvious. We can touch and taste them. Mycorrhizal fungi are evasive. The language of the wood wide web doesn’t help. It is a metaphor that tugs us into plant-centrism by implying that plants are equivalent to the web pages, or nodes, in the network, and fungi are the hyperlinks joining the nodes to one another. In the language of the hardware that comprises the Internet, plants are the routers and fungi are the cables.

			In fact, fungi are far from being passive cables. As we’ve seen, mycelial networks can solve complex spatial problems and have evolved a finely tuned ability to transport substances around themselves. Although material tends to move through fungal networks downhill, from source to sink, transport rarely occurs by passive diffusion alone: It is far too slow. The rivers of cellular fluid that flow within fungal hyphae allow rapid transport, and although these flows are ultimately governed by source–sink dynamics, fungi can direct the flow by growing, thickening, and pruning back parts of the network—or indeed, fusing with another network entirely. Without the ability to regulate flow within their networks, much of fungal life—including the intricately choreographed growth of mushrooms—would be impossible.

			 			Fungi are able to manage transport through their networks in other ways. As Kiers’s studies suggest, fungi have some degree of control over their trading patterns—whether they “reward” more cooperative plant partners, “hoard” minerals within their tissues, or move resources around themselves to optimize the “exchange rate” they obtain. In Kiers’s study on resource inequality, phosphorus moved down a gradient from areas of abundance to areas of scarcity, but it did so much faster than passive diffusion would allow—probably transported using fungal microtubule “motors.” These active transport systems allow fungi to shuttle material around their networks in any direction—even in both directions at once—regardless of the gradient between source and sink.

			The wood wide web is a problematic metaphor for other reasons. The idea that there is a single kind of wood wide web is misleading. Fungi make entangled webs whether or not they link plants together. Shared mycorrhizal networks are just a special case—fungal networks in which plants find themselves entangled. Ecosystems are riddled with webs of non-mycorrhizal fungal mycelium that stitch organisms into relation. The decomposer fungi that Lynne Boddy studies, for example, range through ecosystems over large distances and link decaying leaves with fallen twigs, large rotting stumps with decomposing roots, as do the record-breaking networks of honey fungus that stretch for kilometers. These fungi make up wood wide webs of a different sort: webs based around consuming plants rather than sustaining them.

			Every link in a wood wide web is a fungus with a life of its own. It’s a small point that makes a big difference. Everything changes when we see fungi as active participants. Writing the fungus into the story encourages us to adopt a more fungal point of view. And a fungal point of view is helpful in asking whose interests are being served by shared mycorrhizal networks. Who stands to benefit?

			 			A mycorrhizal fungus that can keep its various plants alive is at an advantage: a diverse portfolio of plant partners insures it against the death of one of them. If a fungus depends on several orchids, and one of them won’t be able to supply it with carbon until it grows larger, the fungus will benefit by supporting the young orchid while it grows—to let it “take now,” provided it will “pay later.” Adopting a myco-centric perspective helps to avoid the problem of altruism. It also positions fungi front and center: brokers of entanglement able to mediate the interactions between plants according to their own fungal needs.



* * *



			—

			REGARDLESS OF WHETHER we take a myco-centric or a plant-centric perspective, there are many situations where sharing a mycorrhizal network provides clear benefits to the plants involved: Overall, plants that share a network with others grow more quickly and survive better than neighboring plants that are excluded from the common network. These findings have fueled visions of wood wide webs as places of caring, sharing, and mutual aid through which plants can free themselves from the rigid hierarchies of competition for resources. These renditions are not unlike the starry-eyed fantasies of the Internet, proclaimed in the fervor of the 1990s to be an escape route from the rigid power structures of the twentieth century and an entrance into a digital utopia.

			Ecosystems, like human societies, are rarely so one-dimensional. Some researchers, such as Read, feel that utopian visions of the soil are a shameless projection of human values onto a nonhuman system; others, such as Kiers, argue that they ignore the many ways that collaboration is always an alloy of competition and cooperation. The main problem for the myco-utopia is that, like the Internet, shared mycorrhizal networks aren’t always beneficial. Wood wide webs are complex amplifiers of plant, fungal, and bacterial interactions.

			Most of the studies that have found that plants benefit from their involvement with shared mycorrhizal networks have taken place in temperate climates with trees that form relationships with a particular type of mycorrhizal fungus—the “ectomycorrhizal” fungi. Other types of mycorrhizal fungus can behave differently. In some cases, it appears to make little difference to a plant whether it has its own private fungal network or whether it shares a fungal network with other plants—although in these situations the fungus still benefits from forming a shared network by gaining access to a larger number of plant partners. In some cases, belonging to a shared network can bring outright disadvantages to plants. Fungi are in control of the supply of minerals they obtain from the soil and can preferentially trade these nutrients with their larger plant partners, which are both more abundant sources of carbon and stronger sinks for soil minerals. These asymmetries can magnify the competitive advantage of larger plants over smaller plants that share the network. In these situations, smaller plants start to benefit only when their connections to the network are severed, or when the bigger plants that share the network—and which have been extracting a disproportionately large quantity of nutrients—are cut back.

			 			Shared mycorrhizal networks can have yet more ambiguous consequences. A number of plant species produce chemicals that stunt or kill plants growing nearby. Under normal conditions, the passage of these chemicals through the soil is slow, and they don’t always reach toxic concentrations. Mycorrhizal networks can help to overcome these limitations, in some cases providing a “fungal fast lane” or “superhighway” for plants that broadcast poisonous deterrents. In one experiment, a toxic compound released from the fallen leaves of walnut trees was able to travel through mycorrhizal networks and accumulate around the roots of tomato plants, reducing their growth.

			Wood wide webs, in other words, are about far more than the movement of resources—whether energy-rich carbon compounds, nutrients, or water. Besides poisons, hormones that regulate plant growth and development can pass through shared mycorrhizal networks. In many species of fungus, DNA-containing nuclei and other genetic elements such as viruses or RNA are free to travel through the mycelium, suggesting that genetic material might pass between plants via a fungal channel—although these possibilities have barely been explored.



* * *



			—

			 			ONE OF THE most surprising properties of wood wide webs is the way they enfold organisms other than plants. Fungal networks provide highways for bacteria to migrate around the obstacle course of the soil. In some cases, predatory bacteria use mycelial networks to pursue and hunt their prey. Some bacteria make their lives within fungal hyphae themselves, and enhance fungal growth, stimulate their metabolisms, produce key vitamins, and even influence fungal relationships with their plant partners. One species of mycorrhizal fungus, the thick-footed morel (Morchella crassipes), actually farms the bacteria that live within its networks: The fungus “plants” bacterial populations, then cultivates, harvests, and consumes them. There is a division of labor across the network, with some parts of the fungus responsible for food production and some for consumption.

			There are yet more extravagant possibilities. Plants emit all sorts of chemicals. When broad bean plants are attacked by aphids, for example, they release plumes of volatile compounds that drift out from the wound and attract parasitic wasps that prey on the aphids. These “infochemicals”—so-called because they convey information about a plant’s condition—are one of the ways plants communicate, both between different parts of their own bodies and with other organisms.

			Might infochemicals pass between plants underground via shared fungal networks? It is a question that came to preoccupy Lucy Gilbert and David Johnson, then working at the University of Aberdeen in Scotland. To find out, they set up a deft experiment. Broad bean plants were either allowed to connect to a shared mycorrhizal network or prevented from doing so using a fine nylon mesh. The mesh allowed water and chemicals to pass, but prevented direct contact between the fungi connected to different plants. Once the plants had grown, aphids were allowed to attack the leaves of one of the plants in the network. Plastic bags placed over the plants prevented the transmission of infochemicals through the air.

			Gilbert and Johnson found clear confirmation of their hypothesis. Plants that were connected to the aphid-infested plant via a shared fungal network ramped up their production of volatile defense compounds, even though they had not encountered the aphids themselves. The plumes of volatile compounds produced by the plants were large enough to attract the parasitic wasps, suggesting that information passing between the plants through the fungal channel could make a difference in a real-world setting. Gilbert described this to me as a “completely new” finding. It revealed a previously unknown role for shared mycorrhizal networks. Not only could a donor plant influence a receiver but its influence could leak out beyond the receiver in the form of volatile chemicals. A shared mycorrhizal network influenced not only the relationship between two plants but also the relationship between two plants, their aphid pests, and their wasp allies.

			 			Since 2013, it has become clear that Gilbert and Johnson’s finding isn’t an anomaly. A similar phenomenon has been observed with tomato plants attacked by caterpillars, and between Douglas fir and pine seedlings attacked by budworm. These studies open up exciting new possibilities. Many of the researchers I have talked with share the view that plant communication through fungal networks is one of the most compelling aspects of mycorrhizal behavior. However, good experiments throw up more questions than they answer. “What is it that plants are actually responding to, and what is it that the fungus is actually doing?” Johnson pondered.

			One hypothesis is that infochemicals pass between plants via the shared fungal networks. This seems most likely, given that plants are known to use infochemicals to communicate above ground. Electrical impulses passing along fungal hyphae are another intriguing possibility. As Stefan Olsson and his neuroscientist colleagues found, the mycelium of some fungi—including that of a mycorrhizal fungus—can conduct spikes of electrical activity that are sensitive to stimulation. Plants also use electrical signaling to communicate between different parts of themselves. No one has investigated whether electrical signals can pass from plant to fungus to plant, though it isn’t much of a stretch. However, Gilbert is firm: “We don’t know. That these signals exist at all is such a new finding. We’re at the very beginning of a new area of research.” For her, identifying the nature of the signal is a priority. “Without knowing what the plants are responding to, we can’t answer questions about how the signal is controlled, or how it is actually being sent.”

			 			There is so much more to uncover. If information can pass through fungal networks linking small bean plants in pots in a greenhouse, what’s going on in natural ecosystems? Compared with the clamor of chemical cues and signals drifting around between plants in the air, how big a role do fungal pathways play? How far can information travel underground through fungal networks? Johnson and Gilbert are conducting experiments where they link several plants in “daisy chains,” to see if information can pass from plant to plant to plant in a relay system. The ecological consequences could be profound, but Johnson is cautious. “Suddenly to scale up lab findings to whole forests of trees talking and communicating with each other is a bit much,” he told me. “People are very quick to extrapolate from a pot to an entire ecosystem.”



* * *



			—

			PRECISELY WHAT IS passing between plants through fungal networks is a thorny question for all researchers investigating wood wide webs. It is a lack of knowledge that leads to some conceptual impasses. For instance, without knowing how information passes between plants, it’s impossible to know whether donor plants actively “send” a warning message, or whether receiver plants simply eavesdrop on their neighbor’s stress. In the eavesdropping scenario, there is nothing that we might recognize as deliberate behavior on the part of the sender. As Kiers explained, “If a tree gets attacked by an insect then of course it’s going to scream in its language: It will produce some sort of chemical to get ready for the attack.” These chemicals could easily spill over from one plant into another through the network. Nothing is actively sent. The receiver plant just happens to notice. Johnson uses the same analogy. If we hear someone screaming, it doesn’t mean they are screaming in order to warn us of something. Sure, a scream may cause us to change our behavior, but it doesn’t imply any intention on the part of the screamer. “You’re just eavesdropping on their response to a particular situation.”

			 			It may seem like splitting hairs, but a lot turns on which way we read the interaction. Either way, a stimulus moves from one plant to another and allows the receiver to prepare itself for attack. However, if plants do send a message, we would think of it as a signal. If their neighbors are eavesdropping, we would think of it as a cue. How best to interpret the behavior of shared mycorrhizal networks is a sensitive subject. Some researchers are concerned about how wood wide webs are commonly portrayed. “Just because we found that plants can respond to a neighbor,” Johnson told me, “doesn’t mean that there is some altruistic network in operation.” The idea that plants are talking to each other and warning each other of imminent attack is an anthropomorphic delusion. “It’s very attractive to think that way,” he admitted, but it’s ultimately “a load of nonsense.”

			The screaming metaphor might not do much to help. It can slide two ways. Humans scream when they’re distressed, shocked, excited, or in pain. Humans also scream in order to alert other humans to their plight. It’s not always easy to disentangle cause and effect, even if one asks the distressed human outright. With plants it’s even harder. Perhaps the fraught question of whether plants warn one another of an aphid attack or just happen to overhear their neighbor’s chemical shrieks is the wrong thing to ask. As Kiers remarked, “It’s the narrative that we tell that needs to be examined. I’d really love to get past the language and try to understand the phenomenon.” Once again, it may be more helpful to ask why this behavior has evolved in the first place: Who stands to benefit?

			The receiver bean plant certainly benefits from the warning: By the time aphids arrive, it will have already activated its defenses. But why would it benefit the sender bean plant to alert its neighbors? We bump into the altruism problem again. Once more, the swiftest way through the labyrinth is to switch perspectives. Why might it benefit a fungus to pass a warning between the multiple plants that it lives with?

			If a fungus is connected to several plants and one is attacked by aphids, the fungus will suffer as well as the plant. If a whole clump of plants move into a state of high alert, they will produce a larger plume of wasp-summoning chemicals than a lone plant can. Any fungus that can magnify the chemical beacon will benefit from its ability to do so—of course, the plants benefit too, but without incurring a cost. Similarly, when stress signals pass from a sick plant to a healthy plant, it is the fungus that stands to benefit from keeping the healthy plant alive. “Imagine that in a forest you’ve got trees that appear to be giving resources to other trees,” Gilbert explained. “It seems to me more likely that the fungus notices that tree A is a bit ill at the moment, and tree B isn’t, so it shifts some resources over to tree A. If you take a myco-centric point of view it all makes sense.”



* * *



			—

			 			MOST STUDIES OF shared mycorrhizal networks limit themselves to pairs of plants. Read made images of radioactivity passing from the roots of one plant into another. Simard traced radioactive labels from a donor plant into receivers. Only by limiting the scope to a small number of plants could these experiments take place. But wood wide webs potentially sprawl outward over tens or hundreds of meters, and possibly farther. What happens then? Look outside. Trees, shrubs, grass, vines, flowers. Who is connected to whom, and how? What would a map of a wood wide web look like?

			Without knowledge about the architecture of shared fungal networks, it is hard to understand what’s going on. We know that resources and infochemicals tend to move through networks downhill, from plenty to scarcity, but sources and sinks can’t be the whole story. Your heart is a pump that causes blood to flow “downhill” by creating areas of high pressure and areas of low pressure. Source–sink dynamics can explain why blood circulates, but not why it reaches your organs in the way it does. This has to do with the blood vessels: how thick they are, how branched they are, and the route they take around your body. It is similar for mycorrhizal networks. Material can’t pass through the network from source to sink unless there is a network to flow through.

			Kevin Beiler, one of Simard’s former students, is the lead author of the only two studies that, in the late 2000s, set out to map the spatial structure of a shared mycorrhizal network. Beiler chose a relatively simple ecosystem—a forest in British Columbia, made up of Douglas fir trees of different ages. He deployed a technique used to conduct human paternity tests. Within a thirty-by-thirty-meter plot, he identified genetic fingerprints of each individual fungus and tree, which allowed him to work out exactly who associated with whom. This is an unusual level of detail. Many studies have looked at which plant species interact with which fungal species, but few go beyond and ask which individuals are actually connected to each other.

			 			Beiler’s maps are striking. Fungal networks sprawl over tens of meters, but trees are not linked evenly. Young trees have few connections, and older trees have many. The most well-connected tree is linked to forty-seven other trees and would have been linked to two hundred fifty others if the plot had been larger than it was. If one uses a finger to jump from tree to tree across the network—which is, of course, a plant-centric thing to do—one doesn’t trickle through the forest evenly. One skips across the network through a small number of well-connected older trees. Via these “hubs,” it’s possible to get to any other tree in no more than three steps.

			In 1999, when Barabási and his colleagues published the first map of the World Wide Web, they discovered a similar pattern. Web pages are linked to other web pages, but not all pages have the same number of links. The great majority of pages have just a few connections. A small number of pages are extremely well-connected. The difference between pages with the highest and lowest number of links is huge: Around eighty percent of links on the Web point to fifteen percent of pages. The same goes for many other types of network—from routes of global air travel, to neuronal networks in the brain. In each case, well-connected hubs make it possible to traverse the network in a small number of steps. It is in part these properties of a network—known as “scale-free” properties—that allow diseases, news, and fashions to cascade rapidly through populations. It is the same scale-free properties of a shared mycorrhizal network that might allow a young plant to survive in a heavily shaded understory, or infochemicals to ripple out across a stand of trees in a forest. “A young seedling will quickly become tied up within a complex, interwoven, and stable network,” Beiler explained. “You would expect this to increase its chances of survival and increase the resilience of the forest.” But only up to a point. It is the same scale-free properties that make a wood wide web vulnerable to targeted attacks. Eliminate Google and Amazon and Facebook overnight or shut down the three busiest airports in the world, and you’ll cause havoc. Selectively remove large hub trees—as many commercial logging operations do in an effort to extract the most valuable timber—and serious disruption will ensue.

			 			There are no fundamental laws in operation here. Scale-free properties tend to emerge in any network that grows. “Most networks that arise in the world are the result of some kind of growth process,” Barabási explained. There are more ways for a new node to connect to a well-connected node than to a less well-connected node. Old nodes with lots of links thus end up with even more links. As Beiler put it, “You can see these mycorrhizal networks as a contagious process. You have some founding trees and the network grows from there. Trees with more links to other trees tend to accumulate more links, more quickly.”

			Does this mean that the architecture of wood wide webs will be similar in other parts of the world? It’s possible, but we haven’t mapped enough networks to be sure. Extrapolating from a plant pot to an entire ecosystem brings problems; extrapolating from a thirty-by-thirty-meter plot is no less of an issue. There are many different ways to be a plant and many different ways to be a fungus. Some plants can form relationships with thousands of fungal species; some plants form relationships with fewer than ten and grow into cliquey networks with members of their own species. Some types of fungus have mycelium that easily grafts onto other mycelial networks to form large composite networks; some fungi are more likely to isolate themselves. In Panama, I found that Voyria depended on only a single fungal species, but that its specialism was far from limiting: Voyria’s partner was the most abundant mycorrhizal fungus in the forest and formed relationships with all the common tree species, allowing Voyria to connect with the largest possible number of other plants. Other mycohets that grew in the same forest had evolved a different strategy and associated with a range of fungal species.

			 			Even in the small area of forest that Beiler chose to study—in part for its simplicity—we are missing many pieces of the puzzle. His maps show how trees and fungi were arranged, but we don’t know what they were actually doing. “I only looked at one species of tree and two species of fungus—nothing close to the whole community,” he reflected. “It was just a glimpse; a small window into a vast and open system. Everything I described is a gross underestimate of the actual connectivity in the forest.”



* * *



			—

			VOYRIA HAVE LOST the ability to form complex root systems. They don’t need them; their shared fungal networks are their roots. Where their roots used to be, Voyria plants have a cluster of fleshy fingers. Cut them open, and you see hyphae winding and bursting within Voyria’s cells. Sometimes their roots aren’t even buried and sit like little fists on the surface of the soil. It’s easy to pick them up. Their fungal connections snap instantly. It feels strange to cut a plant’s lifelines with so little effort. Voyria’s grip on their network is a matter of life and death, yet the physical links are so slight. I often wondered how all the material needed to make an entire plant could traverse such a delicate passage.

			Like most research into mycorrhizal networks, asking questions about Voyria involved collecting them, thus severing their connections to the web. I’ve spent days doing it. And days thinking about the irony of cutting the very connections that I was studying. Of course, biologists often destroy the organisms they hope to understand. I was used to this idea, as much as it’s possible to get used to it. But severing the connections in a network to study the network felt unusually absurd. The physicists Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers remarked that attempts to break down complex systems into their components often fail to provide satisfying explanations; we rarely know how to put the pieces back together again. Wood wide webs present a particular challenge. We’re still not sure how mycelial networks coordinate their own behavior and stay in touch with themselves, let alone how they manage their interactions with multiple plants in natural soils. However, we do know enough to know that mycelial networks are ongoing happenings rather than things. We know that mycelial networks are able to fuse with one another and prune themselves back, redirect flow around themselves, and release—and respond to—plumes of chemicals. We know that mycorrhizal fungi form and re-form their connections with plants, tangling, detangling, and retangling. We know, in short, that wood wide webs are dynamic systems in shimmering, unceasing turnover.

			 			Entities that behave in these ways are loosely termed “complex adaptive systems”: complex, because their behavior is difficult to predict from a knowledge of their constituent parts alone; adaptive, because they self-organize into new forms or behaviors in response to their circumstances. You—like all organisms—are a complex adaptive system. So is the World Wide Web. So are brains, termite colonies, swarming bees, cities, and financial markets—to name a few. Within complex adaptive systems, small changes can bring about large effects that can only be observed in the system as a whole. Rarely can a neat arrow be plotted between cause and effect. Stimuli—which may be unremarkable gestures in themselves—swirl into often surprising responses. Financial crashes are a good example of this type of dynamic nonlinear process. So are sneezes, and orgasms.

			How best to think about shared mycorrhizal networks then? Are we dealing with a superorganism? A metropolis? A living Internet? Nursery schools for trees? Socialism in the soil? Deregulated markets of late capitalism, with fungi jostling on the trading floor of a forest stock exchange? Or maybe it’s fungal feudalism, with mycorrhizal overlords presiding over the lives of their plant laborers for their own ultimate benefit. All are problematic. The questions raised by wood wide webs range further than these limited casts of characters allow. However, we do need some imaginative tools. To understand how shared mycorrhizal networks really behave in complex ecosystems—what they are actually doing, rather than what they are capable of doing—perhaps we will have to start to think of them in terms analogous to those that we use to understand other, potentially better-studied complex adaptive systems.

			Simard draws parallels between shared mycorrhizal networks in forests and neural networks in animal brains. She argues that the field of neuroscience can provide tools to better understand how complex behaviors arise in ecosystems linked by fungal networks. Neuroscience has concerned itself, for longer than mycology has, with the question of how dynamic, self-organizing networks can give rise to complex adaptive behaviors. Her point is not that mycorrhizal networks are brains. There are countless ways that the two systems differ. For one, brains are made up of cells belonging to a single organism rather than a multitude of different species. Brains are also anatomically confined and can’t range across a landscape in the same way that fungal networks can. Nonetheless, the analogy is seductive. The challenges that face researchers studying wood wide webs and brains are not dissimilar, although neuroscience is several decades and hundreds of billions of dollars ahead. “Neuroscientists are making slices of brains to map neural networks,” Barabási joked. “You ecologists need to slice up a forest so you can see exactly where all the roots and fungi are, and who connects to whom.”

			 			Simard observes that there do appear to be some informative—if superficial—points of overlap. Networks of activity in the brain have scale-free properties, with a few well-connected modules that allow information to pass from A to B in a small number of steps. Brains, like fungal networks, reconfigure themselves—or “adaptively rewire”—in response to new situations. Underused neuronal pathways are pruned back, as are underused patches of mycelium. New connections between neurons—or synapses—form and strengthen, as do the connections between fungi and tree roots. Chemicals known as neurotransmitters pass across synapses, allowing information to move from nerve to nerve; similarly, chemical substances pass across mycorrhizal “synapses” from fungus to plant or plant to fungus, in some cases transmitting information between them. Indeed, the amino acids glutamate and glycine—major signaling molecules in plants, and the most common neurotransmitters in animal brains and spinal cords—are known to pass between plants and fungi at these junctions.

			But, ultimately, the behaviors of wood wide webs are ambiguous, and our brain analogies—like Internet analogies or political analogies—are limiting. However these networks coordinate themselves, and however it is that cues—or are they signals?—pass between plants via fungal channels, wood wide webs overlap with one another and have soft edges that fray outward inclusively. Included are the bacteria that migrate from place to place within fungal mycelium. Included are the aphids and also the parasitic wasps lured in for the feast by the volatile compounds produced by broad bean plants. Step back further and humans, too, fall in. Knowingly or not, we have been interacting with mycorrhizal networks for as long as we have interacted with plants.

			 			Are we able to release ourselves from these metaphors, think outside the skull, and learn to talk about wood wide webs without leaning on one of our well-worn human totems? Are we able to let shared mycorrhizal networks be questions, rather than answers known in advance? “I try just to look at the system and let the lichen be a lichen.” Discussions of wood wide webs often lead me back to the words of Toby Spribille, the researcher who keeps discovering new partners in the lichen symbiosis. Wood wide webs aren’t lichens—although to think of them as enormous lichens that we can walk around in brings welcome variety to the range of metaphors currently on offer. Nonetheless, I wonder if we can learn something from Spribille’s patience. Are we able to stand back, look at the system, and let the polyphonic swarms of plants and fungi and bacteria that make up our homes and our worlds be themselves, and quite unlike anything else? What would that do to our minds?





7


			RADICAL MYCOLOGY




To use the world well, to be able to stop wasting it and our time in it, we need to relearn our being in it.

					—URSULA LE GUIN





			I LAY NAKED IN a mound of decomposing wood chips and was buried up to my neck by the spadeful. It was hot, and the steam smelled of cedar and the fust of old books. I leaned back, sweating under the damp weight, and closed my eyes.

			I was in California, visiting one of the only fermentation baths to be found outside Japan. The wood shavings had been moistened and piled into a heap. After two weeks of rotting they had been shoveled into a large wooden tub and ripened for another week before I arrived. The bath was now cooking, heated by nothing more than the fierce energy of decomposition.

			The intense heat made me drowsy, and I thought of the fungi decomposing the wood. How easy it is when one’s not being stewed in a heap of rotting wood to take for granted that everything decays. We live and breathe in the space that decomposition leaves behind. I greedily sucked some cold water through a straw and tried to blink the sweat out of my eyes. If we could pause decomposition, starting now, the planet would pile up kilometers deep in bodies. We would think of it as a crisis, but from a fungal point of view it would be an enormous heap of opportunities.

			 			My torpor deepened. It certainly wouldn’t be the first time fungi have thrived through a period of dramatic global transformation. Fungi are veteran survivors of ecological disruption. Their ability to cling on—and often flourish—through periods of catastrophic change is one of their defining characteristics. They are inventive, flexible, and collaborative. With much of life on Earth threatened by human activity, are there ways we can partner with fungi to help us adapt?

			These may sound like the delirious musings of someone buried up to their neck in decomposing wood chips, but a growing number of radical mycologists think exactly this. Many symbioses have formed in times of crisis. The algal partner in a lichen can’t make a living on bare rock without striking up a relationship with a fungus. Might it be that we can’t adjust to life on a damaged planet without cultivating new fungal relationships?



* * *



			—

			IN THE CARBONIFEROUS period, 290 to 360 million years ago, the earliest wood-producing plants spread across the tropics in swampy forests, supported by their mycorrhizal fungal partners. These forests grew and died, pulling huge quantities of carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere. And for tens of millions of years, much of this plant matter didn’t decompose. Layers of dead and un-rotted forest built up, storing so much carbon that atmospheric carbon dioxide levels crashed, and the planet entered a period of global cooling. Plants had caused the climate crisis, and plants were hit the hardest by it: Huge areas of tropical forest were wiped out in an extinction event known as the Carboniferous rainforest collapse. How had wood become a climate-change-inducing pollutant?

			From a plant perspective wood was, and remains, a brilliant structural innovation. As plant life boomed, the jostle for light intensified, and plants grew taller to reach it. The taller they became, the greater their need for structural support. Wood was plants’ answer to this problem. Today, the wood of some three trillion trees—more than fifteen billion of which are cut down every year—accounts for about sixty percent of the total mass of every living organism on Earth, some three hundred gigatons of carbon.

			 			Wood is a hybrid material. Cellulose—a feature of all plant cells, whether woody or not—is one of the ingredients and the most abundant polymer on earth. Lignin is another ingredient, and the second most abundant. Lignin is what makes wood wood. It is stronger than cellulose and more complex. Whereas cellulose is made up of orderly chains of glucose molecules, lignin is a haphazard matrix of molecular rings.

			To this day, only a small number of organisms have worked out how to decompose lignin. By far the most prolific group are the white rot fungi—so-called because in decomposition they bleach wood a pale color. Most enzymes—biological catalysts that living organisms use to conduct chemical reactions—lock onto specific molecular shapes. Faced with lignin, this approach is hopeless; its chemical structure is too irregular. White rot fungi work around the problem using nonspecific enzymes that don’t depend on shape. These “peroxidases” release a torrent of highly reactive molecules, known as “free radicals,” which crack open lignin’s tightly bonded structure in a process known as “enzymatic combustion.”

			Fungi are prodigious decomposers, but of their many biochemical achievements, one of the most impressive is this ability of white rot fungi to break down the lignin in wood. Based on their ability to release free radicals, the peroxidases produced by white rot fungi perform what is technically known as “radical chemistry.” “Radical” has it right. These enzymes have forever changed the way that carbon journeys through its earthly cycles. Today, fungal decomposition—much of it of woody plant matter—is one of the largest sources of carbon emissions, emitting about eighty-five gigatons of carbon to the atmosphere every year. In 2018, the combustion of fossil fuels by humans emitted around ten gigatons.

			How did tens of millions of years’ worth of forest go un-rotted over the Carboniferous period? Opinions differ. Some point to climatic factors: Tropical forests were stagnant, waterlogged places. When trees died, they were submerged in anoxic swamps, where white rot fungi were unable to follow. Others suggest that when lignin first evolved in the early Carboniferous period, white rot fungi weren’t yet able to decompose it and required several million more years to upgrade their apparatus of decay.

			 			So what happened to the vast areas of forest that didn’t decompose? It’s an inconceivably large amount of matter to pile up, kilometers deep.

			The answer is coal. Human industrialization has been powered on these seams of un-rotted plant matter, somehow kept out of fungal reach. (If given the chance, many types of fungi readily decompose coal, and a species known as the “kerosene fungus” thrives in the fuel tanks of aircraft.) Coal provides a negative of fungal histories: It’s a record of fungal absence, of what fungi did not digest. Rarely since then has so much organic material escaped fungal attention.

			I lay buried among white rot fungi for twenty minutes, slow-cooked by their radical chemistry. My skin seemed to dissolve into the heat, and I lost track of where my body started and stopped; a complex cuddle, blissful and unbearable in turn. No wonder coal can give off such heat: It is made from wood that hasn’t yet been burned. When we burn coal, we physically combust the material that fungi were unable to combust enzymatically. We thermally decompose what fungi were unable to decompose chemically.



* * *



			—

			IT MAY BE rare for wood to escape fungal attention; it is common for fungi to escape ours. In 2009, the mycologist David Hawksworth referred to mycology as “a neglected megascience.” Animal and plant biology have had their own university departments for generations, but the study of fungi has long been lumped in with plant sciences and is seldom recognized as a distinct field, even today.

			Neglect is a relative term. In China, fungi have been a major source of food and medicines for thousands of years. Today, seventy-five percent of the global production of mushrooms—almost forty million tons—occurs in China. In central and eastern Europe, too, fungi have long played important cultural roles. If deaths from mushroom poisoning are any metric of national fungal enthusiasm, compare the one or two deaths a year in the United States with the two hundred deaths in Russia and Ukraine in the year 2000.

			 			Nonetheless, for much of the world, Hawksworth’s observations hold true. The first State of the World’s Fungi report published in 2018 reveals that in the Red List of Threatened Species, compiled by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), only fifty-six species of fungi have had their conservation status evaluated, compared with more than twenty-five thousand plants and sixty-eight thousand animals. Hawksworth proposes several possible solutions for this oversight. One stands out: “The resources needed to empower ‘amateur’ mycologists” should be increased. His use of quotation marks speaks volumes. Although many fields of science have networks of dedicated and talented amateur practitioners, they are particularly prominent in the field of mycology. Too often, there has been no other outlet for fungal inquiry.

			A grassroots scientific movement may sound improbable, but it emerges from a rich tradition. The “professional” academic study of living organisms only picked up momentum in the nineteenth century. Many major developments in the history of the sciences have been fueled by amateur enthusiasm and taken place outside dedicated university departments. Today, after a long period of specialization and professionalization, there is an explosion of new ways of doing science. “Citizen science projects,” along with “hackerspaces” and “makerspaces,” have grown increasingly popular since the 1990s, providing opportunities for dedicated nonspecialists to carry out research projects. What does one call these practitioners? Do they count as the “public”? Citizen scientists? Lay experts? Or just amateurs?

			Peter McCoy is an anarchist, hip-hop artist, self-taught mycologist, and founder of an organization called Radical Mycology, which works to develop fungal solutions to the many technological and ecological problems we face. As he explains in his book Radical Mycology—a hybrid of fungal manifesto, guidebook, and grower’s guide—his goal is to create a “people’s mycological movement” versed in “the cultivation of fungi and the applications of mycology.”

			Radical Mycology is part of a larger movement of DIY mycology, which emerged from the psychedelic mushroom-growing scene kickstarted in the 1970s by Terence McKenna and Paul Stamets. The movement took on its modern form as it grew together with hackerspaces, crowdsourced science projects, and online forums. Although its center of gravity remains on the West Coast of North America, grassroots mycological organizations are rapidly spreading to other countries and continents. The word radical derives from the Latin radix, meaning “root.” Interpreted literally, the concerns of radical mycology lie with its mycelial base, or its “grassroots.”

			 			It is for these grassroots fungal enthusiasts that McCoy founded an online mycology school, Mycologos. Knowledge about fungi is often inaccessible and hard to understand. His mission is to reshape human-fungal relations by distributing this information in readily digestible form: “I envisage teams of Radical Mycologists Without Borders traveling the globe, sharing their skills and discovering new means of working with fungi. Where one Radical Mycologist trains ten, those ten can train a hundred, and from them a thousand—so it is that mycelium spreads.”



* * *



			—

			IN THE AUTUMN of 2018, I traveled to a farm in rural Oregon for the biannual Radical Mycology Convergence. There I found more than five hundred fungal nerds, mushroom growers, artists, budding enthusiasts, and social and ecological activists bustling around a farmyard. Wearing a baseball cap, worn sneakers, and thick-lensed spectacles, McCoy set the scene in a keynote address: “Liberation Mycology.”

			To grow mushrooms on any kind of scale, growers have to develop a keen nose for material to satisfy voracious fungal appetites. Most mushroom-producing fungi thrive on the mess that humans make. Growing cash crops on waste is a kind of alchemy. Fungi transform a liability with negative worth into a product with value. A win for the waste-producer, a win for the cultivator, and a win for the fungi. The inefficiency of many industries is a blessing to mushroom growers. Agriculture is particularly wasteful: Palm and coconut oil plantations discard ninety-five percent of the total biomass produced. Sugar plantations discard eighty-three percent. Urban life isn’t much better. In Mexico City, used diapers make up between five and fifteen percent by weight of solid waste. Researchers have found that the omnivorous Pleurotus mycelium—a white rot fungus that fruits into edible oyster mushrooms—can grow happily on a diet of used diapers. Over the course of two months, diapers introduced to Pleurotus lost about eighty-five percent of their starting mass when the plastic covering was removed, compared with a mere five percent in fungus-free controls. What’s more, the mushrooms produced were healthy and free from human diseases. Similar projects are underway in India. By cultivating Pleurotus on agricultural waste—by enzymatically combusting the material—less biomass is thermally combusted and air quality is improved.



				 					Oyster mushrooms, Pleurotus ostreatus, growing on agricultural waste



			It is no great surprise that the mess humans have made might look like an opportunity from a fungal perspective. Fungi have persisted through Earth’s five major extinction events, each of which eliminated between seventy-five and ninety-five percent of species on the planet. Some fungi even thrived during these calamitous episodes. Following the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction, credited with the dispatch of dinosaurs and the mass destruction of forests across the globe, fungal abundance surged, fueled by an abundance of dead woody material to decompose. Radiotrophic fungi—those able to harvest the energy emitted by radioactive particles—flourish in the ruins of Chernobyl and are just the latest players in a longer story of fungi and human nuclear enterprise. After Hiroshima was destroyed by an atomic bomb, it is reported that the first living thing to emerge from the devastation was a matsutake mushroom.

			 			Fungal appetites are diverse, but there are some materials they won’t break down unless they have to. In one of his workshops, McCoy explained how he had trained Pleurotus mycelium to digest one of the most commonly littered items in the world, cigarette butts, more than 750 thousand tons of which are thrown away every year. Unused cigarette butts will break down, given time, but used cigarette butts are saturated with toxic residues that impede the process. McCoy had weaned Pleurotus onto a diet of used butts by gradually phasing out the alternatives. Over time, the fungus had “learned” how to use them as its sole food source. A time-lapse video showed the mycelium seeping steadily upward through a jam jar filled with crumpled tar-stained butts. A burly oyster mushroom soon bundled itself up and out of the top.

			In fact, it is just as much “remembering” as “learning.” A fungus won’t produce an enzyme it doesn’t need. Enzymes, or even entire metabolic pathways, can lie dormant in fungal genomes for generations. For the Pleurotus mycelium to digest the used cigarette butts it might have to dust off an unused metabolic move. Or it might deploy an enzyme normally used for something else and press it into the service of a new cause. Many fungal enzymes, like lignin peroxidases, are not specific. This means that a single enzyme can serve as a multitool, allowing the fungus to metabolize different compounds with similar structures. As it happens, many toxic pollutants—including those in cigarette butts—resemble the by-products of lignin breakdown. In this sense, to confront Pleurotus mycelium with used cigarette butts is to offer it a commonplace challenge.

			Much of radical mycology is underwritten by the radical chemistry of white rot fungi. However, it isn’t always easy to predict what a given fungal strain will metabolize. McCoy told us about his attempts to grow Pleurotus mycelium on dishes spotted with drops of the herbicide glyphosate. Some of the Pleurotus strains avoided the drops. Some grew straight through them. Some grew up to the edge of a drop and stopped growing. “It took those ones a week to work out how to break it down,” McCoy recalled. He likened fungi to jailers with bunches of enzymatic keys that can unlock certain chemical bonds. Some strains might have the right key ready to go. Others might have it buried somewhere inside their genome but choose to avoid the new substance anyway. Others might take a week to riffle through the bunch of keys, trying different ones until they get lucky.

			 			McCoy, like many in the DIY mycology movement, received his first shot of fungal zeal from Stamets. Since his influential work on psilocybin mushrooms in the 1970s, Stamets has grown into an unlikely hybrid between fungal evangelist and tycoon. His TED Talk—“Six Ways that Mushrooms Can Save the World”—has been viewed millions of times. He runs a multimillion-dollar fungal business, Fungi Perfecti, which does a roaring trade in everything from antiviral throat sprays to fungal dog treats (Mutt-rooms). His books on mushroom identification and cultivation—including the definitive Psilocybin Mushrooms of the World—continue to provide a crucial reference for countless mycologists, grassroots or otherwise.

			As a teenager, Stamets suffered from a debilitating stammer. One day, he took a heroic dose of magic mushrooms and climbed to the top of a tall tree, where he was trapped by a lightning storm. When he came down, his stammer was gone. Stamets was converted. He studied mycology at Evergreen State College as an undergraduate and has dedicated his life to fungal matters ever since. Stamets isn’t affiliated with Radical Mycology. However, like McCoy, he is devoted to spreading the fungal message to the widest possible audience. On his website is a letter from a Syrian cultivator who, inspired by Stamets, developed ways to farm oyster mushrooms on agricultural debris. The cultivator taught more than a thousand people how to grow mushrooms in their basements, providing a key foodstuff during six years under siege and bombardment by the Assad regime.

			In fact, it is no exaggeration to say that Stamets has done more than anyone else to popularize fungal topics outside university biology departments. However, his relationship with the academic world is not straightforward. From his sensational claims to his speculative theories, Stamets behaves in many ways academic scientists are not supposed to. And yet his maverick approach is undeniably effective. It is a tension that sometimes borders on the absurd. Stamets once described a complaint he received from a university professor he knows. “Paul, you’ve created a huge problem. We want to study yeast and these students want to save the world. What do we do?”



* * *



			—

			 			ONE OF THE ways fungi might help save the world is by helping to restore contaminated ecosystems. In mycoremediation, as the field is known, fungi become collaborators in environmental cleanup operations.

			We have recruited fungi to break things down for millennia. The diverse microbial populations in our guts remind us that in those moments in our evolutionary history when we haven’t been able to digest something by ourselves, we’ve pulled microbes on board. Where this has proved impossible, we’ve outsourced the process using barrels, jars, compost heaps, and industrial fermenters. Human life hinges on many forms of external digestion using fungi, from alcohol, to soy sauce, to vaccines, to penicillin, to the citric acid used in all fizzy drinks. This sort of partnering—in which different organisms together sing a metabolic “song” neither could sing alone—enacts one of the oldest evolutionary maxims. Mycoremediation is just a special case.

			And it shows great promise. Fungi have a remarkable appetite for a range of pollutants besides toxic cigarette butts and the herbicide glyphosate. In his book Mycelium Running, Stamets writes about a collaboration with a research institute in Washington State, which partnered with the US Department of Defense to develop ways to break down a potent neurotoxin. The chemical—dimethyl methylphosphonate, or DMMP—was one of the deadly components of VX gas, manufactured and deployed in the late 1980s by Saddam Hussein during the Iran-Iraq War. Stamets sent his colleagues twenty-eight different fungal species, which were exposed to the compound in gradually increasing concentrations. After six months, two of the species had “learned” to consume DMMP as their primary nutrient source. One was Trametes, or turkey tail, and the other was Psilocybe azurescens, the most potent psilocybin-producing species known, discovered by Stamets several years before and named for the bluish hue on the stems (he later named his son Azureus after the mushroom). Both are white rot fungi.

			 			The mycological literature is filled with hundreds of such examples. Fungi can transform many common pollutants in soil and waterways that endanger lives, whether human or otherwise. They are able to degrade pesticides (such as chlorophenols), synthetic dyes, the explosives TNT and RDX, crude oil, some plastics, and a range of human and veterinary drugs not removed by wastewater treatment plants, from antibiotics to synthetic hormones.

			In principle, fungi are some of the best-qualified organisms for environmental remediation. Mycelium has been fine-tuned over a billion years of evolution for one primary purpose: to consume. It is appetite in bodily form. For hundreds of millions of years before the plant boom in the Carboniferous, fungi made a living finding ways to decompose the debris that other organisms left behind. They can even boost decomposition by providing mycelial highways that allow bacteria to travel into otherwise inaccessible sites of decay. And yet decomposition is only part of the story. Heavy metals accumulate within fungal tissues, which can then be removed and disposed of safely. The dense meshwork of mycelium can even be used to filter polluted water. Mycofiltration removes infectious diseases such as E. coli and can sop up heavy metals like a sponge—a company in Finland uses this approach to reclaim gold from electronic waste.

			Despite its promise, however, mycoremediation is no simple fix. Just because a given fungal strain behaves in a certain way in a dish doesn’t mean it will do the same thing when introduced to the rumpus of a contaminated ecosystem. Fungi have needs—such as oxygen or additional food sources—that must be taken into account. Moreover, decomposition takes place in stages, achieved by a succession of fungi and bacteria, each able to pick up where the previous ones left off. It is naïve to imagine that a lab-trained fungal strain will be able to hustle effectively in a new environment and remediate a site by itself. The challenges faced by mycoremediators are analogous to those faced by brewers—without suitable conditions, yeast will struggle to remediate the sugar in a barrel of grape juice into alcohol—except that the wine barrel is a contaminated ecosystem, and we’re inside it.

			McCoy advocated a radical approach based on grassroots empiricism. I had been skeptical. The field of mycoremediation, it struck me, needs a big institutional boost. Funky homegrown solutions are all very well, but surely large-scale studies are required. How could the field progress without flagship projects, big grants, and institutional attention? I found it hard to imagine that an army of grassroots hobbyists, no matter how dedicated, could be equipped or credible enough to move things forward.

			 			I soon realized that McCoy was advocating this approach not because of a disregard for institutional research but because of its scarcity. Many factors contribute. Ecosystems are complex, and there is no single fungal solution that will work in all sites and conditions. To develop scalable off-the-shelf mycoremediation protocols would require a large investment, which is uncommon in the remediation sector: On the whole, remediation is undertaken by reluctant companies under pressure to fulfill a legal obligation. Few are interested in solutions seen to be experimental or alternative. Moreover, there is a conventional remediation industry in full swing, which scrapes up polluted soil by the ton, transports it elsewhere, and burns it. Despite the expense and ecological disruption this causes, it is an industry in no hurry to be replaced.

			Radical mycologists have little choice but to take matters into their own hands. And since the early 2000s, inspired in part by Stamets’s evangelism, a number of projects have been set up to test fungal solutions. One of the older organizations, CoRenewal, has been conducting research into the ability of fungi to detoxify the poisonous by-products of crude oil extraction left behind by Chevron’s twenty-six-year operation in the Ecuadorian Amazon. In an alliance with partners in polluted areas, researchers are investigating the microbial communities and local “petrophilic” fungal strains found in contaminated soils. It is classic radical mycology—local mycologists learning how to partner with local fungal strains to solve local problems. There are other examples. A grassroots organization in California has laid out miles of straw-filled tubes full of Pleurotus mycelium in the hope that they will remediate the toxic runoff from houses destroyed in the 2017 wildfires. In 2018, floating booms filled with Pleurotus mycelium were installed in a Danish harbor to help mop up fuel spills. Most of these projects have only just begun, others are underway. None has reached maturity.

			 			Will mycoremediation take off? It’s too early to say. But it’s clear that now, as we fret at the edge of a toxic puddle of our own making, radical mycological solutions based on the ability of certain fungi to decompose wood offer some hope. Our favored method of accessing the energy in wood has been to burn it. This, too, is a radical solution. And it is this energy—the fossilized remnants of a wood boom in the Carboniferous—that has helped get us into trouble. Could the radical chemistry of white rot fungi—an evolutionary response to the very same wood boom—now help to pull us through?



* * *



			—

			FOR MCCOY, RADICAL Mycology means more than just solving particular problems in particular places. A distributed network of grassroots practitioners is also capable of advancing the state of fungal knowledge as a whole. One way this can happen is through the discovery and isolation of potent fungal strains. Fungi isolated from a contaminated environment may have already learned how to digest a given pollutant and, as locals, be able to remediate a problem and thrive. This was the approach used by a team of researchers in Pakistan who screened soil from a city landfill site in Islamabad and found a novel fungal strain that could degrade polyurethane plastic.

			Crowdsourcing fungal strains may sound implausible, but it has resulted in some major discoveries. The industrial production of the antibiotic penicillin was only possible because of the discovery of a high-yielding strain of Penicillium fungus. In 1941, this “pretty golden mold” was found on a rotting cantaloupe in an Illinois market by Mary Hunt, a laboratory assistant, after the lab put out a call for civilians to submit molds. Before this point, penicillin had been expensive to produce and remained largely unavailable.

			Finding fungal strains is one thing. Isolating them and testing their activity is more difficult. Hunt may have found the mold, but it had to be taken into the lab to be examined. This was my main doubt about McCoy’s approach. How could radical mycologists isolate and grow new strains without access to well-provisioned facilities? Sterile benches pumping clean air, ultra-pure chemicals, expensive machines whirring away in equipment rooms—surely this was all needed to make any kind of real progress?

			 			I wanted to find out more, so I attended one of McCoy’s weekend mushroom-cultivation courses in Brooklyn, New York. The class was an eclectic mix: artists, educators, community planners, computer programmers, a university lecturer, entrepreneurs, and chefs. McCoy stood behind a table piled high with dishes, plastic bags filled with grain, and boxes stacked with syringes and scalpels—staple tackle of the modern mushroom cultivator. A large pot of water simmered on the stove, filled with gelatinous wood ear mushrooms that we ladled into mugs during the tea break. This was Radical Mycology at its growing tip. Or rather, at one of its growing tips.

			Over the course of the weekend, it became clear that the field of amateur fungal cultivation is in a state of wild proliferation. A well-connected, actively experimenting network of fungal enthusiasts are already accelerating the production of fungal knowledge. Techniques like DNA sequencing remain out of reach for most, but recent advances make it possible to perform operations that would have been impossible for amateurs even ten years ago. Most are ingenious low-tech solutions developed by kitchen-sink magic mushroom growers. Many are improvements and tweaks on methods developed and published by Terence McKenna and Paul Stamets in their grower’s guides. Although McCoy’s vision of mycological transformation includes community lab spaces, a lot can be done without them.

			The most revolutionary innovation emerged in 2009. The founder of the magic mushroom-growing forum mycotopia.net, known only by the handle hippie3, devised a method to grow fungi without fear of contamination. This changed everything. Contamination is the menace of all fungal cultivators. Freshly sterilized material is a biological vacuum; if exposed to the busy world of the open air, life rushes in. Using hippie3’s “injection port” method, amateur mushroom cultivators can ditch the most expensive kit and fiddly procedures. All one needs is a syringe and a modified jam jar. The knowledge spread quickly. In McCoy’s view this was one of the most important developments in the history of mycology—“lab results without the lab”—and has changed the cultivation of mushrooms forever. He grinned and expelled a small libation from the syringe he held. “A squirt for hippie3.”

			 			I laughed at the thought of teams of mycohackers tinkering around at the edge of problems, just as McCoy’s Pleurotus mycelium had hovered at the edge of the puddle of glyphosate, experimenting with different enzymes until it found a way through. McCoy was training radical mycologists to cultivate fungi at home, so they could then train fungal strains to make an opportunity out of yet another toxic human oversight. Even with relatively small incentives, the field could advance rapidly. I pictured crowds of enthusiasts gathering to race their homegrown fungal strains through fiendish cocktails of toxic waste, competing for an annual award of $1 million.

			So much remains to be seen. Mycology, whether radical or not, is in its infancy. Humans have been cultivating and domesticating plants for more than twelve thousand years. But fungi? The earliest records of mushroom cultivation date from around two thousand years ago in China. Wu San Kwung, who is credited with working out how to grow shiitake mushrooms—another white rot fungus—in China around AD 1000, is commemorated with an annual feast day, and temples throughout the country are dedicated to his achievements. By the late nineteenth century, in the limestone catacombs that riddle the subsurface of Paris, hundreds of mushroom farmers produced more than a thousand tons of “Paris” mushrooms every year. Yet lab-based techniques only arose around a hundred years ago. Many of the techniques that McCoy teaches, including hippie3’s injection port method, are only about a decade old.

			McCoy’s course ended in a flutter of excitement, ideas flying around. “There’s lots of ways to play,” he grinned, a quiet blend of incitement and encouragement. “There’s a lot we just don’t know.”



* * *



			—

			FOR AS LONG as fungi have existed, they have been bringing about a “change from the roots.” Humans are latecomers to the story. Over hundreds of millions of years, many organisms have formed radical partnerships with fungi. Many—such as plants’ relationships with mycorrhizal fungi—have been blockbuster moments in the history of life, with world-changing consequences. Today there are plenty of nonhumans cultivating fungi in sophisticated ways, with radical outcomes. Can these relationships be thought of as ancient precursors to radical mycology?

			 			African Macrotermes termites are some of the more striking examples. Macrotermes, like most termites, spend much of their lives foraging for wood, although they aren’t able to eat it. Instead, the termites cultivate a white rot fungus—Termitomyces—that digests it for them. The termites chew wood into a slurry that they regurgitate in fungal gardens, known as the “fungus comb,” by contrast with bees’ honeycomb. The fungus uses radical chemistry to decompose the wood. The termites consume the compost that remains. To house the fungus, Macrotermes build towering mounds that reach heights of nine meters, some of which are more than two thousand years old. Societies of Macrotermes termites, like those of leaf-cutter ants, are some of the most complex formed by any insect group.

			Macrotermes mounds are giant, externalized guts—prosthetic metabolisms that allow the termites to decompose complex materials they can’t break down themselves. Like the fungi they cultivate, Macrotermes muddle the concept of individuality. An individual termite can’t survive apart from its society. A termite society can’t survive separate from the cultures of fungi and other microbes that feed them, and that they feed. The partnership is prolific: A substantial proportion of the wood decomposed in the African tropics passes through Macrotermes mounds.

			Whereas humans access the energy bound up in lignin by physically burning it, Macrotermes help a white rot fungus to burn it chemically. Termites deploy white rot fungi just as a radical mycologist might enlist Pleurotus to break down crude oil or cigarette butts. Or in the way that a no less radical mycologist might outsource their metabolism to fungi in the barrels and jars used to ferment wine, miso, or cheese. However, there’s no question who got there first. Macrotermes had been cultivating fungi for more than twenty million years by the time the genus Homo evolved. And indeed, when it comes to Termitomyces fungi, termites’ cultivation techniques far outstrip those of humans. Termitomyces mushrooms are a delicacy (and can grow to a meter across, making them some of the largest mushrooms in the world). But despite prolonged effort, humans have not found a way to cultivate them. The fungus requires the finely balanced conditions furnished by the termites through a combination of their bacterial symbionts and the architecture of their mounds.

			 			The expertise of termites has not been lost on the humans who live around them. The radical chemistry of white rot fungi—and its astonishing force—has long been wrapped into human lives. Termites are reported to consume between $1.5 and $20 billion of property in the United States every year. (As Lisa Margonelli observes in Underbug, North American termites are most commonly described as eating “private” property, as if they had some intentional anarchist or anticapitalist sentiment.) In 2011 termites found their way into a bank in India and ate ten million rupees in banknotes—around $225,000. In a twist on the theme of radical fungal partnerships, one of Stamets’s “six ways that fungi can save the world” involves tweaking the biology of certain disease-causing fungi so they are able to bypass termites’ defenses and exterminate their colonies (this is the same fungus—the mold Metarhizium—that shows promise in eliminating populations of malarial mosquitoes).

			The anthropologist James Fairhead describes how farmers in many parts of West Africa encourage Macrotermes termites because of the way they “wake up” the soil. Earth from inside termite mounds is sometimes eaten by humans or smeared on wounds, and has been found to have a number of benefits—as a mineral supplement, or an antidote to toxins, or an antibiotic. Macrotermes cultivate an antibiotic-producing bacteria, Streptomyces, within their mounds. The partnership between Macrotermes and their fungi has even been weaponized by humans for radical political causes. In the early twentieth century in coastal West Africa, locals secretly released termites in the military outpost of a colonizing French army. Driven by the voracious appetites of their fungal partners, the termites destroyed the buildings and chewed up the bureaucrats’ papers. The French garrison quickly abandoned their post.

			 			In a number of West African cultures, termites lie above humans in spiritual hierarchies. In some, Macrotermes are portrayed as messengers between humans and gods. In others, it was only with the help of a termite assistant that God was able to create the universe in the first place. In these myths, Macrotermes are not just portrayed as breaking things down. They are builders on the largest possible scale.



				 					Macrotermes termites





* * *



			—

			AROUND THE WORLD, the idea that fungi can be used to build things as well as break them down is starting to catch on. A material made from the outer layers of portabello mushrooms shows promise in replacing graphite in lithium batteries. The mycelium of some species makes an effective skin substitute, used by surgeons to help wounds to heal. And in the United States, a company called Ecovative Design is growing building materials out of mycelium.

			I went to visit Ecovative’s research and manufacturing facility in an industrial park in upstate New York. Stepping into the lobby, I found myself surrounded by mycelial products. There were boards, bricks, acoustic tiles, and molded packaging for wine bottles. All were light gray with a rough texture and looked like cardboard. Next to a mycelium lampshade and stool was a box filled with white cubes of squishy mycelial foam. Next to this was a piece of fungal leather. I felt as if I’d stumbled into an elaborate prank, the set of a satirical TV show making fun of people with big claims about how fungi can save the world.

			Eben Bayer, the young CEO of Ecovative, found me prodding a piece of mycelium. “Dell ships their servers in packaging like that. We send them about half a million pieces a year.” He gestured to a stool. “Safe, healthy, sustainably grown furniture.” Its seat was covered with mycelium leather and padded with mycelium foam. If you ordered one, it would arrive in mycelial packaging. Whereas mycoremediation is all about decomposing the consequences of our actions, “mycofabrication” is all about recomposing the types of material we choose to use in the first place. It is the yang to the yin of decomposition.

			 			Like the radical mycologists I had met in Oregon and Brooklyn, Ecovative reroutes agricultural waste streams to feed its fungi. Out of sawdust or corn stalks grew a valuable commodity. It was the familiar fungal win-win-win: for waste producer, cultivator, and fungus. However, in the case of Ecovative there were some additional wins. One of Bayer’s long-standing ambitions has been to disrupt polluting industries. The packaging materials that Ecovative grows are designed to replace plastics. Their construction materials are designed to replace brick, concrete, and particle board. Their leather-like textile replaces animal leather. Hundreds of square feet of mycelial leather can be grown in less than a week on materials that would otherwise be disposed of. At the end of their life, mycelial products can be composted. Ecovative’s materials are lightweight, water resistant, and fire retardant. They are stronger than concrete when subjected to bending forces and resist compression better than wood framing. They have a better insulation value than expanded polystyrene and can be grown in a matter of days into an unlimited number of forms (researchers in Australia are working to create a termite-resistant brick by combining Trametes mycelium with crushed glass—a product that would avoid the need for Stamets’s termite-killing fungi).

			The potential of mycelial materials has not gone unnoticed. The designer Stella McCartney is working with fungal leather grown using Ecovative’s methods. Ecovative has a close relationship with IKEA, who are developing ways to replace their polystyrene packaging with a mycelial alternative. Researchers at NASA have taken an interest in “mycotecture” and its potential role in growing structures on the moon. Ecovative has just received a $10 million research and development contract from DARPA, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, a wing of the US military. DARPA is interested in growing barracks out of mycelium that repair themselves when damaged and decompose when their job is done. Growing housing for soldiers hadn’t been part of Bayer’s original vision, but these are adaptable techniques. “We can use these methods to grow relief shelters in disaster zones,” Bayer pointed out. “Using mycelium, you can grow a lot of housing for a lot of people at really low cost.”

			 			The basic idea is simple. Mycelium weaves itself into a dense fabric. The living mycelium is then dried into a dead material. The final product depends on how the mycelium is encouraged to grow. The bricks and packaging material are formed as mycelium “runs” through a slurry of damp sawdust packed into molds. The flexible materials are made from pure mycelium. Tan it, and you get leather. Dry it, and you get a foam that can be used to make anything from insoles for sports shoes to dock floats. Whereas McCoy and Stamets tempt fungi into new metabolic behaviors, Bayer tempts them into new growth forms. Mycelium can always be trusted to pour itself into its environment, whether it be a puddle of neurotoxin or a mold shaped like a lampshade.

			Bayer and I pushed our way through a set of doors and entered a hangar large enough to build an airplane in. Wood chips and other raw materials slithered down chutes into mixing drums where they were combined in ratios digitally controlled via banks of computer screens. Twenty-foot-long Archimedes’ screws trammeled streams of sawdust through heating and cooling chambers at rates of half a ton an hour. Towering stacks of plastic molds were wheeled between growth chambers and ten-meter-high drying racks. The chambers were digitally controlled microclimates—light, humidity, temperature, oxygen, and carbon dioxide levels all varied in carefully programmed cycles. It was the industrial human equivalent of a Macrotermes termite mound.

			Like Ecovative’s growth facility, Macrotermes mounds are carefully regulated microclimates, built around the requirements of the fungus. By opening and closing tunnels within a system of chimneys and galleries, termites are able to regulate temperature, moisture, and levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide. In the middle of the Sahara, termites can create the cool, damp conditions that allow the fungus to thrive.

			 			As in Macrotermes mounds, the fungi grown at Ecovative are species of white rot fungi. Most products are grown from Ganoderma mycelium, the species that fruits into reishi mushrooms. Some use Pleurotus, and others Trametes, which fruits into turkey tail mushrooms. It was Pleurotus that McCoy had trained to digest glyphosate and cigarette butts. It was Trametes that Stamets’s collaborators had trained to digest the toxic precursor to VX gas. Just as different fungal strains vary in their willingness to break down toxic nerve agents or glyphosate, different strains vary in how fast they grow and what sort of material their mycelium will make.

			Ecovative holds a patent on its process and grows more than four hundred tons of furniture and packaging every year, but its business model does not depend on it being the primary producer of mycelial materials. There are people and organizations licensed to use Ecovative’s Grow It Yourself (GIY) kits in thirty-one countries, producing everything from furniture to surfboards. Lighting is popular (the MushLume lamp has recently launched). A designer in the Netherlands is making mycelial slippers. The US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration replaced the plastic foam in the buoyant rings used to float tsunami-detection devices with a mycelial alternative.

			One of the more ambitious visions for building with mycelium is Fungal Architectures, or FUNGAR. FUNGAR is an international consortium of scientists and designers who intend to create a building made entirely of fungus, combining mycelial composites with fungal “computing circuits” that will detect and respond to light levels, temperature, and pollution. One of the lead researchers is Andrew Adamatzky, of the Unconventional Computing Laboratory, the researcher who proposes that mycelial networks can be harnessed to compute information using electrical impulses that pass along their hyphae. Mycelial networks only generate electrical impulses when they are alive, a problem Adamatzky hopes to overcome by encouraging living mycelium to absorb electrically conductive particles. Once killed and preserved, these mycelial networks will create electrical circuits consisting of mycelial wires, transistors, and capacitors—“a computing network that will fill every cubic millimeter of the building.”

			 			Walking around Ecovative’s production facility, it’s hard to escape the feeling that a handful of white rot fungal species are doing very well out of this arrangement. Sure, they are killed before the materials are used. But only after their appetites have been fulfilled. And after they have been introduced, for yet another time, into hundreds of pounds of freshly pasteurized sawdust. Like McCoy and the radical mycologists, who literally—and figuratively—spread spores around the world, Ecovative serves as a global dispersal system for a number of fungal species. The fungi are at once a “technology” and partners with humans in a new type of relationship.

			It’s too early to say where the relationships being forged at Ecovative will end up. Confronted with the problem of how to access the energy in plant matter, Macrotermes termites have been cultivating huge quantities of white rot fungi in purpose-built production facilities for thirty million years. Macrotermes and Termitomyces have lived with one another for so long that neither can survive without the other. Whether or not mycofabrication will draw humans into a codependent symbiosis remains to be seen, but already it’s clear that once more, a global crisis is turning into a suite of fungal opportunities. Yet again, human waste streams are being reimagined in terms of fungal appetites. Some trends go viral. I started to reflect on what it would mean to go fungal.



* * *



			—

			IF ANYONE KNOWS about going fungal, it’s Paul Stamets. I have often wondered whether he has been infected with a fungus that fills him with mycological zeal—and an irrepressible urge to persuade humans that fungi are keen to partner with us in new and peculiar ways. I went to visit him at his home on the west coast of Canada. The house is balanced on a granite bluff, looking out to sea. The roof is suspended on beams that look like mushroom gills. A Star Trek fan since the age of twelve, Stamets christened his new house Starship Agarikon—agarikon is another name for Laricifomes officinalis, a medicinal wood-rotting fungus that grows in the forests of the Pacific Northwest.

			 			I’ve known Stamets since I was a teenager, and he has done a lot to inspire my own interest in fungi. Every time I see him I’m met with a flurry of electrifying fungal news flashes. Within minutes his mycological patter picks up speed, and he leaps between bulletins almost faster than he can talk, a ceaseless torrent of fungal enthusiasm. In his world, fungal solutions run amok. Give him an insoluble problem and he’ll toss you a new way it can be decomposed, poisoned, or healed by a fungus. Much of the time, he wears a hat made from amadou—a feltlike material produced from the fruiting body of the tinder fungus, or Fomes fomentarius, another white rot fungus. It carries fitting associations. Amadou has been used by humans as a firestarter for thousands of years—it was carried by the Iceman, the five-thousand-year-old corpse preserved in glacial ice. As a tool of —thermal—combustion, it is one of the most ancient examples of human radical mycology currently known.

			Not long before I arrived, Stamets had been contacted by the creative team behind the TV series Star Trek: Discovery, who wanted to know more about his work. He had agreed to brief them on the ways that fungi could be used to save worlds. Sure enough, Star Trek: Discovery, which premiered the next year, was laced with mycological themes. A new character was introduced, a brilliant astromycologist called Lieutenant Paul Stamets, who uses fungi to develop powerful technologies that can be deployed to save humanity in a fight against a series of terminal threats. The Star Trek team has taken plenty of license, though they hardly needed to. By tapping into intergalactic mycelial networks—“an infinite number of roads, leading everywhere”—(the fictional) Stamets and his team work out how to travel in the “mycelial plane” faster than the speed of light. Following his first mycelial immersion, Stamets comes to, dazed and transformed. “I’ve spent my whole life trying to grasp the essence of mycelium. And now I do. I saw the network. An entire universe of possibilities I never dreamed existed.”

			One of the problems (the real) Stamets hoped to address by collaborating with the Star Trek team is the neglected state of mycology. Art imitates life and life imitates art. Fictional astromycologist heroes might be able to shape the nonfictional future of fungal knowledge by inspiring a generation of young people to get excited by fungi. For (the real) Stamets, a surge of interest in fungi could fuel the development of mycological technologies that might “help save the planet that’s in jeopardy.”



				 					Oyster mushroom, Pleurotus ostreatus



			When I showed up at Starship Agarikon, I found Stamets sitting on the deck fiddling around with a mason jar and a blue plastic dish. It was the prototype for a bee feeder he had invented. The jar dribbled sugar water laced with fungal extracts into the dish, and bees crawled through a chute to get to it. It was his latest venture; a seventh way that mushrooms could help save the world. Even by Stamets’s standards, this project was a big headline. His latest study, co-authored with entomologists at the Washington State University bee lab, had been accepted by the prestigious journal Nature Scientific Reports. He and his team had shown that extracts of certain white rot fungi could be used to reduce bee mortality dramatically.

			About a third of global agricultural output depends on pollination from animals, particularly honeybees, and the precipitous decline in bee populations is one of the many pressing threats to humanity. A number of factors contribute to the syndrome known as colony collapse disorder. Widespread use of insecticides is one. Habitat loss is another. The most insidious problem, however, is the varroa mite, appropriately named Varroa destructor. Varroa mites are parasites that suck fluid from bees’ bodies and are vectors for a range of deadly viruses.

			 			Wood-rotting fungi are a rich source of antiviral compounds, many of which have long been used as medicines, particularly in China. After 9/11, Stamets collaborated with the US National Institutes of Health and Department of Defense in Project BioShield, a search for compounds that could be used to fight viral storms unleashed by biological terrorists. Of the thousands of compounds tested, some of Stamets’s extracts from wood-rotting fungi had the strongest activity against a number of deadly viruses, including smallpox, herpes, and flu. He had been producing these extracts for human consumption for several years—it is largely these products that have made Fungi Perfecti into a multimillion-dollar business. But the idea of using them to treat bees was a more recent brain wave.

			The effects of the fungal extracts on the bees’ viral infections were unambiguous. Adding a one percent extract of amadou (or Fomes) and reishi (Ganoderma, the species used to grow materials at Ecovative) to bees’ sugar water reduced deformed wing virus eighty-fold. Fomes extracts reduced levels of Lake Sinai virus nearly ninety-fold, and Ganoderma extracts reduced it forty-five-thousand-fold. Steve Sheppard, a professor of entomology at Washington State University and one of Stamets’s collaborators on the study, observed that he had not encountered any other substance that could extend the life of bees to this extent.

			Stamets told me how he had come up with the idea. He was daydreaming. All of a sudden, separate lines of thought came together and hit him “like a lightning bolt.” If fungal extracts had antiviral properties, then maybe they’d help reduce the viral load of bees—and yes, in fact, he remembered that in the late 1980s, he had watched bees from his hives visiting a pile of rotting wood chips in his garden, moving the chips aside to feed on the mycelium underneath. “Oh my god.” Stamets woke up. “I think I know how to save the bees.” It was a big moment, even for someone who has spent decades dreaming up fungal solutions to obstinate problems.

			 			It is easy to see why Star Trek borrowed Stamets. His narrative style is straight out of an American blockbuster movie. Many of his accounts feature fungal heroes, poised to save the planet from almost certain doom. Viral storms of unprecedented proportions threaten global food security. Critical pollinators struggle on under grave threat from the virus-bearing parasites, poised to inflict global famine. The future of the world hangs in the balance. But wait. Is that…? Yes! Once again, fungi come to the rescue with the help of their human accomplice, Stamets.

			Will antiviral compounds produced by wood-rotting fungi really save the bees? Stamets’s findings are promising, but it’s too early to say whether the fungal extracts will translate into fewer collapsed colonies in the long term. Viruses are just one of many problems that bees face. Whether the fungal antivirals perform equally well in other countries and contexts isn’t known. More important, to save bee populations, Stamets’s solution has to be widely adopted, a feat he hopes to accomplish by recruiting the efforts of millions of citizen scientists.



* * *



			—

			I TRAVELED DOWN to the Olympic Peninsula in Washington State to visit Stamets’s production facility. Headquarters is a cluster of large hangar-like sheds, surrounded by woods, several kilometers off the beaten track. This was where Stamets grew and extracted the fungi used in the study. It was where production was soon to be ramped up to bring a product to market for widespread use. In the few months after the bee study had been published, he had received tens of thousands of requests for the BeeMushroomed Feeder. Unable to keep up with demand, Stamets plans to open source the 3-D printed design in the hope that others will start to manufacture them.

			I met one of Stamets’s directors of operations who had agreed to show me around. There was a strict dress code: no shoes, a lab coat, and a hairnet—beard nets were also provided. We kitted up and passed through a special set of double doors designed to reduce the inflow of contaminant-filled air from outside.

			 			We entered the fruiting rooms, which were warm and damp, the air thick and cloying. There were ranks of shelves lined with clear plastic growing bags stitched solid with mycelium sporting all sorts of startling protrusions, from woody reishi mushrooms with their shiny chestnut scalps, to lion’s mane tumbling out of the bags like delicate cream-colored corals. In the reishi fruiting room, the air was so thick with spores I could taste their soft, damp bitterness. After just a couple of minutes my hands were dusted a cappuccino brown.

			Once again, humans were going out of their way to divert tons of food into fungal networks. Once again, a global crisis was turning into a set of fungal opportunities. Like the challenge faced by Pleurotus mycelium paused at the edge of a puddle of toxic waste, radical mycological solutions are less about inventing than remembering. Somewhere in the Pleurotus genome there is probably an enzyme that will do the job. Perhaps it has done the job before. Perhaps it hasn’t but can be repurposed to serve a new cause. Similarly, somewhere in the history of life there may be a fungal ability or relationship that can inspire a new old solution to one of our many dire problems. I thought of the bee story. Stamets’s eureka moment happened when he remembered something that he had seen decades earlier—bees appearing to medicate themselves using fungi. Stamets didn’t discover the idea of curing bees using fungi. Bees did, we presume, during a biochemical squabble with viruses in a damp corner of their shared history. Somewhere deep in the psycho-spiritual compost heap of his dream world, Stamets metabolized an old radical mycological solution into a new one.

			I walked into the growing rooms, packed with shelving units three meters tall. This was the fungus comb. Thousands of bags charged with soft blocks of furry mycelium filled the space. Some were white, some off-yellow, some a pale orange. If the fans filtering the air had stopped, I felt that I might have heard the crackling of millions of miles of mycelium running through its food. Upon harvest, the bags of mycelium were extracted in large barrels full of alcohol to produce the cure for the bees. Like so many radical mycological solutions, it is still uncertain; the first tender steps toward the possibility of mutually assured survival, symbiosis in its earliest infancy.





8.


			MAKING SENSE OF FUNGI




It matters which stories tell stories, which concepts think concepts…which systems systematize systems.

				—DONNA HARAWAY



			THE FUNGI THAT share the most intimate history with humans are yeasts. Yeasts live on our skin, in our lungs, and in our gastrointestinal tract, and line our orifices. Our bodies have evolved to regulate these populations and have been doing so for long stretches of our evolutionary history. For thousands of years, too, human cultures have evolved sophisticated ways to regulate yeast populations outside the confines of our bodies, in barrels and jars. Today, yeasts are some of the most widely used model organisms in cell biology and genetics: They are the simplest envelopes of eukaryotic life, and many human genes have equivalents in yeasts. In 1996, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the species of yeast used in brewing and baking, became the first eukaryotic organism to have its genome sequenced. Since 2010, more than a quarter of Nobel Prizes for Physiology or Medicine have been awarded for work on yeast. Yet it was only in the nineteenth century that yeasts were discovered to be microscopic organisms.

			Exactly when humans first started to work with yeast remains an open question. The first unambiguous evidence dates from around nine thousand years ago in China, but microscopic starch grains have been unearthed on stone tools in Kenya that date from a hundred thousand years ago. The shape of the starch grains suggests that the tools had been used to process the African wine palm, Hyphaene petersiana, which is still used to make liquor. Given that any sugary liquid left for longer than a day will start to ferment by itself, it is probable that humans have been brewing for far longer.

			 			Yeasts oversee a transformation of sugar into alcohol; the anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss argued that they also oversaw one of the most dramatic cultural transformations in human history: the passage of humans from hunter-gatherers to agriculturalists. He considered mead—a drink made from fermented honey—to be the first alcoholic beverage and imagined the transition from “natural” fermentation to cultural “brewing” using the example of a hollow tree. The alcohol was part of nature if the honey had fermented “by itself,” and part of culture if humans had placed the honey to ferment in an artificially hollowed-out trunk. (It is an interesting distinction; by extension, Macrotermes termites and leaf-cutter ants made the transition from nature to culture tens of millions of years before humans.)

			Lévi-Strauss may or may not be correct about mead. However, the yeast resembling modern brewing yeast arose around the same time as domesticated goats and sheep. The origins of agriculture around twelve thousand years ago—the so-called Neolithic transition—can be understood, at least in part, as a cultural response to yeast. It was either for bread or for beer that humans started to give up their nomadic lifestyles and settle into sedentary societies (the beer-before-bread hypothesis has steadily gained traction among scholars since the 1980s). And whether in bread or in beer, yeasts were the primary beneficiaries of humans’ earliest agricultural efforts. In the preparation of either, humans feed yeast before they feed themselves. The cultural developments associated with agriculture—from fields of crops, to cities, accumulation of wealth, grain stores, new diseases—form part of our shared history with yeast. In many ways, you might argue, yeasts have domesticated us.



* * *



			—

			 			MY OWN RELATIONSHIP with yeast underwent a transformation at university. One of my neighbors had a boyfriend who visited regularly. Without fail, soon after he arrived, large plastic mixing bowls filled with fluid and covered with cling film would appear on the kitchen windowsills. It was wine, he told me. He had learned how to make alcohol from a friend who had spent time in prison in French Guyana. I was fascinated and soon had a collection of mixing bowls of my own. It turned out to be remarkably simple. Yeast does almost all the work. It likes to be warm, but not too hot, and reproduces most happily in the dark. Fermentation starts when you add the yeast to a warm sugary solution. In the absence of oxygen, yeast converts sugar into alcohol and releases carbon dioxide. Fermentation stops when the yeast runs out of sugar or dies of alcohol poisoning.



				 					Brewer’s yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae



			I filled a mixing bowl with apple juice, sprinkled in a couple of teaspoons of dried baker’s yeast, and left it by the heater in my bedroom. I watched as swathes of froth appeared and the plastic covering puffed out into a bubble. Now and then a small jet of gas would escape, carrying increasingly alcoholic fumes. After three weeks I could contain my curiosity no longer and took the bowl along to a party where it disappeared in a matter of minutes. The brew was drinkable, if a little sweet, and judging by its effects had an alcohol percentage around that of a strong beer.

			Things escalated quickly. After a couple of years I had several large brewing containers, including a fifty-liter saucepan, and had started to brew drinks from recipes I found documented in historical texts. There were spiced meads, from The Closet of Sir Kenelm Digby, published in 1669, and medieval “gruit” ales made with bog myrtle that I harvested from a nearby marsh. Soon followed hawthorn wines, nettle beers, and a medicinal ale recorded in the seventeenth century by Dr. William Butler, the physician to James I, and said to be a remedy for everything from “London plague” to measles and “diverse other diseases.” My room was lined with barrels of bubbling liquids and my wardrobe filled up with bottles.

			 			I brewed the same fruit with cultures of yeast gathered from different places. Some were rich and savory. Some were cloudy and delicious. Others tasted of socks or turpentine. There was a fine line between foul and fragrant, but it didn’t matter. Brewing granted me access to the invisible worlds of these fungi, and I delighted in being able to taste the difference between yeasts gathered from apple skins or collected in plates of sugar water placed overnight on shelves in old libraries.

			The transformational power of yeast has long been personified as a divine energy, spirit, or god. How could it escape this treatment? Alcohol and inebriation are some of the oldest magics. An invisible force conjures wine from fruit, beer from grain, mead from nectar. These liquids alter our minds and have been enfolded within human cultures in many ways: from ritual feasting and statecraft, to a means to pay for labor. For just as long, they have been responsible for dissolving our senses, for wildness and ecstasy. Yeasts are both makers and breakers of human social orders.

			Ancient Sumerians—who left written beer recipes dating back five thousand years—worshipped a goddess of fermentation, Ninkasi. In The Egyptian Book of the Dead, prayers are addressed to “givers of bread and beer.” Among the Ch’orti’ people in South America, the onset of fermentation was understood as “the birth of the good spirit.” The ancient Greeks had Dionysus—the god of wine, winemaking, madness, drunkenness, and domesticated fruit in general—a personification of the power of alcohol both to forge and corrode human cultural categories.

			Today, yeasts have become biotechnological tools engineered to produce drugs from insulin to vaccines. Bolt Threads, a company working with Ecovative to produce mycelial leather, has genetically engineered yeasts to produce spider silk. Researchers are working to modify yeast metabolisms to allow them to make sugar from woody plant material for use in biofuels. One team is working on Sc2.0, a human-designed synthetic yeast built from the bottom up—an artificial life-form that engineers will be able to program to produce any number of compounds. In all these instances, yeast and its transformational power blurs the line between nature and culture, between an organism that self-organizes and a machine that is built.

			 			In my experimentations, I learned that the brewer’s art involves a subtle negotiation with the cultures of yeast. Fermentation is domesticated decomposition—rot rehoused. If successful, the brew would end up on the right side of the line. But as is so often the case with fungi, nothing is for certain. By attending to cleanliness and temperature and ingredients—all important constraints on the possible routes that fermentation could take—I could lure the fermentation in promising directions, but there could be no coercion. For this reason the outcome was always surprising.

			Many of the historical brews were fun to drink. The meads brought on laughter. The gruit ales made people talkative. Dr. Butler’s ale induced a peculiar golden heaviness. Some were bottled havoc. Whatever their effect, I was fascinated by the process of brewing a historical text into being. Old brewing recipes are records of how yeasts have etched themselves into human lives and minds over the last few hundred years. In all the pages of these books, yeasts are a silent companion, an invisible participant in human culture. Ultimately, these recipes were stories that made sense of how substances decomposed. They reminded me that it matters what stories we use to make sense of the world. The story you hear about grain determines whether you end up with bread or beer. The story you hear about milk determines whether you end up with yogurt or cheese. The story you hear about apples determines whether you end up with sauce or cider.



* * *



			—

			YEASTS ARE MICROSCOPIC, which makes it easy for a thick narrative sediment to build up around their lives. Fungi that grow mushrooms have generally been understood in simpler terms. Mushrooms, it has long been known, might be delicious but might also poison you, cure you, feed you, or give you visions. For hundreds of years, East Asian poets have written rhapsodic verse about mushrooms and their flavors. “Oh matsutake: / The excitement before finding them,” enthused Yamaguchi Sodo in seventeenth-century Japan. European authors, on the whole, have been more dubious. Albertus Magnus, in his thirteenth-century herbal treatise De Vegetabilibus, warned that mushrooms “of a moist humour” might “stop up in the head the mental passages of the creatures [that eat them] and bring on insanity.” John Gerard, writing in 1597, warned his readers to stay clear entirely: “Few mushrooms are good to be eaten and most of them do suffocate and strangle the eater. Therefore, I give my advice unto those that love such strange and new fangled meates to beware of licking honey among thorns lest the sweetness of the one do countervaile the sharpness and pricking of the other.” But humans have never stayed clear.

			 			In 1957, Gordon Wasson—who first popularized magic mushrooms in the 1957 article in Life—and his wife, Valentina, developed a binary system by which all cultures could be categorized as either “mycophilic” (fungus-loving) or “mycophobic” (fungus-fearing). Present-day cultural attitudes to mushrooms were, the Wassons speculated, a “latter-day echo” of ancient psychedelic mushroom cults. Mycophilic cultures were descendants of those who had worshipped mushrooms. Mycophobic cultures were descendants of those who had considered their power diabolical. Mycophilic attitudes might lead Yamaguchi Sodo to write poems in praise of matsutake, or urge Terence McKenna to proselytize about the benefits of taking large doses of psilocybin mushrooms. Mycophobic attitudes might fuel a moral panic that leads to their illegalization, or prompt Albertus Magnus and John Gerard to issue stark warnings about the dangers of these “new fangled meates.” Both positions recognize the power of mushrooms to affect people’s lives. Both make sense of this power in different ways.

			We shoehorn organisms into questionable categories all the time. It’s one of the ways we make sense of them. In the nineteenth century, bacteria and fungi were classified as plants. Today both are recognized as belonging to their own distinct kingdoms of life, although it wasn’t until the mid-1960s that they won their independence. For much of recorded human history there has been little consensus over what fungi actually are.

			 			Theophrastus, a student of Aristotle, wrote about truffles—but could only say what they were not: He described them as having no root, no stem, no branch, no bud, no leaf, no flower, no fruit; nor bark, nor pith, nor fibers, nor veins. In the opinion of other classical writers, mushrooms were spontaneously generated by lightning strikes. For others, they were outgrowths of the Earth, or “excrescences.” Carl Linnaeus, the eighteenth-century Swedish botanist who devised the modern taxonomic system, wrote in 1751 that “The order of Fungi is still Chaos, a scandal of art, no botanist knowing what is a Species and what is a Variety.”

			To this day, fungi slip around the systems of classification we build for them. The Linnaean system of taxonomy was designed for animals and plants, and doesn’t easily cope with fungi, lichens, or bacteria. A single species of fungus can grow into forms that bear no resemblance to each other whatsoever. Many species have no distinctive characteristics that can be used to define their identity. Advances in gene sequencing make it possible to order fungi into groups that share an evolutionary history, rather than groups based on physical traits. However, deciding where one species starts and another stops based on genetic data presents as many problems as it solves. Within the mycelium of a single fungal “individual” there can exist multiple genomes. Within the DNA extracted from a single pinch of dust, there might be tens of thousands of unique genetic signatures, but no way to assign them to known fungal groups. In 2013, in a paper called “Against the naming of fungi,” the mycologist Nicholas Money went so far as to suggest that the concept of fungal species should be abandoned altogether.

			Systems of classification are just one of the ways people make sense of the world. Out-and-out value judgments are another. Charles Darwin’s granddaughter Gwen Raverat described the disgust evoked in her aunt Etty—Darwin’s daughter—by the stinkhorn mushroom, Phallus impudicus. Stinkhorns are notorious for their phallic form. They also produce a pungent-smelling slime that attracts the flies that help disperse their spores. In 1952, Raverat reminisced:

			 			In our native woods there grows a kind of toadstool called in the vernacular The Stinkhorn (though in Latin it bears a grosser name). The name is justified for the fungus can be hunted by scent alone, and this was Aunt Etty’s great invention. Armed with a basket and a pointed stick, and wearing a special hunting cloak and gloves, she would sniff her way through the wood, pausing here and there, her nostrils twitching when she caught a whiff of her prey. Then with a deadly pounce she would fall upon her victim and poke his putrid carcass into her basket. At the end of the day’s sport the catch was brought back and burnt in the deepest secrecy on the drawing room fire with the door locked—because of the morals of the maids.



			Crusade or fetish? Mycophobe or closet mycophile? It isn’t always easy to tell the difference. For someone repulsed by the stinkhorns, Aunt Etty spent more time than most seeking them out. In her “sport,” she would no doubt have performed better than any number of flies in spreading the stinkhorns’ spores. The noisome odor, presumably irresistible to the flies, proved irresistible to Aunt Etty as well—although her attraction was refracted through distaste. Motivated by her horror, she enveloped stinkhorns within a Victorian morality and became a passionate recruit to a fungal cause.

			The ways that we try to make sense of fungi often tell us as much about ourselves as the fungi that we try to understand. The yellow staining mushroom (Agaricus xanthodermus) is described in most field guides as poisonous. A keen mushroom hunter with a large mycological library once told me about an old guidebook he owned, in which the same mushroom was described as “delicious, when fried,” although the author did add as an afterthought that the mushroom “may cause a light coma in those of weak constitution.” How you make sense of the yellow staining mushroom depends on your physiological makeup. Although poisonous to most people, some are able to eat it without ill effect. How it is described will depend on the physiology of the person doing the describing.



* * *



			—

			 			THIS KIND OF bias is particularly apparent in discussions of symbiotic relationships, which have been understood in human terms since the word was first coined in the late nineteenth century. The analogies used to make sense of lichens and mycorrhizal fungi say it all. Master and slave, cheater and cheated, humans and domesticated organisms, men and women, the diplomatic relationships between nations…The metaphors change over time, but attempts to dress up more-than-human relationships in human categories continue to the present day.

			As the historian Jan Sapp explained to me, the concept of symbiosis behaves like a prism through which our own social values are often dispersed. Sapp is fast-talking and has a sharp eye for ironic detail. The history of symbiosis is his specialty. He has spent decades with biologists—in labs, conferences, symposiums, and jungles—as they’ve wrestled with questions about how organisms interact with one another. A good friend of Lynn Margulis and Joshua Lederberg, he has watched from the front row as the modern science of microbiology has “gone big.” The politics of symbiosis have always been fraught. Is nature fundamentally competitive or cooperative? A lot turns on this question. For many, it changes the way we understand ourselves. It isn’t surprising that these issues remain a conceptual and ideological tinderbox.

			The dominant narrative in the United States and western Europe since the development of evolutionary theory in the late nineteenth century was one of conflict and competition, and it mirrored views of human social progress within an industrial capitalist system. Examples of organisms cooperating with one another to their mutual benefit “remained close to the margins of polite biological society,” in Sapp’s words. Mutualistic relationships, such as those that give rise to lichens, or plants’ relationships with mycorrhizal fungi, were curious exceptions to the rule—where they were acknowledged to exist at all.

			Opposition to this view didn’t fall neatly down East–West lines. Nonetheless, the ideas of mutual aid and cooperation in evolution were more prominent in Russia than in western European evolutionary circles. The strongest riposte to the dog-eat-dog vision of “Nature, red in tooth and claw” came from the Russian anarchist Peter Kropotkin in his bestselling book Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution, in 1902. In it, he stresses that “sociability” was as much a part of nature as the struggle for existence. Based on his interpretation of nature, he advocated a clear message: “Don’t compete!” “Practice mutual aid! That is the surest means of giving to each and to all the greatest safety, the best guarantee of existence and progress, bodily, intellectual, and moral.”

			 			For much of the twentieth century, discussion of symbiotic interactions remained loaded with political charge. Sapp points out that the Cold War prompted biologists to take more seriously the question of coexistence in the world at large. The first international conference on symbiosis was held in London in 1963, six months after the Cuban Missile Crisis had brought the world to the brink of nuclear war. This was no accident. The editors of the conference proceedings commented that “the pressing problems of coexistence in world affairs may have influenced the Committee in their choice of subject for this year’s Symposium.”

			It is well-established in the sciences that metaphors can help to generate new ways of thinking. The biochemist Joseph Needham described a working analogy as a “net of coordinates” that could be used to arrange an otherwise formless mass of information, much as a sculptor might use a wire frame to provide support for wet clay. The evolutionary biologist Richard Lewontin pointed out that it is impossible to “do the work of science” without using metaphors, given that almost “the entire body of modern science is an attempt to explain phenomena that cannot be experienced directly by human beings.” Metaphors and analogies, in turn, come laced with human stories and values, meaning that no discussion of scientific ideas—this one included—can be free of cultural bias.

			Today, the study of shared mycorrhizal networks is one of the fields most commonly beset with political baggage. Some portray these systems as a form of socialism by which the wealth of the forest can be redistributed. Others take inspiration from mammalian family structures and parental care, with young trees nourished by their fungal connections to older and larger “mother trees.” Some describe networks in terms of “biological markets,” in which plants and fungi are portrayed as rational economic individuals trading on the floor of an ecological stock exchange, engaging in “sanctions,” “strategic trading investments,” and “market gains.”

			 			The wood wide web is a no less anthropomorphic term. Not only are humans the only organisms to build machines but the Internet and World Wide Web are some of the most overtly politicized technologies that exist today. Using machine metaphors to understand other organisms can be as problematic as borrowing concepts from human social lives. In reality, organisms grow; machines are built. Organisms continually remake themselves; machines are maintained by humans. Organisms self-organize; machines are organized by humans. Machine metaphors are sets of stories and tools that have helped make countless discoveries of life-changing importance. But they aren’t scientific facts and can lead us into trouble when prioritized over all other types of story. If we understand organisms to be machines, we’ll be more likely to treat them as such.

			Only with hindsight can we see which metaphors are most helpful. Today it would be absurd to try to bundle all fungi into categories of “agents of disease” or “parasites” as was common in the late nineteenth century. Yet before lichens had led Albert Frank to coin the word symbiosis, there was no other way to describe relationships between different types of organism. In recent years the narratives surrounding symbiotic relationships have become more nuanced. Toby Spribille—the researcher who found that lichens consist of more than two players—makes the case that lichens have to be understood as systems. Lichens don’t seem to be the product of a fixed partnership, as had long been thought. Rather, they arise out of an array of possible relationships between a number of different players. For Spribille, the relationships that underpin lichens have become a question, rather than an answer known in advance.

			Similarly, plants and mycorrhizal fungi are no longer thought of as behaving either mutualistically or parasitically. Even in the relationship between a single mycorrhizal fungus and a single plant, give and take is fluid. Instead of a rigid dichotomy, researchers describe a mutualism-to-parasitism continuum. Shared mycorrhizal networks can facilitate cooperation and also competition. Nutrients can move through the soil via fungal connections, but so can poisons. The narrative possibilities are richer. We have to shift perspectives and find comfort in—or just endure—uncertainty.

			 			Nonetheless, some still relish politicizing the debate. One biologist in particular, Sapp relayed with amusement, “calls me the biological left, and himself the biological right.” They had been discussing the idea of biological individuals. In Sapp’s view, the developments in microbial sciences had made it hard to define the boundaries of an individual organism. For his detractor, who had positioned himself on the biological right, neat individuals had to exist. Modern capitalist thought is founded on the idea of rational individuals acting in their own interest. Without individuals, everything comes crashing down. From his perspective, Sapp’s argument belied a fondness for collectives and an underlying socialist tendency. Sapp laughed. “Some people just like to make artificial dichotomies.”



* * *



			—

			IN BRAIDING SWEETGRASS, the biologist Robin Wall Kimmerer writes about a word in the Native American language of Potawotomi, puhpowee. Puhpowee translates as “the force which causes mushrooms to push up from the earth overnight.” Kimmerer recalls that she later learned that “puhpowee is used not only for mushrooms but also for certain other shafts that rise mysteriously in the night.” Is it anthropomorphic to describe a mushroom’s emergence in the same language used to describe human male sexual arousal? Or is it mycomorphic to describe human male sexual arousal in the same language used to describe a mushroom’s growth? Which way does the arrow point? If you say that a plant “learns,” “decides,” “communicates,” or “remembers,” are you humanizing the plant or vegetalizing a set of human concepts? The human concept might take on new meanings when applied to a plant, just as plant concepts might take on new meanings when applied to a human: blossom, bloom, robust, root, sappy, radical…

			Natasha Myers—the anthropologist who introduced the word involution to describe the tendency for organisms to associate with one another—points out that Charles Darwin seemed quite ready to vegetalize himself, to practice “phytomorphism.” Writing about orchid flowers in 1862, Darwin observed: “The position of the antennae in this Catasetum may be compared with that of a man with his left arm raised and bent so that his hand stands in front of his chest, and with his right arm crossing his body lower down so that the fingers project just beyond his left side.”

			 			Is Darwin humanizing the flower, or is he being vegetalized by the flower? He is describing plant features in human terms, a sure sign of anthropomorphism. But he is also reimagining the male body—including his own—in floral form, suggesting that he is open to exploring the flower’s anatomy on its own terms. This is an old story. It is hard to make sense of something without a little part of that something rubbing off on you. Sometimes it is intentional. Radical Mycology, for example, is an organization without a well-defined shape. This is no accident. Its founder, Peter McCoy, points out that fungi have the power to change the way we think and imagine. Trees crop up in everything from our depictions of genealogy and relationship (whether human, biological, or linguistic families), to the tree-like data structures in computer science, to “dendrites” in nervous systems (from dendron, the Greek for “tree”). Why shouldn’t mycelium? Radical Mycology organizes itself using decentralized mycelial logics. Regional networks loosely associate with the larger movement. Periodically, the Radical Mycology network coalesces into a fruiting body, such as the Radical Mycology Convergence I attended in Oregon. How different would our societies and institutions look if we thought of fungi, rather than animals or plants, as “typical” life-forms?

			Sometimes we imitate the world without conscious effort. Dog owners often look like their dogs; biologists often come to behave like their subject matter. Since the term “symbiosis” was first coined by Frank in the late nineteenth century, researchers studying the relationships between organisms have been coaxed into forming unusual interdisciplinary collaborations. As Sapp pointed out to me, it was an unwillingness to make daring leaps across institutional boundaries that contributed to the neglect of symbiotic relationships for much of the twentieth century. As the sciences became increasingly professionalized, disciplinary chasms separated geneticists from embryologists, botanists from zoologists, microbiologists from physiologists.

			 			Symbiotic interactions reach across species boundaries; studies of symbiotic interactions must reach across disciplinary boundaries. This is no less the case today. “Sharing resources for mutual benefit: crosstalk between disciplines deepens the understanding of mycorrhizal symbioses…” So began a write-up of the international conference on mycorrhizal biology in 2018. The study of mycorrhizal fungi requires that an academic symbiosis form between mycologists and botanists. The study of the bacteria that live in fungal hyphae requires symbiotic interactions between mycologists and bacteriologists.

			I never behave more like a fungus than when I’m investigating them, and quickly enter into academic mutualisms based on an exchange of favors and data. In Panama I acted like the growing front of mycorrhizal mycelium, up to my elbows in red mud for days on end. I anxiously ferried large coolers of samples to other countries through customs, X-ray checks, and sniffer dogs. I peered down microscopes in Germany, pored over fungal lipid profiles in Sweden, and extracted and sequenced fungal DNA in England. I sent gigabytes of data coughed out of a machine in Cambridge to be processed in Sweden, and then on to collaborators in the United States and Belgium. If my movements had left a trail behind them, they would have traced a complex network, complete with the bidirectional movement of information and resources. Like plants, my collaborators in Sweden and Germany got access to a greater volume of soil by associating with me. They were unable to travel to the tropics themselves, so I extended their reach. In return, like a fungus, I got access to funds and techniques that would have otherwise remained out of my reach. My collaborators in Panama benefited from the grants and technical expertise of my colleagues in England. Similarly, my colleagues in England benefited from the grants and expertise of my Panamanian collaborators. To study a flexible network, I had to assemble a flexible network. It is a recurring theme: Look at the network, and it starts to look back at you.





* * *



			—

			“DRUNKENNESS,” THE FRENCH theorist Gilles Deleuze writes, is “a triumphant eruption of the plant in us.” It is no less the triumphant eruption of the fungus in us. Can intoxication help us rediscover parts of ourselves in the fungal world? Might there be ways to make sense of fungi by loosening our grip on our humanness, or finding in our humanness a bit of something else, something fungal? This something else might be a scrap or two left over from a time when we were more closely related to fungi. Or perhaps something that we have learned in our long and entangled history with these extraordinary creatures.

			About ten million years ago, the enzyme our bodies use to detoxify alcohol, known as alcohol dehydrogenase, or ADH4, underwent a single mutation that left it forty times more efficient. The mutation occurred in the last common ancestor we shared with gorillas, chimpanzees, and bonobos. Without a modified ADH4, even small quantities of alcohol are poisonous. With a modified ADH4, alcohol can be consumed safely and used by our bodies as a source of energy. Long before our ancestors became human, and long before we evolved stories to make cultural and spiritual sense of alcohol and the cultures of yeast that produce it, we evolved the enzyme to make metabolic sense of them.

			 			Why would the ability to metabolize alcohol arise so many millions of years before humans developed technologies of fermentation? Researchers point out that ADH4 upgraded at a time when our primate ancestors were spending less time in trees and adapting to life on the ground. The ability to metabolize alcohol, they speculate, played a crucial role in the ability of primates to make a living on the forest floor by opening up a new dietary niche: overripe, fermented fruit that had fallen from trees.

			The ADH4 mutation provides support for the “drunken monkey hypothesis,” proposed by the biologist Robert Dudley to explain the origins of humans’ fondness for alcohol. In this view, humans are tempted by alcohol because our primate ancestors were. The scent of alcohol produced by yeasts was a reliable way to find ripe fruit as it rotted on the ground. Both our human attraction to alcohol and the entire ecology of gods and goddesses that oversee fermentation and intoxication are remnants of a much more ancient fascination.

			Primates aren’t the only animals attracted by alcohol. Malaysian tree shrews—small mammals with feathery tails—climb into the flower buds of the bertram palm and drink fermented nectar in quantities that scaled to body weight would intoxicate a human. The plume of alcoholic vapors produced by yeasts attract the tree shrews to the palm flowers. Bertram palms depend on tree shrews to pollinate them, and their flower buds have evolved into specialized fermentation vessels—structures that harbor communities of yeast and encourage such rapid fermentation that their nectar froths and bubbles. Tree shrews for their part have evolved a remarkable ability to detoxify the alcohol and appear not to suffer from any negative effects of inebriation.

			The mutation in ADH4 helped our primate ancestors to extract energy from alcohol. In a twist on the drunken monkey hypothesis, humans continue to look for ways to extract energy from alcohol, although we burn it as biofuel in combustion engines rather than as metabolic fuel in our bodies. Billions of gallons of ethanol biofuels are produced every year from corn in the United States and sugarcane in Brazil. In the States, an area larger than the size of England is used to grow corn, which is processed and fed to yeast. The rate of conversion of grassland to biofuel crops is comparable to the rate of deforestation, by percentage of land cover, in Brazil, Malaysia, and Indonesia. The ecological consequences of the biofuel boom are far-reaching. Vast government subsidies are required; conversion of grassland into farmland releases large amounts of carbon into the atmosphere; huge quantities of fertilizer run off into streams and rivers and are responsible for the dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico. Once again, yeasts and the ambiguous power of the alcohol they produce is participating in human agricultural transformation.



* * *



			—

			 			INSPIRED BY THE drunken monkey hypothesis, I resolved to ferment some overripe fruit. This would be a way to consummate a narrative, to let it modify my perceptions of the world, to make decisions under the influence of it, to be intoxicated by it. Drunkenness may be the eruption of the fungus in us; this would be the eruption of a fungal story. How often stories change our perceptions, and how often we don’t notice.

			The idea occurred to me while on a tour of the Cambridge Botanical Gardens given by their charismatic director. In his company, clouds of stories emanated from even the most unremarkable shrub. One plant, a large apple tree near the entrance, stood out. It grew, we were told, from a cutting taken from a four-hundred-year-old apple tree in the garden of Isaac Newton’s family home, Woolsthorpe Manor. It was the only apple tree that grew there and was old enough to have been around when Newton formulated his theory of universal gravitation. If any tree had dropped an apple that inspired Newton, it was this one.

			Having been grown from a cutting, the tree in front of us was, the director reminded us, a clone of the famous tree. This made it, at least genetically, the same tree that had done the deed. Or rather, that would have done the deed if the deed had happened. Given that the apple story had no basis in firm fact, we were quickly assured, it was unlikely that an apple had been involved in the theory of gravitation at all. Nevertheless, this was far and away the most likely candidate for the tree that didn’t drop the apple that inspired the theory of gravitation.

			 			This wasn’t the only clone. The director informed us that there were two more: one on the site of Newton’s alchemical laboratory, at the front of Trinity College, and the other outside the math faculty. (It later transpired that there are even more—in the president’s garden at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, among other places.) The myth was strong enough to make three separate academic committees—known for their caution and indecision above all else—decide to plant the trees in auspicious places around the town. All the while, the official position remained unchanged: The story of Newton’s apple was apocryphal and had no basis in firm fact.

			As botanical theater goes, it doesn’t get much better. A plant’s involvement in one of the most significant theoretical breakthroughs in the history of Western thought was being affirmed and denied at the same time. Out of this ambiguity grew actual trees, with actual apples, that fell to the ground and rotted into a pungent alcoholic mess.

			The story of Newton’s apple is apocryphal because Newton himself left no written account of it. However, there are several versions of the story recorded by Newton’s contemporaries. The most detailed account was written by William Stukeley, a young fellow of the Royal Society and antiquarian best-known today for his works on Britain’s stone circles. In 1726, Stukeley recalled, he and Newton ate together in London:

			 				After dinner, the weather being warm, we went into the garden & drank thea under the shade of some apple tree; only he & myself…Amid other discourse, he told me, he was just in the same situation, as when formerly the notion of gravitation came into his mind. Why shd that apple always descend perpendicularly to the ground, thought he to himself; occasion’d by the fall of an apple, as he sat in contemplative mood. Why shd it not go sideways, or upward? But constantly to the Earth’s center? Assuredly the reason is, that the Earth draws it. There must be a drawing power in matter.



			The modern story of Newton’s apple is a story about a story about what Newton said. This is what made the trees so narratively rich. It was impossible to verify the story either way. In response to this quandary, the academics acted as if it were both true and false. The story shuttled in and out of legend. The trees were saddled with an impossible narrative, an example of the way nonhuman organisms stretch the seams of our categories to breaking point. Whether an apple had actually inspired Newton to derive his theory of gravitation had long ceased to matter. The trees grew; the story thrived.

			 			Politely, I asked the director if I could pick some apples from the tree. It hadn’t occurred to me that this might be a problem. We had been told that the apples—a rare variety called the Flower of Kent—were famously unpleasant to eat. It was something to do with their particular combination of sourness and bitterness, the director explained, a combination that some likened to Newton’s character in his later life. I was surprised to be met with a hard no, and asked why. “The apples have to be seen by the tourists to fall from the tree,” the director confessed apologetically, “to add verisimilitude to the myth.”

			Who was kidding whom? How could so many respectable people become so intoxicated by a story, so comforted by it, constrained by it, enraptured with it, blinded by it? Then again, how could they not be. Stories are told to modify our perceptions of the world, so it’s rare that they don’t do all these things to us. But it is uncommon to find a situation where the absurdity is so apparent, where a plant is made to clown for us quite so explicitly. I picked up one of the already fallen, decomposing apples, smelled the alcohol, and decided that this would be my rotting fruit.

			The trouble was that I had no way to press apples into juice. I looked online and read about an apple problem afflicting communities in a suburb of Cambridge. Residents’ apple trees overhanging the road were dropping their fruit into the street. Local youngsters used them as missiles. Windows had been broken and cars dented. In an inspired political gambit, a residents’ association had provided a community apple press to manage the problem and reduce waste. It appeared to have worked. Community violence was pressed into juice. Juice was fermented into cider. Cider was drunk into community spirit. The principle was sound. A human crisis was being decomposed by a fungus. In yet another way, humans were organizing themselves to divert waste into waiting fungal appetites. In turn, fungal metabolisms were acting back on human lives and culture. Beer, penicillin, psilocybin, LSD, biofuels…how many times had this happened before?

			 			I contacted the custodian of the press to ask for a turn. It was in high demand and had to be transferred directly from borrower to borrower. I was put in touch with a local vicar, who pulled up in a battered Volvo a couple of days later, the elegant device in tow. There were vicious-looking toothed cogs to mulch apples into a pulp, a large screw to apply pressure, and a spout for the juice to run out.

			I harvested Newton’s apples by night with a friend and large camping backpacks. We left some apples on the tree for the sake of the myth, but I’m sorry to say we made off with most of them. I later discovered that we were “scrumping”—a dialect word of West Country provenance, originally used to describe the collection of windfalls, and later, the taking of fruit without permission. The difference was that in the West Country apples entailed cider, and cider had value: Landowners used to include a daily pintage of cider as part of their laborers’ wages, one of the many ways that yeasts’ metabolisms fed back into the agricultural systems made to house them. Under the Newton tree, however, apples meant mess and a gardener’s nuisance. The press was working its magic. Waste was pressed into juice, and juice fermented into cider. A win-win.

			Pressing the apples was hard work. Two or three people would steady the press, while one cranked the handle. As the apples were mulched, two people would wash and chop. It grew into a production line. The room was filled with the sharp, musty smell of crushed apples. There were apples everywhere, in various states. Our hair had pulp in it and our clothes were sodden. The carpets were sticky and damp and the walls were stained. By the end of the day there were thirty liters of juice.

			When fermenting cider, you’re faced with a choice. Either you add an established yeast culture that comes in a packet, or you add nothing and let the resident yeast on the apple skins take on the task. Different varieties of apple have their own indigenous yeast cultures on their skins, each fermenting at its own pace, preferentially preserving and transforming different elements of the fruit’s flavor. Like all fermentations, it is a fine line. If rogue yeasts or bacteria become established, the juice goes rotten. A cider made with a single cultivated strain from a packet would be less likely to veer into a rot, but wouldn’t represent the apples’ own cultures of yeast. There was no question that the wild yeasts would have to handle this job. Newton’s apples came ready-dusted in Newton’s yeast. I would have no way to know exactly which yeast strains would end up running the brew, but so it had been for most of human history.

			 			The juice fermented in about two weeks, resulting in a cloudy, pungent liquid, which I bottled. After a few days, once it had settled, I poured myself a glass. To my amazement it was delicious. The bitterness and sourness of the apples had transformed. The taste was floral and delicate, dry with a gentle fizz. Drunk in larger quantities, it elicited elation and light euphoria. I didn’t experience the muddiness of emotion I had felt after drinking some ciders. Nor did I feel clumsy, although yeast had most certainly made a nonsense of me. I was intoxicated with a story, comforted by it, constrained by it, dissolved in it, made senseless by it, weighed down by it. I called the cider Gravity and lay heavy and reeling under the influence of yeast’s prodigious metabolism.





EPILOGUE


			THIS COMPOST


			 				 					Our hands imbibe like roots, so I place them on what is beautiful in this world.

					—SAINT FRANCIS OF ASSISI





			AS A CHILD I loved the autumn. Leaves fell from a large chestnut tree and gathered into drifts in the garden. I raked them into a pile and tended it carefully, adding fresh armfuls as the weeks went by. Before long, the piles grew large enough to fill several bathtubs. Again and again, I’d leap into the leaves from the low branches of the tree. Once inside, I’d wriggle until I was entirely submerged and lie buried in the rustle, lost in the curious smells.

			My father encouraged me to immerse myself in the world headfirst. He used to carry me around on his shoulders and bury my face in flowers as if I were a bee. We must have pollinated countless flowers as we shuffled from plant to plant, my cheeks smeared with yellows and oranges, my face scrunched into new shapes to better fit inside the pavilions that the petals made, both of us delighted with the colors and smells and mess.

			My leaf piles were both places to hide and worlds to explore. But as months went by, the piles shrank. It became harder to submerge myself. I investigated, reaching down into the deepest regions of the heap, pulling out damp handfuls of what looked less and less like leaves, and more and more like soil. Worms started to appear. Were they carrying the soil up into the pile, or the leaves down into the soil? I was never sure. My sense was that the pile of leaves was sinking, but if it was sinking, what was it sinking into? How deep was the soil? What kept the world afloat on this solid sea?

			 			I asked my father. He gave me an answer. I replied with another “why.” No matter how many times I asked “why” he always had an answer. These games of “why” would go on until I exhausted myself. It was in one of these binges that I first learned about decomposition. I struggled to imagine the invisible creatures that ate all the leaves, and how such small beings could have such enormous appetites. I struggled to imagine how they could devour my leaf piles as I lay submerged in them. Why couldn’t I see it happening? If their hunger was so fierce, surely I would be able to catch them in the act if I buried myself in the heap of leaves and lay there quietly enough. They always eluded me.

			My father proposed an experiment. We cut the top off a clear plastic bottle. Into the bottle we placed alternating layers of soil, sand, dead leaves, and finally a handful of earthworms. Over the next days I watched the worms wind their way between the layers. They mixed and stirred. Nothing stayed still. Sand crept into soil and leaves crept into sand. The hard edges of the layers dissolved into each other. The worms might be visible, my father explained, but there are many more creatures that behave like this that you can’t see. Tiny worms. And creatures smaller than tiny worms. And creatures still smaller that don’t look like worms but are able to mix and stir and dissolve one thing into another just like these worms can. Composers make pieces of music. These were decomposers, who unmake pieces of life. Nothing could happen without them.

			This was such a useful idea. It was as if I’d been shown how to reverse, how to think backward. Now there were arrows that pointed in both directions at once. Composers make; decomposers unmake. And unless decomposers unmake, there isn’t anything that the composers can make with. It was a thought that changed the way I understood the world. And from this thought, from my fascination with the creatures that decompose, grew my interest in fungi.

			It is out of this compost heap of questions and fascinations that this book has composed itself. There have been so many questions, so few answers—and this feels exciting. Ambiguity isn’t as itchy as it was; it’s easier for me to resist the temptation to remedy uncertainty with certainty. In my conversations with researchers and enthusiasts I’ve found myself acting as an unwitting go-between, answering questions about what people are doing in different, far-flung fields of mycological inquiry, sometimes carrying a few grains of sand into the soil, sometimes a few clumps of soil into the sand. There is more pollen on my face than when I began. New whys have fallen on top of old whys. There is a bigger pile to leap into, and it smells just as mysterious as it did at the start. But there is more damp, more space to bury myself, and more to explore.

			 			Fungi might make mushrooms, but first they must unmake something else. Now that this book is made, I can hand it over to fungi to unmake. I’ll dampen a copy and seed it with Pleurotus mycelium. When it has eaten its way through the words and pages and endpapers and sprouted oyster mushrooms from the covers, I’ll eat them. From another copy I will remove the pages, mash them up, and using a weak acid break the cellulose of the paper into sugars. To the sugar solution I’ll add a yeast. Once it’s fermented into a beer, I’ll drink it and close the circuit.

			Fungi make worlds; they also unmake them. There are lots of ways to catch them in the act: when you cook mushroom soup, or just eat it; when you go out gathering mushrooms, or buy them; when you ferment alcohol, plant a plant, or just bury your hands in the soil. And whether you let a fungus into your mind, or marvel at the way that it might enter the mind of another; whether you’re cured by a fungus, or watch it cure someone else; whether you build your home from fungi, or start growing mushrooms in your home, fungi will catch you in the act. If you’re alive, they already have.





				 					 					COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR



				 					Kika, the truffle-hunting Lagotto Romagnolo





				 					 					COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR



				 					Piedmont white truffles, Tuber magnatum





				 					 					SAMANTHA VUIGNIER/CORBIS VIA GETTY IMAGES



				 					An illustration from around 1890 captioned, “Truffle-hunting—Trained hogs rooting for the valuable esculent.” The hogs are wearing muzzles to prevent them from eating the truffles they unearth.





				 					 					COURTESY OF YU FUKASAWA



				 					Foraging behavior of the wood-rotting fungus Phanerochaete velutina. The three images depict a single fungus growing over a period of 48 days. The mycelium starts in an exploratory mode, proliferating in all directions. When the fungus discovers something to eat, it reinforces the links that connect it with the food and prunes back the links that don't lead anywhere.





				 					 					COURTESY OF ALISON POULIOT



				 					Mycelium of a wood-rotting fungus exploring and consuming a log.





				 					The bread mold Neurospora crassa, solving microscopic labyrinths. Black arrows mark the direction of growth of the fungus at branch points and at the entrance to the labyrinths. Image reproduced from Held, et al. (2010).





				 					 					COURTESY OF ALISON POULIOT



				 					Bioluminescent ghost mushrooms, Omphalotus nidiformis.





				 					 					COURTESY OF PATRICK HICKEY



				 					Bioluminescent mycelium of the bitter oyster, Panellus stipticus, growing on wood chips. The first submarine, Turtle, developed during the American Revolutionary War, used glowing fungi to illuminate its depth gauge. English coal miners in the nineteenth century reported fungus on pit props that cast enough light to see their hands by.





				 					Ernst Haeckel’s lichens, published in Art Forms in Nature (1904).





				 					 					THE ARMITT TRUST



				 					Beatrix Potter’s illustration of a Cladonia lichen.





				 					 					COURTESY OF JOÃO ARAÚJO



				 					A carpenter ant infected with the “zombie fungus” Ophiocordyceps lloydii. Two fungal fruiting bodies sprout from the body of the ant. Sample collected in the Brazilian Amazon.





				 					 					COURTESY OF JOÃO ARAÚJO



				 					A carpenter ant infected with Ophiocordyceps camponoti-nidulantis. The fungus is visible as a white furry coating, and the stalk of the fungal fruiting body emerges from the back of the ant’s head. Sample collected in the Brazilian Amazon.





				 					 					COURTESY OF JOÃO ARAÚJO



				 					A carpenter ant infected with Ophiocordyceps camponoti-atricipis. A fungal fruiting body sprouts from the ant’s head. Sample collected in the Brazilian Amazon.





				 					 					COURTESY OF JOÃO ARAÚJO



				 					A carpenter ant infected with Ophiocordyceps unilateralis. The white spines belong to a different fungus, a “mycoparasite,” that infects Ophiocordyceps fungi living on insect bodies. Sample collected in Japan.





				 					 					COURTESY OF COLLEEN MANGOLD



				 					Ophiocordyceps growing around an ant’s muscle fibers. Scale bar = 2 micrometers.





				 					 					GRANT KALIVODA, COURTESY OF CHARLOTTE SCHAARF



				 					A collection of mushroom stones from Guatemala, photographed in the early 1970s. Around two hundred such stones are thought to survive. These statues suggest that the ceremonial consumption of psilocybin mushrooms dates back at least until the second millenium BCE.





				 					Interconnections between networks of brain activity during normal waking consciousness (left), and after an injection of psilocybin (right). Different networks are depicted as small colored circles around the rim of each figure. Following an injection of psilocybin, a tumult of new neuronal pathways arise. The ability of psilocybin to change people’s minds seems related to these states of cerebral flux. Image reproduced from Petri, et al. (2014).





				 					 					COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR



				 					Mycorrhizal fungus living inside a plant root. The fungus is depicted in red, and the plant in blue. The finely branched structures within the plant cells are known as “arbuscules” (“little trees”) and are the site of exchange between the plant and fungus. Scale bar = 20 micrometers.





				 					 					COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR



				 					Mycorrhizal fungus growing into a plant root. The fungus is depicted in red, and the edge of the plant’s root in blue. The inside of the root is densely inhabited by fungus. Scale bar = 50 micrometers.





				 					 					COURTESY OF CHRISTIAN ZIEGLER



				 					The mycoheterotroph Voyria tenella growing in a rainforest in Panama. Mycoheterotrophs—”hackers” of the wood wide web—have lost the ability to photosynthesize and draw their nutrients from mycorrhizal fungal networks that lace their way through soil.





				 					 					COURTESY OF DENNIS KALMA



				 					The mycoheterotroph Monotropa uniflora, or “ghost pipe,” growing in Adirondack Park, New York.





				 					 					COURTESY OF TIMOTHY BOOMER



				 					The mycoheterotroph Sarcodes sanguinea, John Muir’s “glowing pillar of fire,” growing in the El Dorado National Forest in California.





				 					 					COURTESY OF TIMOTHY BOOMER



				 					The mycoheterotroph Allotropa virgata, or “candycane,” growing in Salt Point State Park in California.





				 					Intimacies within intimacies. The roots of the mycoheterotroph Voyria tenella are densely inhabited by mycorrhizal fungi. In A, fungi are visible as a light-colored ring around the edge of the root. In B, the fungi are depicted in red and the plant material is not shown. Scale bar = 1 millimeter. Image reproduced from Sheldrake, et al. (2017)





				 					Mycorrhizal fungi living inside a root of the mycoheterotroph Voyria tenella. The fungus is depicted in red, and the plant root in grey. A to D show the same section of root with the plant tissue made increasingly transparent. Scale bar = 100 micrometers. Image reproduced from Sheldrake, et al. (2017)





				 					 					COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR



				 					The roots of the mycoheterotroph Voyria tenella are poorly adapted to the task of absorbing water and minerals from the soil and have evolved into fungal “farms.” Note the mycorrhizal fungal hyphae trailing off the roots. Fragments of soil remain caught in the sticky mycelial web. This is a rare glimpse of the fungal connections that link plant roots with their surroundings.





				 					 					COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR



				 					Mycorrhizal fungal mycelium on the roots of the mycoheterotroph Voyria tenella.





				 					A map of a shared fungal network made by Kevin Beiler. The green shapes are Douglas fir trees, and the straight lines indicate linkages between tree roots and mycorrhizal fungi. The black dots mark the points where Beiler collected samples. Genetically identical fungal networks are outlined in different colors. Networks formed by the mycorrhizal fungus Rhizopogon vesiculosus are shaded in blue, and those formed by the fungus Rhizopogon vinicolor are shaded in pink. The black border marks the 30 × 30 meter plot, and an arrow points to the most highly connected tree, which was linked to 47 other trees. Image reproduced from Beiler, et al. (2009).



			 				 					 					COURTESY OF PETER MCCOY



				 					Peter McCoy’s experiment with Pleurotus. The oyster mushroom is growing on a diet of nothing but used cigarette butts. The outside of a cigarette filter can be seen smeared across the inside of the jar.





			 			With gratitude to the fungi from which I have learned





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


			WITHOUT THE GUIDANCE, teaching, and patient assistance of many experts, scholars, researchers, and enthusiasts this book would have been inconceivable. In particular I would like to thank Ralph Abraham, Andrew Adamatzky, Phil Ayres, Albert-László Barabási, Eben Bayer, Kevin Beiler, Luis Beltran, Michael Beug, Martin Bidartondo, Lynne Boddy, Ulf Büntgen, Duncan Cameron, Keith Clay, Yves Couder, Bryn Dentinger, Julie Deslippe, Katie Field, Emmanuel Fort, Mark Fricker, Maria Giovanna Galliani, Lucy Gilbert, Rufino Gonzales, Trevor Goward, Christian Gronau, Omar Hernandez, Allen Herre, David Hibbett, Stephan Imhof, David Johnson, Toby Kiers, Callum Kingwell, Natuschka Lee, Charles Lefevre, Egbert Leigh, David Luke, Scott Mangan, Michael Marder, Peter McCoy, Dennis McKenna, Pål Axel Olsson, Stefan Olsson, Magnus Rath, Alan Rayner, David Read, Dan Revillini, Marcus Roper, Jan Sapp, Carolina Sarmiento, Justin Schaffer, Jason Scott, Marc-André Selosse, Jason Slot, Sameh Soliman, Toby Spribille, Paul Stamets, Michael Stusser, Anna Tsing, Raskal Turbeville, Ben Turner, Milton Wainwright, Håkan Wallander, Joe Wright, and Camilo Zalamea.

			My agent, Jessica Woollard, and my editors, Will Hammond at Bodley Head and Hilary Redmon at Random House, have provided a steady stream of encouragement, clear vision, and wise council for which I’m immensely grateful. At Bodley Head/Vintage I’ve been lucky to work with Graham Coster, Suzanne Dean, Sophie Painter, and Joe Pickering, and at Random House I have had an excellent team in Karla Eoff, Lucas Heinrich, Tim O’Brian, Simon Sullivan, Molly Turpin, and Ada Yonenaka. Collin Elder experimented with ink made from the shaggy ink cap mushroom and produced a beautiful set of fungal illustrations. For their help with various pieces of translation I thank Xavier Buxton, Simi Freund, Julia Hart, Pete Riley, and Anna Westermeier. Pam Smart provided valuable help with transcription, and Chris Morris from “Spores for Thought” collected spore prints. Christian Ziegler joined me in the forest in Panama and was able to photograph the strange magic of mycoheterotrophic plants.

			 			I am enormously grateful to those who read parts or all of the book at various stages of its growth: Leo Amiel, Angelika Cawdor, Nadia Chaney, Monique Charlesworth, Libby Davy, Tom Evans, Charles Foster, Simi Freund, Stephan Harding, Ian Henderson, Johnny Lifschutz, Robert Macfarlane, Barnaby Martin, Uta Paszkowski, Jeremy Prynne, Jill Purce, Pete Riley, Erin Robinsong, Nicholas Rosenstock, Will Sapp, Emma Sayer, Cosmo Sheldrake, Rupert Sheldrake, Sara Sjölund, Teddy St. Aubyn, Erik Verbruggen, and Flora Wallace. I could not have done without their insight and sensitivity.

			For many kinds of humor, care, and inspiration along the way I thank David Abram, Mileece Abson, Matthew Barley, Fawn Baron, Finn Beames, Gerry Brady, Dean Broderick, Caroline Casey, Udavi Cruz-Márquez, Mike de Danann Datura, Andréa de Keijzer, Lindy Dufferin, Sara Perl Egendorf, Zac Embree, Amanda Feilding, Johnny Flynn, Viktor Frankel, Dana Frederick, Charlie Gilmour, Stephan Harding, Lucy Hinton, Rick Ingrasci, James Keay, Oliver Kelhammer, Erica Kohn, Natalie Lawrence, Sam Lee, Andy Letcher, Jane Longman, Luis Eduardo Luna, Vahakn Matossian, Sean Matteson, Tom Fortes Mayer, Evan McGown, Zayn Mohammed, Mark Morey, Viktoria Mullova, Misha Mullov-Abbado, Charlie Murphy, Dan Nicholson, Richard Perl, John Preston, Anthony Ramsay, Vilma Ramsay, Paul Raphael, Steve Rooke, Gryphon Rower-Upjohn, Matt Segall, Rupinder Sidhu, Wayne Silby, Paulo Roberto Silva e Souza, Joel Solomon, Anne Stillman, Peggy Taylor, Robert Temple, Jeremy Thres, Mark Vonesch, Flora Wallace, Andrew Weil, Khari Wendell-McClelland, Kate Whitley, Heather Wolf, and Jon Young. I am indebted to many wonderful teachers and mentors who have helped me over the years, in particular Patricia Fara, William Foster, Howard Griffiths, David Hanke, Nick Jardine, Mike Majerus, Oliver Rackham, Fergus Read, Simon Schaffer, Ed Tanner, and Louis Vause.

			 			I am grateful for the support of several institutions: Clare College, Cambridge, and the Cambridge Department of Plant Sciences and Department of History and Philosophy of Science, where I spent several exciting years; the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute for its support while I lived in Panama and for its ongoing care of the Barro Colorado Nature Monument; and Hollyhock, British Columbia, for providing me with a beautiful place to work through the winter.

			Countless hours of music have helped me to think and feel my way through this book. Of particular importance have been the sounds of the Aka people, Johann Sebastian Bach, William Byrd, Miles Davis, João Gilberto, Billie Holiday, Charles Mingus, Thelonius Monk, Moondog, Bud Powell, Thomas Tallis, Fats Waller, and Teddy Wilson. The two places that have most guided the emergence of this book are Hampstead Heath and Cortes Island. To these places, and to all those who inhabit and protect them, I owe more than I can say. Above all, for their inspiration, love, wit, wisdom, generosity, and endless patience I am grateful to Erin Robinsong, Cosmo Sheldrake, and my parents, Jill Purce and Rupert Sheldrake.





NOTES





INTRODUCTION: WHAT IS IT LIKE TO BE A FUNGUS?




			 				on earth can do: Hafiz (1315–1390), in Ladinsky (2010).

				specimens that remain undiscovered: Ferguson et al. (2003). There are numerous other reports of enormous networks of Armillaria. A study published by Anderson et al. (2018) investigated a mycelial network in Michigan with an estimated age of 2,500 years and a weight of at least 400 metric tons, sprawling over an area of 75 hectares. The researchers found that the fungus had an extremely low rate of genetic mutation, suggesting that it has a way of protecting itself against damage to its DNA. How exactly the fungus is able to maintain such a stable genome is not known, but this probably helps to account for its ability to live to such a great age. Apart from Armillaria, some of the largest organisms are clonal sea grasses (Arnaud-Haond et al. [2012]).

				genus Homo has existed: Moore et al. (2011), ch. 2.7; Honegger et al. (2018). The fossilized remains of Prototaxites have been found in North America, Europe, Africa, Asia, and Australia. Biologists have puzzled over what Prototaxites was since the mid-nineteenth century. It was first thought to be a rotted tree. Shortly afterward, it was promoted to the status of giant marine alga despite overwhelming evidence that it grew on land. In 2001, after decades of debate, it was argued that Prototaxites were in fact the fruiting bodies of a fungus. It is a persuasive argument: Prototaxites were formed from thickly woven filaments that look more like fungal hyphae than anything else. Analysis of the carbon isotopes indicate that it survived by consuming its surroundings rather than by photosynthesis. More recently, Selosse (2002) has argued that it is more plausible that Prototaxites were giant lichen-like structures, made up of a union of fungi with photosynthetic algae. He argues that Prototaxites were too large to support themselves by decomposing plants. If Prototaxites were partly photosynthetic, they would have been able to supplement their diet of dead plants with energy from photosynthesis. They would have both the means and the incentive to grow into structures taller than anything else around. What’s more, Prototaxites contained tough polymers found in algae of the time, suggesting that algal cells lived interwoven with the fungal hyphae. The lichen hypothesis also helps to explain why they went extinct. After forty million years of global dominance, Prototaxites mysteriously died out just as plants were evolving into trees and shrubs. This observation fits with Prototaxites being lichen-like organisms, because more plants mean less light.

				 				as leaves or roots: For a broad discussion of fungal diversity and distribution see Peay (2016); for marine fungi see Bass et al. (2007); for fungal endophytes see Mejía et al. (2014), Arnold et al. (2003), and Rodriguez et al. (2009). For an account of specialist fungi found in distilleries where they thrive on the alcohol fumes that evaporate from whiskey barrels as they age see Alpert (2011).

				the energy in sunlight: For rock-digesting fungi see Burford et al. (2003) and Quirk et al. (2014); for plastics and TNT see Peay et al. (2016), Harms et al. (2011), Stamets (2011), and Khan et al. (2017); for radiation-resistant fungi see Tkavc et al. (2018); for radiographic fungi see Dadachova and Casadevall (2008) and Casadevall et al. (2017).

				snow, sleet, and hail: For spore ejection see Money (1998), Money (2016), and Dressaire et al. (2016). For spore mass and influence on weather see Fröhlich-Nowoisky et al. (2009). For a review of the many colorful solutions fungi have evolved in response to the problems of spore dispersal see Roper et al. (2010) and Roper and Seminara (2017).

				in animal nerve cells: For flow see Roper and Seminara (2017); for electrical impulses see Harold et al. (1985) and Olsson and Hansson (1995). Yeasts make up about one percent of the fungal kingdom and multiply by “budding” or splitting in two. Some yeasts can form hyphal structures under certain conditions (Sudbery et al. [2004]).

				drawn with Coprinus ink: For accounts of fungi pushing through asphalt and lifting paving stones see Moore (2013b), ch. 3.

				with fragments of leaf: Leaf-cutter ants don’t just feed and house their fungi, they medicate them as well. Leaf-cutter ants’ fungal gardens are monocultures, consisting of a single type of fungus. Like human monocultures, the fungi are vulnerable. Particularly threatening is a type of specialist parasitic fungus that can destroy a fungal garden. Leaf-cutters harbor bacteria in elaborate chambers in their cuticles, fed by specialized glands. Each nest cultures its own specific strain of bacteria, recognized and favored by the ants above other strains, even closely related ones. These domesticated bacteria produce antibiotics that powerfully inhibit the parasitic fungus and boost the growth of the cultivated one. Without these fungi, leaf-cutter ant colonies wouldn’t be able to grow to such a large size. See Currie et al. (1999), Currie et al. (2006), and Zhang et al. (2007).

				in the coming decades: For the Roman god Robigus see Money (2007), ch. 6, and Kavaler (1967), ch. 1. For fungal superbugs see Fisher et al. (2012, 2018), Casadevall et al. (2019), and Engelthaler et al. (2019); for fungal disease of amphibians see Yong (2019); for banana disease see Maxman (2019). Among animals, diseases caused by bacteria pose more of a threat than those caused by fungi. By contrast, among plants, diseases caused by fungi pose a greater threat than those caused by bacteria. It is a pattern that holds through sickness and through health: Animal microbiomes tend to be dominated by bacteria, while plant microbiomes tend to be dominated by fungi. This is not to say that animals don’t suffer from fungal diseases at all. Casadevall (2012) hypothesizes that the rise of mammals and decline of reptiles following the extinction event that wiped out the dinosaurs—the Cretaceous-Tertiary (K-T) extinction—was due to the ability of mammals to fight fungal diseases. Compared with reptiles, mammals have a number of handicaps: It is energetically costly to be warm-blooded, and even more so to produce milk and deliver intensive parental care. But it may be that mammals’ elevated body temperatures were exactly what made it possible to replace reptiles as the dominant land-dwelling animals. Mammals’ elevated body temperatures help to deter the growth of fungal pathogens that are hypothesized to have proliferated in the “global compost heap” that followed the widespread dieback of forests during the K-T extinction. To this day, mammals are more resistant to common fungal diseases than reptiles or amphibians.

				 				as a medicine: For a study of Neanderthals see Weyrich et al. (2017); for Iceman see Peintner et al. (1998). How the Iceman used the birch polypore (Fomitopsis betulina) can’t be known for certain, but they are bitter and indigestibly corky, so clearly not “nutritional” in any conventional sense. The Iceman’s careful preparation of these fungi—which were mounted like key rings on leather thongs—indicates a well-developed knowledge of their value and application.

				the Second World War: For mold cures see Wainwright (1989a and 1989b). Human remains from archaeological sites in Egypt, Sudan, and Jordan dating from around the year AD 400 have been found to have high levels of the antibiotic tetracycline in their bones, indicating a long-term sustained intake, most likely in a therapeutic context. Tetracycline is produced by a bacterium, not a fungus, but its likely source was moldy grains, likely used to make a medicinal beer (Bassett et al. [1980] and Nelson et al. [2010]). The journey from Fleming’s first observation to penicillin’s emergence onto the world stage was not a straightforward one and required a great deal of human effort: experiments, industrial know-how, investment, and political support. For a start, it was difficult for Fleming to persuade anyone to take an interest in his discovery. In the words of Milton Wainwright, a microbiologist and historian of science, Fleming was eccentric, a “messer abouter.” “He had a reputation for being a nutter and doing daft things, like creating pictures of the Queen on a petri dish using different bacteria cultures.” Dramatic proof of penicillin’s therapeutic value didn’t come until twelve years after Fleming’s first observations. In the 1930s, a research group in Oxford developed a method to extract and purify penicillin and, in 1940, conducted trials that demonstrated its astonishing ability to fight infections. Nonetheless, penicillin remained difficult to produce. In the absence of a widely available product, instructions on how to grow the mold were published in the medical press. Crude “kitchen sink” extracts, along with chopped mycelium on surgical gauze—“mycelial pads”—were used by some doctors to treat infections, treatments observed to be remarkably effective (Wainwright [1989a and 1989b]). It was in the United States that penicillin production was industrialized. This was partly due to the well-developed American methods to cultivate fungi in industrial fermenters, and partly due to the discovery of higher yielding strains of Penicillium mold, strains that were further enhanced by rounds of mutation. The industrialization of penicillin led to a massive effort to search for new antibiotics, and thousands of fungi and bacteria were screened.

				 				mushrooms are increasing yearly: For drugs see Linnakoski et al. (2018), Aly et al. (2011), and Gond et al. (2014). For psilocybin see Carhart-Harris et al. (2016a), Griffiths et al. (2016), and Ross et al. (2016). For vaccines and citric acid see the State of the World’s Fungi (2018). For the market in edible and medicinal mushrooms see www.knowledge-sourcing.com/report/global-edible-mushrooms-market [accessed October 29, 2019]. In 1993, a study published in Science reported that paclitaxel (sold under the brand name Taxol) was produced by an endophytic fungus isolated from the bark of the Pacific yew (Stierle et al. [1993]). It has subsequently emerged that paclitaxel is produced far more widely by fungi than by plants—by around two hundred endophytic fungi, spread across several fungal families (Kusari et al. [2014]). A potent antifungal, it plays an important defensive role: Fungi that are able to produce paclitaxel are able to deter other fungi. It acts against fungi in the same way it acts against cancer, by interrupting cell division. Paclitaxel-producing fungi are immune to its effects, as are other fungal endophytes of yew (Soliman et al. [2015]). A number of other fungal anticancer drugs have made their way into mainstream pharmaceutical practice. Lentinan, a polysaccharide from the shiitake mushroom, has been found to stimulate the immune system’s ability to fight cancers and is medically approved in Japan for the treatment of gastric and breast cancers (Rogers [2012]). PSK, a compound isolated from turkey tail mushrooms, extends the survival time of patients suffering from a range of cancers and is used alongside conventional cancer treatments in China and Japan (Powell [2014]).

				radiation-resistant biomaterials: For fungal melanins see Cordero (2017).

				sophistications of fungal lives: For estimates of the number of fungal species see Hawksworth (2001) and Hawksworth and Lücking (2017).

				when we actually look: Among neuroscientists, the involvement of our expectations in perception is known as top-down influence, or sometimes as Bayesian inference (after Thomas Bayes, a mathematician who made a founding contribution to the mathematics of probability, or “the doctrine of chances”). See Gilbert and Sigman (2007), and Mazzucato et al. (2019).

				“they’re cleverer than me”: Adamatzky (2016), Latty and Beekman (2011), Nakagaki et al. (2000), Bonifaci et al. (2012), Tero et al. (2010), and Oettmeier et al. (2017). In Advances in Physarum Machines (Adamatzky [2016]), researchers detail many surprising properties of slime molds. Some use slime molds to make decision gates and oscillators, some simulate historical human migrations and model possible future patterns of human migrations on the moon. Mathematical models inspired by slime molds include a non-quantum implementation of Shor’s factorization, calculation of shortest paths, and the design of supply-chain networks. Oettmeier et al. (2017) note that Hirohito, the emperor of Japan between 1926 and 1989, was fascinated by slime molds and in 1935 published a book on the subject. Slime molds have been a high-prestige subject of research in Japan ever since.

				 				may start to change: The system of classification devised by Linnaeus and published in his Systema Naturae in 1735, a modified version of which is used today, extended this hierarchy to human races. At the top of the human league tables were Europeans: “Very smart, inventive. Covered by tight clothing. Ruled by law.” Americans followed: “Ruled by custom.” Then Asians: “Ruled by opinion.” Then Africans: “sluggish, lazy…[c]rafty, slow, careless. Covered by grease. Ruled by caprice” (Kendi [2017]). The way that hierarchal classification systems order different species can be seen, by extension, as species racism.

				stars in our galaxy: For different microbial communities in different parts of the body see Costello et al. (2009) and Ross et al. (2018). For comparison with stars in the galaxy see Yong (2016), ch. 1. W. H. Auden, in his “New Year Greeting,” offers up the ecosystems of his body to his microbial inhabitants. “For creatures your size I offer / a free choice of habitat, / so settle yourselves in the zone / that suits you best, in the pools / of my pores or the tropical / forests of arm-pit and crotch, / in the deserts of my fore-arms, / or the cool woods of my scalp.”

				ubiquitous feature of life: For organ transplants and human cell cultures see Ball (2019). For an estimate of the size of our microbiome see Bordenstein and Theis. (2015). For viruses within viruses see Stough et al. (2019). For a general introduction to the microbiome see Yong (2016) and a special issue of Nature on the human microbiome (May 2019): www.nature.com/collections/fiabfcjbfj [accessed October 29, 2019].

				dark matter, or dark life: In a sense, all biologists are now ecologists—but disciplinary ecologists have a head start and their methods are starting to seep into new fields: A number of biologists are starting to call for the application of ecological methods to historically non-ecological fields of biology. See Gilbert and Lynch (2019) and Venner et al. (2009). There are a number of examples of the knock-on effects of the microbes that live within fungi. A study published by Márquez et al. (2007) in Science in 2007 described “a virus in a fungus in a plant.” The plant—a tropical grass—grows naturally in high soil temperatures. But without a fungal associate that grows in its leaves, the grass can’t survive at high temperatures. When grown alone, without the plant, the fungus fares little better and is unable to survive. However, it turns out not to be the fungus that confers the ability to survive high temperatures after all. Rather, it is a virus that lives within the fungus that confers heat tolerance. When grown without the virus, neither fungus nor plant can survive high temperatures. The microbiome of the fungus, in other words, determines the role that the fungus plays in the microbiome of the plant. The outcome is clear: life or death. One of the most dramatic examples of microbes that live within microbes comes from the notorious rice blast fungus: Rhizopus microsporus. The key toxins used by Rhizopus are actually produced by a bacterium living within its hyphae. In a dramatic indication of how entwined the fates of fungi and their bacterial associates can be, Rhizopus requires the bacteria not only to cause the disease but also to reproduce. Experimentally “curing” Rhizopus of its bacterial residents impedes the fungus’s ability to produce spores. The bacterium is responsible for the most important features of Rhizopus’s lifestyle, from its diet to its sexual habits. See Araldi-Brondolo et al. (2017), Mondo et al. (2017), and Deveau et al. (2018).

				 				only now becoming known: For remarks about loss of self-identity see Relman (2008). The questions of whether human beings are singular or plural is not a new one. In nineteenth-century physiology, the bodies of multicellular organisms were thought of as being made up of a community of cells with each cell an individual in its own right, by analogy to the individual human member of a nation-state. These questions are complicated by developments in the microbial sciences because the multitude of cells in your body aren’t strictly related to each other, as, for example, an average liver cell would be related to an average kidney cell. See Ball (2019), ch. 1.





1. A LURE




			 				Who’s pimping who?: Prince, “Illusion, Coma, Pimp & Circumstance,” Musicology (2004).

				to the eyes of animals: Psychoactive “truffles” sold in Amsterdam are not, as their name suggests, fruiting bodies. They are storage organs known as “sclerotia,” which are called truffles because of their superficial resemblance.

				to have olfactory flashbacks: For trillion odors see Bushdid et al. (2014); for olfactory navigation see Jacobs et al. (2015); for olfactory flashbacks and a general discussion of human olfactory abilities see McGann (2017). Some humans are classed as “super smellers,” or hyperosmic individuals. A study published by Trivedi et al. (2019) reported that a super smeller was able to detect Parkinson’s disease using their sense of smell alone.

				smell metallic and oily: For a discussion of the smell of different chemical bonds see Burr (2012), ch. 2.

				Olympic swimming pools: These receptors belong to a large family called G-protein coupled receptors, or GPCRs. For a study of human olfactory sensitivity see Sarrafchi et al. (2013), who report that humans can detect some odors at concentrations of 0.001 parts per trillion.

				“visual and emotional memories”: For turmas de tierra see Ott (2002). Truffles, according to Aristotle, were “a fruit consecrated to Aphrodite.” They are reputed to have been used as aphrodisiacs by Napoleon and the Marquis de Sade, and George Sand described them as the “black magic apple of love.” The French gastronome Jean Anthelme Brillat-Savarin documented that “truffles are conducive to erotic pleasure.” In the 1820s, he set out to investigate this commonly held belief, and embarked on a series of consultations with ladies (“all the replies I received were ironical or evasive”) and men (“who by their profession are invested with special trust”). He concluded that “the truffle is not a true aphrodisiac but in certain circumstances it can make women more affectionate and men more attentive” (Hall et al. [2007], p. 33).

				 				“it’s perishable and mercurial”: For Laurent Rambaud see Chrisafis (2010). The reporter Ryan Jacobs documents the foul play that occurs all the way along truffle supply lines. Some poisoners use meatballs laced with strychnine, others poison pools of water in the forest so that dogs with muzzles can still be poisoned, some deploy meat spiked with shards of glass, others use rat poison or antifreeze. Based on vets’ reports, hundreds of poisoned dogs receive treatment each truffle season. The authorities have taken to using poison-sniffing dogs to patrol certain woods (Jacobs [2019], pp. 130–34). In 2003, The Guardian reported that Michel Tournayre, a French truffle expert, had his truffle dog stolen. Tournayre suspected that the thieves had not sold the dog but rather were using her to steal truffles from other people’s land (Hall et al. [2007], p. 209). What better way to steal truffles than with a stolen dog?

				that break down wood: For elk with bloodied noses see Tsing (2015), “Interlude. Smelling”; for fly-pollinated orchids see Policha et al. (2016); for orchid bees collecting complex aromatic compounds see Vetter and Roberts (2007); for similarity with compounds produced by fungi see de Jong et al. (1994). Orchid bees secrete a fatty substance that they apply to the scented object. Once the scent has been absorbed, they scrape the fat back up and store it in pockets on their hind legs. This approach is identical in principle to enfleurage, the method used by humans for hundreds of years to capture fragrances like jasmine that are too delicate to extract using heat (Eltz et al. [2007]).

				extinction in the wild: Naef (2011).

				ghosts at a disco: For Bordeu see Corbin (1986), p. 35.

				nonlinearly with their size: For record-breaking truffle see news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/7123414.stm [accessed October 29, 2019].

				than a single organism: For a discussion of the role of truffle microbiome in odor production see Vahdatzadeh et al. (2015). When I was out with Daniele and Paride I noticed that a truffle excavated from the silty soil near a river smelled quite different from one found in the more clay-heavy soil farther up the valley. These differences are unlikely to make much difference to a hungry shrew. But a white truffle found in Alba will sell for four times as much as a white truffle found near Bologna (although the fact that some truffle dealers regularly pass off Bolognese truffles as being from Alba would suggest that not everyone is able to tell the difference). Regional differences in truffles’ volatile profiles have been confirmed in formal studies (Vita et al. [2015]).

				None detected the androstenol: For the original report that truffles produce androstenol see Claus et al. (1981); for the follow-up study from nine years later see Talou et al. (1990).

				even for taxonomic purposes: The number of volatiles produced by a single species of truffle has steadily increased over the years as the sensitivity of detection methods has improved. These methods are still less sensitive than the human nose, and the number of truffle volatiles is likely to increase yet further in the future. For white truffle volatiles see Pennazza et al. (2013) and Vita et al. (2015); for other species see Splivallo et al. (2011). There are a number of reasons why it is risky to pin all of truffles’ allure on a single compound. In the study by Talou et al. (1990), a small sample of animals was used and only a single species of truffle was tested, at a single shallow depth, at a single site. Different subsets of the profile of volatile compounds might be more prominent at different depths or in different places. Moreover, in the wild, a range of animals are attracted to truffles, from wild pigs to voles to insects. It might be that different elements of the cocktail of volatile compounds that truffles produce attract different animals. It may be that androstenol acts on animals in more subtle ways. It might not be effective on its own, as tested in the study, but only in conjunction with other compounds. Alternatively, it may be less important in finding the truffles and more important in the animals’ experience of eating them. For more on poisonous truffles see Hall et al. (2007). Besides Gautieria, the truffle species Choiromyces meandriformis is reported to smell “overpowering and nauseous” and is considered toxic in Italy (although it is popular in northern Europe). Balsamia vulgaris is another species considered to be mildly toxic, although dogs appear to enjoy its aroma of “rancid fat.”

				 				them with such urgency: For truffle export and packaging see Hall et al. (2007), pp. 219, 227.

				attract itself to itself: In areas of exploring mycelium, hyphae usually grow away from other hyphae without ever touching. In more mature parts of the mycelium, hyphal inclinations pivot. Growing tips instead become attracted to each other and start to “home” (Hickey et al. [2002]). How hyphae attract and repel each other remains poorly understood. Work on the model organism, the bread mold Neurospora crassa, is starting to provide some clues. Each hyphal tip takes it in turn to release a pheromone that attracts and “excites” the other. Through this back-and-forthing—“as if throwing a ball,” write the authors of one study—hyphae are able to entrain and home in on each other by falling into rhythm. It is this oscillation—a chemical rally—that allows them to lure the other without stimulating themselves. When they are serving, they aren’t able to detect the pheromone. When the other serves, they are stimulated (Read et al. [2009] and Goryachev et al. [2012]).

				off into otherness gradually: For a discussion of mating types of Schizophyllum commune see McCoy (2016), p. 13; for fusion between sexually incompatible hyphae see Saupe (2000) and Moore et al. (2011), ch. 7.5. The ability of hyphae to fuse with each other is determined by their “vegetative compatibility.” Once hyphal fusion has taken place, a separate system of mating types determines which nuclei can undergo sexual recombination. These two systems are regulated differently, although sexual recombination cannot take place unless hyphae have fused with each other and shared genetic material. The outcome of vegetative fusions between different mycelial networks can be complex and unpredictable (Rayner et al. [1995] and Roper et al. [2013]).

				 				pheromone for this purpose: For details of truffle sex see Selosse et al. (2017), Rubini et al. (2007), and Taschen et al. (2016); for examples of intersexuality in the animal world see Roughgarden (2013). If truffle cultivators really want to understand how to crack truffle cultivation, they must understand truffle sex. The problem is that they don’t. Truffle fungi have never been caught in the act of fertilization. Perhaps this isn’t so surprising given their inaccessible lifestyles. More peculiar is that no one has ever found a paternal hypha. Despite searching, researchers have only found maternal hyphae growing on tree roots and in soil, whether “+” or “-.” Paternal truffles seem to be short-lived and vanish after fertilization: “birth, then a drop of sex, then nothing” (Dance [2018]).

				microbes course and engage: The hyphae of some types of mycorrhizal fungi can withdraw themselves back into their spores and resprout at a later date (Wipf et al. [2019]).

				physiology of their associates: For fungal influence on plant roots see Ditengou et al. (2015), Li et al. (2016), Splivallo et al. (2009), Schenkel et al. (2018), and Moisan et al. (2019).

				another in real time: For a discussion of the evolution of communication in mycorrhizal symbioses, including suspension of immune response, see Martin et al. (2017); for a discussion of plant-fungus signaling and its genetic basis see Bonfante (2018); for plant-fungus communication in other types of mycorrhizal association see Lanfranco et al. (2018). The chemical propositions released by fungi are nuanced and have a wide dynamic range. The volatiles used to communicate with a plant might also be used to communicate with the surrounding bacterial populations (Li et al. [2016] and Deveau et al. [2018]). Fungi use volatile compounds to deter rival fungi; plants use volatile compounds to deter unwanted fungi (Li et al. [2016] and Quintana-Rodriguez et al. [2018]). The same volatile can have different effects on plants depending on its concentration. The plant hormones produced by some truffles to manipulate their hosts’ physiology can kill plants at higher concentrations and may serve as competitive weapons to deter plants that might compete with their own plant partners (Splivallo et al. [2007 and 2011]). Some species of truffle fungus are parasitized by other fungi, probably attracted by their chemical announcements. The truffle parasite, Tolypocladium capitata, is a cousin of the Ophiocordyceps fungi that parasitize insects and is known to parasitize certain species of truffle such as the deer truffle, Elaphomyces (Rayner et al. [1995]; for photos see mushroaming.com/cordyceps-blog [accessed October 29, 2019]).

				hasn’t yet caught up: For the first report of fruiting Tuber melanosporum in the British Isles—thought to be due to climate change—see Thomas and Büntgen (2017). The “modern” method used to cultivate Tuber melanosporum wasn’t developed until 1969 and resulted in the first batch of artificially inoculated truffles in 1974. Seedling roots are incubated with the mycelium of Tuber melanosporum and planted out when the roots are thoroughly inhabited by the fungus. After several years, given the right conditions, the fungus will start to produce truffles. There is an increasingly large area of land in truffle cultivation (more than 40,000 hectares worldwide), and Périgord truffle orchards are successfully fruiting in countries from the United States to New Zealand (Büntgen et al. [2015]). Lefevre explained that even if he wrote his method down point by point, it would be difficult for someone else to replicate. There is so much intuitive knowledge that is hard to communicate and keep track of. The tiniest details—from the vagaries of the season to the conditions in the nursery—make a huge difference. Secrecy is part of the problem. Truffle cultivators spend much of their time in a fog of uncertainty, picking their way around jealously tended “proprietary insight.” “It is a tradition with old roots in mushroom picking,” Büntgen told me. “Many people go out to pick mushrooms in the woods, but they never tell you anything. If you ask someone how their day was and they say, ‘Oh I found a huge crop!’ they probably found nothing. It is an attitude that persists over generations and makes research very slow.” Undeterred, Lefevre still grows a number of trees with the mycelium of the elusive Tuber magnatum every year in the hope that something, somehow, might just prompt them to fruit. Armed with the same optimism, he continues to experiment in pairing European truffle species with American trees (Tuber magnatum turns out to develop a healthy—though fruitless—partnership with aspens). Other cultivators isolate bacteria from truffles in the hope that they will encourage the growth of Tuber mycelium (some groups of bacteria do seem to be helpful). I asked if many people bought his Tuber magnatum trees for their truffle orchards. “Not many,” he replied, “but we sell the trees in the spirit that if no one tries, no one will succeed.”

				 				eavesdrop on their prey: For a discussion of chemical eavesdropping see Hsueh et al. (2013).

				known as “gun cells”: Nordbring-Hertz (2004) and Nordbring-Hertz et al. (2011).

				many options remains unknown: Nordbring-Hertz (2004).

				or forget to notice: Today, the field of biology most inflamed by debates about anthropomorphism is the study of plants and the ways they sense and respond to their environment. In 2007, thirty-six prominent plant scientists signed a letter that dismissed the nascent field of “plant neurobiology” (Alpi et al. [2007]). Those who put forward the term argued that plants have electrical and chemical signaling systems equivalent to those found in humans and other animals. The thirty-six authors of the letter argued that these were “superficial analogies and questionable extrapolations.” A spirited debate ensued (Trewavas [2007]). From an anthropological perspective, these controversies are fascinating. Natasha Myers, an anthropologist at York University in Canada, interviewed a number of plant scientists about how they understood plants to behave (Myers [2014]). She describes the troubled politics of anthropomorphism and the different ways that researchers dealt with the issue.

				different kind of trap: Kimmerer (2013), “Learning the Grammar of Animacy.”

				on which they depend: “Its relationship with its host trees is very poorly understood,” Lefevre explained, “even in places where truffle productivity is high, the proportion of tree roots colonized by the fungus is often extremely low. This means that productivity can’t be explained in terms of the amount of energy that the fungus receives from the host tree.”

				 				talk about other organisms: For smells and their likenesses see Burr (2012), ch. 2. The anthropologist Anna Tsing writes that in the Edo period in Japan (1603–1868) the smell of matsutake mushrooms became a popular subject for poetry. Trips to pick matsutake grew into the autumn equivalent of cherry-blossom parties in the spring, and references to “the autumn aroma” or the “aroma of the mushroom” became familiar poetic moods (Tsing [2015]).





2. LIVING LABYRINTHS




			 				there is no thread: Cixous (1991).

				somehow, improbably, both: For the fungal navigation of mazes see Hanson et al. (2006), Held et al. (2009, 2010, 2011, 2019). For excellent videos see supplementary information of Held et al. (2011) at www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1878614611000249 [accessed October 29, 2019] and Held et al. (2019) at www.pnas.org/content/116/27/13543/tab-figures-data [accessed October 29, 2019].

				challenges our animal imaginations: For marine fungi see Hyde et al. (1998), Sergeeva and Kopytina (2014), and Peay (2016); for fungi in dust see Tanney et al. (2017); for an estimate of the length of fungal hyphae in soils see Ritz and Young (2004).

				completely remodeled itself: This is a commonly reported phenomenon. See Boddy et al. (2009) and Fukusawa et al. (2019).

				this memory remains unclear: Fukusawa et al. (2019). Did the new block of wood cause changes in chemical concentrations or gene expression across the network? Or did the mycelium rapidly redistribute itself within the original block of wood, making regrowth in one direction more likely? Boddy and her colleagues aren’t sure. The researchers who challenge fungi with microscopic mazes have observed that structures within fungal growing tips behave like internal gyroscopes and provide hyphae with a directional memory that allows them to recover the original direction of growth after being diverted around an obstacle (Held et al. [2019]). However, it is unlikely that this mechanism is responsible for the effect Boddy and her colleagues observed because all the hyphae—including their tips—were removed from the original block of wood before it was placed in the fresh dish.

				mycelium is a multitude: Fungal hyphae are unlike cells in animal or plant bodies, which (usually) have clear boundaries. In fact, strictly speaking, hyphae shouldn’t be described as cells at all. Many fungi have hyphae with divisions along their length, known as “septa,” but these can be opened or closed. When open, hyphal contents can flow between the “cells,” and the mycelial networks are referred to as being in a “supracellular” state (Read [2018]). One mycelial network can fuse with many others to make sprawling “guilds,” in which the contents of one network may be shared with others. Where does one cell start and stop? Where does one network start and stop? These questions are often unanswerable. For a recent study on swarms see Bain and Bartolo (2019) and commentary by Ouellette (2019). This study treats swarms as entities in themselves, rather than a collection of individual agents behaving according to local rules. By treating the swarm as a pattern of fluid flow, its behavior can be more effectively modeled. It’s possible that these top-down “hydrodynamic” models could be used to model the growth of hyphal tips more effectively than swarm models based on local rules of interaction.

				 				or to program robots: For slime molds see Tero et al. (2010), Watanabe et al. (2011), and Adamatzky (2016); for fungi see Asenova et al. (2016) and Held et al. (2019).

				in search of food: For a discussion of mycelial trade-offs see Bebber et al. (2007).

				without a body plan: For a discussion of natural selection of links in mycelial networks see Bebber et al. (2007).

				“My kids loved it”: For discussion of the role of fungal bioluminescence and insect spore dispersal see Oliveira et al. (2015); for foxfire and the Turtle see www.cia.gov/library/publications/intelligence-history/intelligence/intelltech.html [accessed October 29, 2019] and Diamant (2004), p. 27. In a guidebook to fungi published in 1875, Mordecai Cooke wrote that bioluminescent fungi were commonly found on the timber props used in coal mines. Miners “are well acquainted with phosphorescent fungi, and the men state that sufficient light is given ‘to see their hands by.’ The specimens of Polyporus were so luminous that they could be seen in the dark at a distance of twenty yards.”

				a different physiological state: Olsson’s videos are available online at doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.4560923.v1 [accessed October 29, 2019].

				over such short timescales: A study published by Oliveira et al. (2015) found that the bioluminescent mycelium of Neonothopanus gardneri was regulated by a temperature-regulated circadian clock. The authors hypothesize that by increasing bioluminescence at night, fungi are better able to attract insects that disperse their spores. The phenomena that Olsson observed can’t be explained on the basis of a circadian rhythm because it took place only once over the course of several weeks.

				bodies in the food: For hyphal diameter see Fricker et al. (2017). The ecologist Robert Whittaker observed that animal evolution is a story of “change and extinction,” whereas fungal evolution is one of “conservatism and continuity.” The great diversity of animal body plans in the fossil record illustrates the many ways animals have found to ingest features of their worlds. The same can’t be said about fungi. Mycelial fungi have had much longer to evolve than many organisms, but ancient fossilized fungi are remarkably similar to those alive today. It appears that there are only so many ways to make a life as a network. See Whittaker (1969).

				to catch falling leaves: For mycelial nets that catch falling leaves see Hedger (1990).

				eight-ton school bus: For measurement of the pressure exerted by the rice blast pathogen see Howard et al. (1991); for the eight-ton school bus figure and for a general discussion of invasive fungal growth see Money (2004a). To exert such high pressures, the penetrative hyphae must glue themselves to the plant to prevent themselves from pushing away from the surface. They do this by producing an adhesive that can resist pressures of more than 10 megapascals—superglue can resist pressures of 15 to 25 megapascals, though probably not on the waxy surface of a plant leaf (Roper and Seminara [2017]).

				 				six hundred a second: The cellular “bladders” are known as “vesicles.” Fungal tip growth is managed by a cellular structure, or “organelle,” called the “Spitzenkörper,” or tip body. Unlike most organelles, the Spitzenkörper does not have a clearly defined boundary. It is not a singular structure like a nucleus, although it appears to move as one. The Spitzenkörper is thought of as a “vesicle supply center,” receiving and sorting vesicles from inside the hyphae and distributing them to the hyphal tip. The Spitzenkörper pilots both itself and its hypha. Hyphal branching is triggered when Spitzenkörpers divide. When growth stops, the Spitzenkörper disappears. If one changes the position of the Spitzenkörper within the growing tip, one can steer the hypha in a different direction. What the Spitzenkörper makes, it can also unmake, dissolving hyphal walls to allow fusion between different parts of a mycelial network. For an introduction to the Spitzenkörper and “six hundred vesicles per second” see Moore (2013a), ch. 2; for a further discussion of the Spitzenkörper see Steinberg (2007); for the observation that the hyphae of some species can extend in real time see Roper and Seminara (2017).

				in its continual development: The French philosopher Henri Bergson described the passage of time in terms reminiscent of a fungal hypha: “Duration is the continuous progress of the past which gnaws into the future and which swells as it advances” (Bergson [1911], p. 7). For the biologist J.B.S. Haldane, life was not populated with things but with stabilized processes. Haldane went as far as to deem “the conception of a ‘thing,’ or material unit,” to be “useless” in biological thinking (Dupré and Nicholson [2018]). For a general introduction to processual biology see Dupré and Nicholson (2018); for the Bateson quote see Bateson (1928), p. 209.

				“weighed eighty-three pounds”: For stinkhorns growing through asphalt see Niksic et al. (2004); for Cooke see Moore (2013b), ch. 3. Tip growth occurs in other organisms besides fungi, but it is an exception not the rule. Animal neurons grow by elongating at the tip, as do some types of plant cell, like pollen tubes. But neither can prolong themselves indefinitely, as fungal hyphae can under the right conditions (Riquelme [2012]).

				and beside one another: Frank Dugan describes the “herb wives” or “wise women” of Reformation Europe as “midwives” to the field of modern mycology (Dugan [2011]). Many lines of evidence suggest that women were primary holders of fungal lore. Such women were the source of much of the information about mushrooms that were formally described by male scholars of the time, including Carolus Clusius (1526–1609) and Francis van Sterbeeck (1630–1693). A number of paintings—from The Mushroom Seller (Felice Boselli, 1650–1732), to Women Gathering Mushrooms (Camille Pissarro, 1830–1903), to The Mushroom Gatherers (Felix Schlesinger, 1833–1910)—portray women working with mushrooms. Numerous European travelers’ accounts from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries describe women selling or gathering mushrooms.

				 				would sing something different: For a discussion and broad definition of polyphony see Bringhurst (2009), ch. 2, “Singing with the frogs: the theory and practice of literary polyphony.”

				structures remains a mystery: For estimates of flow rates through cords and rhizomorphs see Fricker et al. (2017). It is generally thought that fungi use chemicals to regulate their development, but little is known about these growth-regulating substances (Moore et al. [2011], ch. 12.5, and Moore [2005]). How can such well-defined forms arise from a uniform mass of hyphal strands? An animal’s finger is an elaborate form. But it is made up of an elaborate combination of different sorts of cells, with its blood cells, bone cells, nerve cells, and all the rest. Mushrooms are elaborate forms too, but they are sculpted tufts of one type of cell: hyphae. How fungi make mushrooms has long proved a mystery. In 1921, the Russian developmental biologist Alexander Gurwitsch puzzled over the development of mushrooms. A mushroom’s stalk, the ring around its stalk, and its cap are all made of hyphae, tousled like “shaggy uncombed hair.” This is what baffled him. Building a mushroom from nothing but hyphae is like trying to build a face from nothing but muscle cells. For Gurwitsch, the way hyphae grew together to make complex forms was one of the central riddles in all of developmental biology. An animal’s organization is specified at the earliest point in their development. Animal form arises from highly organized parts; regularity gives rise to further regularity. But the form of mushrooms arises from less organized parts. A regular form arises from an irregular material (von Bertalanffy [1933], pp. 112–17). Inspired in part by mushroom growth, Gurwitsch hypothesized that the development of organisms was guided by fields. Iron filings can be rearranged using a magnetic field. In an analogous way, Gurwitsch advanced, the arrangement of cells and tissues within an organism could be shaped by form-giving biological fields. Gurwitsch’s field theory of development has been picked up by a number of contemporary biologists. Michael Levin, a researcher at Tufts University in Boston, describes how all cells are bathed in a “rich field of information,” whether made up of physical, chemical, or electrical cues. These fields of information help to explain the way that complex forms can arise (Levin [2011] and [2012]). A study published in 2004 built a mathematical model that simulated fungal mycelial growth—a “cyberfungus” (Meskkauskas et al. [2004], Money [2004b], and Moore [2005]). In the model, each hyphal tip is able to influence the behavior of other hyphal tips. The study reports that mushroom-like forms can emerge when all the hyphal tips follow exactly the same rules of growth. These findings imply that mushrooms’ forms can emerge from the “crowd behavior” of hyphae without the need for the sort of top-down developmental coordination found in animals and plants. But for this to work, tens of thousands of hyphal tips must obey the same sets of rules at the same time, and switch to different sets of rules at the same time—a modern reframing of Gurwitsch’s riddle. The researchers who created the cyberfungus hypothesize that developmental changes might be coordinated using a cellular “clock,” but no such mechanism has yet been identified, and the means by which living fungi coordinate their development remains a mystery.

				 				was where it fruited: For microtubule motors see Fricker et al. (2017); for Serpula in Haddon Hall see Moore (2013b), ch. 3; for a discussion of the role of flow in fungal development see Alberti (2015) and Fricker et al. (2017). Flow rates in fungal hyphae range from 3 to 70 micrometers per second, sometimes more than a hundred times faster than passive diffusion alone (Abadeh and Lew [2013]). Alan Rayner is keen on the river analogy because rivers are “systems that both shape, and are shaped by their landscape.” A river flows between its banks. In the process, it shapes the banks that it flows within. Rayner understands hyphae to be blunt-ended rivers that flow within banks that they build for themselves. As in any flow system, pressure is everything. Hyphae absorb water from their surroundings. The inward flow of water increases the pressure in the network. But pressure itself doesn’t lead to flow. For material to flow through mycelium, hyphae have to make space for it to flow into. This is hyphal growth. Hyphal contents flow toward hyphal growing tips. Water flows through a mycelial network toward a rapidly inflating mushroom. If one reverses the pressure gradients, one reverses the flow (Roper et al. [2013]). Hyphae appear to be able to regulate flow in more precise ways, however. A study published in 2019 traced the movement of nutrients and signaling compounds through hyphae in real time. In certain large hyphae, the flow of cellular fluid changed direction every few hours, allowing signaling compounds and nutrients to flow along the network in both directions. For around three hours, flow occurred in one direction. For the next three hours, flow occurred in the other direction. How hyphae are able to control the flow of material inside them isn’t known, but by rhythmically changing the direction of cellular flow, substances are distributed more efficiently through the network. The authors speculate that coordinated opening and closing of hyphal pores are a “major factor” in the coordination of bidirectional flow along transport hyphae (Schmieder et al. [2019], see also commentary by Roper and Dressaire [2019]). “Contractile vacuoles” are another way that fungi might direct flow through themselves. These are tubes within hyphae along which waves of contraction are able to pass, and which have been reported to play a part in transport through mycelial networks (Shepherd et al. [1993], Rees et al. [1994], Allaway and Ashford [2001], and Ashford and Allaway [2002]).

				the researchers wryly observed: Roper et al. (2013), Hickey et al. (2016), and Roper and Dressaire (2019). Videos available on YouTube: “Nuclear dynamics in a fungal chimera,” www.youtube.com/watch?v=_FSuUQP_BBc [accessed October 29, 2019]; “Nuclear traffic in a filamentous fungus,” www.youtube.com/watch?v=AtXKcro5o30 [accessed October 29, 2019].

				hundreds of times higher: Cerdá-Olmedo (2001) and Ensminger (2001), ch. 9.

				is far from proven: For “the most intelligent” see Cerdá-Olmedo (2001); for avoidance response see Johnson and Gamow (1971) and Cohen et al. (1975).

				 				different kinds of “other”: Many aspects of mycelial life are influenced by light, from mushroom development to relationship-building with other organisms—the dreaded rice blast fungus only infects its plant hosts at night (Deng et al. [2015]). For light sensing in fungi see Purschwitz et al. (2006), Rodriguez-Romero et al. (2010), and Corrochano and Galland (2016); for sensing surface topography see Hoch et al. (1987) and Brand and Gow (2009); for sensitivity to gravity see Moore (1996), Moore et al. (1996), Kern (1999), Bahn et al. (2007), and Galland (2014).

				even like a brain: Darwin and Darwin (1880), p. 573. For arguments in favor of “root-brains” see Trewavas (2016) and Calvo Garzón and Keijzer (2011); for arguments against brain analogies see Taiz et al. (2019); for an introduction to the “plant intelligence” debate see Pollan, “The Intelligent Plant” (2013).

				a massively parallel basis: For behavior of hyphal tips see Held et al. (2019).

				mycelial networks so quickly: For fairy rings see Gregory (1982).

				options that remained: electricity: Some researchers have reported sudden hyphal contractions, or twitches, that might be used to transmit information. But they aren’t regular enough to be useful on a moment-to-moment basis. See McKerracher and Heath (1986a and 1986b), Jackson and Heath (1992), and Reynaga-Peña and Bartnicki-García (2005). Some propose that information can be transmitted across mycelial networks by changing the patterns of flow within the network, in some cases changing the direction of flow in rhythmic oscillations (Schmieder et al. [2019] and Roper and Dressaire [2019]). This is a promising line of research, and it may be helpful to think of mycelial networks as a type of “liquid computer,” many versions of which have been built and deployed in systems from fighter jets to nuclear reactor control systems (Adamatzky [2019]). However, changes in mycelial flow are still too slow to explain many phenomena. The regular pulses of metabolic activity that pass across mycelial networks are a plausible way for mycelial networks to coordinate their behavior but are also too slow to explain many phenomena (Tlalka et al. [2003, 2007], Fricker et al. [2007a and 2007b, and 2008]). The poster organism for network living is the puzzle-solving slime mold. Although they’re not fungi, slime molds have evolved ways to coordinate their sprawling, shape-shifting bodies and provide a helpful model for thinking about the challenges and opportunities faced by mycelial fungi. They grow more quickly than fungal mycelium, which makes them easier to study. Slime molds communicate between different parts of themselves using rhythmic pulses that ripple down the branches of their networks in rolling waves of contraction. Branches that have found food produce a signaling molecule that increases the strength of contraction. Stronger contractions cause a greater volume of cellular contents to flow along that branch of the network. For a given contraction, more material will pass along a shorter route than a longer route. The more material passes along a route, the more it is strengthened. It is a feedback loop that allows the organism to redirect itself along “successful” routes at the expense of less “successful” ones. Pulses from the different parts of its network combine, interfere, and reinforce one another. In this way, slime molds can integrate information from its various branches and solve complex routing problems without needing a special place to do so (Zhu et al. [2013], Alim et al. [2017], and Alim [2018]).

				 				important role in fungal lives: One researcher observed in the mid-1980s that “fungal electrobiology is about as far as one can get from the present mainstream of biological research” (Harold et al. 1985). Nevertheless, fungi have since been found to respond to electrical stimulation in potentially surprising ways. Treating mycelium with bursts of electrical current can substantially increase mushroom crops (Takaki et al. [2014]). Crops of the highly prized matsutake mushroom—a mycorrhizal species that has so far resisted cultivation—can be nearly doubled by jolting the ground around its partner trees with a 50-kilovolt pulse of electricity. Researchers conducted the study following reports from matsutake pickers that bumper crops of mushrooms could be found in the area around a lightning strike several days after it hit (Islam and Ohga [2012]). For action potentials in plants see Brunet and Arendt (2015); for early reports of action potentials in fungi see Slayman et al. (1976); for a general discussion of fungal electrophysiology see Gow and Morris (2009); for “cable bacteria” see Pfeffer et al. (2012); for action potential–like waves of activity in bacterial colonies see Prindle et al. (2015), Liu et al. (2017), Martinez-Corral et al. (2019), and a summary in Popkin (2017).

				food for this species: Olsson measured the speed of travel by timing the gap between stimulation and measuring a response. This estimated speed thus includes the time taken for the fungus to sense the stimulus, for the stimulus to travel from A to B, and for the response to register with the microelectrodes. The actual speed of travel of the impulse could thus be considerably faster than this estimate. The fastest rate of bulk flow measured in fungal mycelium is around 180 millimeters per hour (Whiteside et al. [2019]). The action potential–like impulses that Olsson measured traveled at 1,800 millimeters per hour.

				“other individuals around it”: Olsson and Hansson (1995) and Olsson (2009). For Olsson’s recording of the change in action potential–like activity see doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.4560923.v1 [accessed October 29, 2019].

				metaphor was in play: Oné Pagán points out that there is no generally accepted definition of a brain. He argues that it makes more sense to define brains in terms of what they do, rather than based on specific details of their anatomy (Pagán [2019]). For regulation of pores in fungal networks see Jedd and Pieuchot (2012) and Lai et al. (2012).

				into the fungal computer: Adamatzky (2018a and 2018b).

				network-based organism: For examples of network computing see van Delft et al. (2018) and Adamatzky (2016).

				they are sensitive to: Adamatzky (2018a and 2018b).

				“turns out to be right”: I asked Olsson why no one had followed up his studies from the 1990s. “When I presented the work at conferences people were really, really interested,” Olsson said, “but they thought it was weird.” All of the researchers I have asked about his study are fascinated and want to know more. The study has since been cited many times. But he was unable to get funding for further work into the subject. It was considered too likely to come to nothing—“too risky” in technical parlance.

				 				before recognizable brains arose: For “archaic myth” see Pollan (2013); for ancient cellular processes underlying brain behavior see Manicka and Levin (2019). The “moving hypothesis” posits that brains evolved as a cause and a consequence of the need for animals to move around. Organisms that don’t move around aren’t faced with the same type of challenge and have evolved different types of networks to deal with the problems they face (Solé et al. [2019]).

				is all that’s needed: Darwin (1871), quoted in Trewavas (2014), ch. 2. For “minimal cognition” see Calvo Garzón and Keijzer (2011); for “biologically embodied cognition” see Keijzer (2017); for plant cognition see Trewavas (2016); for “basal” cognition and degrees of cognition see Manicka and Levin (2019); for a discussion of microbial intelligence see Westerhoff et al. (2014); for a discussion of different types of “brain” see Solé et al. (2019).

				flexibly remodeling themselves: For “network neuroscience” see Bassett and Sporns (2017) and Barbey (2018). Scientific advances that make it possible to grow cultures of human brain tissue in a dish—known as brain “organoids”—complicate our understanding of intelligence yet further. The philosophical and ethical questions raised by these techniques—and the absence of clear answers—are a reminder of how the limits of our own biological selves remain far from clear. In 2018, several leading neuroscientists and bioethicists published an article in Nature in which they raised some of these questions (Farahany et al. [2018]). Over the coming decades, advances in brain-tissue culturing will make it possible to grow artificial “mini-brains” that more closely mimic the functioning of human brains. The authors write that “as brain surrogates become larger and more sophisticated, the possibility of them having capabilities akin to human sentience might become less remote. Such capacities could include being able to feel (to some degree) pleasure, pain, or distress; being able to store and retrieve memories; or perhaps even having some perception of agency or awareness of self.” Some are concerned that brain organoids might one day outsmart us (Thierry [2019]).

				to reach and grasp: For flatworm experiment see Shomrat and Levin (2013); for nervous systems of octopuses see Hague et al. (2013) and Godfrey-Smith (2017), ch. 3.

				catastrophic global transformations: Bengtson et al. (2017) and Donoghue and Antcliffe (2010). With studied caution, Bengtson and colleagues point out that their specimens might not be actual fungi but might belong to a separate lineage of organisms resembling modern fungi in every observable way. One can understand their hesitance. The authors point out that if these mycelial fossils were true fungi, they would “overturn” our current understanding of where and how fungi first evolved. Fungi do not fossilize well, and exactly when fungi first branched off the tree of life is disputed. DNA-based methods—using the so-called “molecular clock”—suggest that the earliest fungi diverged around a billion years ago. In 2019, researchers reported fossilized mycelium found in Arctic shale that dates from around a billion years ago (Loron et al. [2019] and Ledford [2019]). Prior to this finding, the earliest undisputed fungal fossils date from around 450 million years ago (Taylor et al. [2007]). The earliest fossilized gilled mushroom dates from around 120 million years ago (Heads et al. [2017]).

				 				ceaselessly remodel themselves: For Barbara McClintock see Keller (1984).

				to make sense of: Ibid.

				oldest of life’s labyrinths: Humboldt (1849), vol. 1, p. 20.





3. THE INTIMACY OF STRANGERS




			 				when we said “we”: Rich (1994).

				“have our samples back”: BIOMEX is one of several astrobiological projects. For BIOMEX see de Vera et al. (2019); for the EXPOSE facility see Rabbow et al. (2009).

				“limitations of terrestrial life”: For “limits and limitations” quote see Sancho et al. (2008); for a review of organisms sent into space, including lichens, see Cottin et al. (2017); for lichens as models for astrobiological research see Meeßen et al. (2017) and de la Torre Noetzel et al. (2018).

				be understood in isolation: Wulf (2015), ch. 22.

				neither could survive alone: For a discussion of Schwendener and the dual hypothesis see Sapp (1994), ch. 1.

				“believe in Schwendener’s theory”: Sapp (1994), ch. 1; for “sensational romance” see Ainsworth (1976), ch. 4. Some of Beatrix Potter’s biographers have suggested that she was a proponent of Schwendener’s dual hypothesis, and it is possible she changed her mind over the course of her life. Nonetheless, in 1897, in a letter to Charles MacIntosh, a rural postman and amateur naturalist, she appeared to take a clear stance on the question: “You see we do not believe in Schwendener’s theory, and the older books say that the lichens pass gradually into hepaticas, through the foliaceous species. I should like very much to grow the spore of one of those large flat lichens, and also the spore of a real hepatica in order to compare the two ways of sprouting. The names do not matter as I can dry them. If you could get me any more spores of the lichen and the hepatica when the weather changes I should be very much obliged” (Kroken [2007]).

				entirely unexpected: converging: The tree is one of the founding images in modern theories of evolution, and famously the only illustration in Darwin’s On the Origin of Species. Darwin was by no means the first to deploy the image. For centuries, the branching form of trees has provided a framework for human thought in fields from theology to mathematics. Perhaps most familiar are genealogical trees, which have their roots in the Old Testament (the Tree of Jesse).

				relationships at the other: For a debate about Schwendener’s portrayal of lichens see Sapp (1994), ch. 1, and Honegger (2000); for Albert Frank and “symbiosis” see Sapp (1994), ch. 1, Honegger (2000), and Sapp (2004). Frank first used the word “symbiotismus” (which translates literally as “symbiotism”).

				described them as “microlichens”: Ancestors of green sea slugs—Elysia viridis—ingested algae that continued to live within their tissues. Green sea slugs obtain their energy from sunlight, as a plant would. For new symbiotic discoveries see Honegger (2000); for “animal lichens” see Sapp (1994), ch. 1; for “microlichens” see Sapp (2016).

				 				of inter-kingdom collaboration: For Huxley quote see Sapp (1994), p. 21.

				“look like fairy tales”: For the eight percent estimate see Ahmadjian (1995); for a greater area than tropical forests see Moore (2013a), ch. 1; for “hung in hashtags” see Hillman (2018); for the diversity of lichen habitats, including erratics and lichens that live on insects, see Seaward (2008); for the interview with Knudsen see aeon.co/videos/how-lsd-helped-a-scientist-find-beauty-in-a-peculiar-and-overlooked-form-of-life [accessed October 29, 2019].

				a “clay-like” consistency: For “every monument” quote see twitter.com/GlamFuzz [accessed October 29, 2019]; for Mount Rushmore see Perrottet (2006); for Easter Island heads see www.theguardian.com/world/2019/mar/01/easter-island-statues-leprosy [accessed October 29, 2019].

				been able to form: For lichens’ approach to weathering see Chen et al. (2000), Seaward (2008), and Porada et al. (2014); for lichens and soil formation see Burford et al. (2003).

				to make a life: For the history of panspermia and related ideas see Temple (2007) and Steele et al. (2018).

				now known as astrobiology: In response to Lederberg’s concerns about interplanetary infection, NASA developed ways to sterilize spacecraft before departure from Earth. These have not been entirely successful: There is a thriving volunteer population of bacteria and fungi aboard the International Space Station (Novikova et al. [2006]). When the Apollo 11 mission returned from the first trip to the moon in 1969, the astronauts were isolated in stringent quarantine in a converted Airstream trailer for three weeks (Scharf [2016]).

				several hours a day: It had been known that bacteria are capable of acquiring DNA from their surroundings since the work of Frederick Griffith in the 1920s, later confirmed by Oswald Avery and his colleagues in the early 1940s. What Lederberg showed was that bacteria could actively exchange genetic material with each other—a process known as “conjugation.” For a discussion of Lederberg’s findings see Lederberg (1952), Sapp (2009), ch. 10, and Gontier (2015b). Viral DNA has had a profound influence on the history of animal life: It is thought that viral genes played key roles in the evolution of placental mammals from their egg-laying ancestors (Gontier [2015b] and Sapp [2016]).

				the domains of life: Bacterial DNA is found in the genomes of animals (for a general discussion see Yong [2016], ch. 8). Bacterial and fungal DNA is found in plant and algal genomes (Pennisi [2019a]). Fungal DNA is found in lichen-forming algae (Beck et al. [2015]). Horizontal gene transfer is pervasive in fungi (Gluck-Thaler and Slot [2015], Richards et al. [2011], and Milner et al. [2019]). At least eight percent of the human genome started off in viruses (Horie et al. [2010]).

				potentially catastrophic consequences: For foreign DNA “short-circuiting” evolution on Earth see Lederberg and Cowie (1958).

				 				within twenty-four hours: For hostile conditions in space see de la Torre Noetzel et al. (2018).

				“degree of biological activity”: Sancho et al. (2008).

				with no apparent problems: Even at 18 kilograys of gamma irradiation, samples of Circinaria gyrosa only suffered a seventy percent reduction in photosynthetic activity. At 24 kilograys, photosynthetic activity was reduced by ninety-five percent but wasn’t eliminated entirely (Meeßen et al. [2017]). To put these results in context, one of the most radiotolerant organisms ever documented, an archaea isolated from deep-sea hydrothermal vents (appropriately named Thermococcus gammatolerans), can withstand levels of gamma irradiation up to 30 kilograys (Jolivet et al. [2003]). For a summary of lichen space studies see Cottin et al. (2017), Sancho et al. (2008), and Brandt et al. (2015); for effects of high-dose irradiation on lichens see Meeßen et al. (2017), Brandt et al. (2017), and de la Torre et al. (2017); for tardigrades in space see Jönsson et al. (2008).

				“They inform us”: Some disciplines are routinely “informed” by lichens. Lichens are so sensitive to some forms of industrial pollution that they are used as reliable indicators of air quality—“lichen deserts” extend downwind of urban areas and can be used to map the zone affected by industrial pollution. In some cases, lichens serve as indicators in a more literal sense. They are used by geologists to determine the age of rock formations (a discipline known as lichenometry). And litmus, the pH-sensitive dye used to make the indicator paper found in all school science departments, comes from a lichen.

				where photosynthesis happens: Recent work by Thijs Ettema and his group at Uppsala University suggest that eukaryotes arose within archaea. The exact sequence of events remains much debated (Eme et al. [2017]). Bacteria have long been thought of as having no internal cellular structures, known as “organelles.” This view is changing. Many bacteria appear to have organelle-like structures that perform specialized functions. For a discussion see Cepelewicz (2019).

				“intimacy of strangers”: Margulis (1999); Mazur (2009), “Intimacy of Strangers and Natural Selection.”

				that themselves contain bacteria: For “fusion and merger” see Margulis (1996); for origins of endosymbiosis see Sapp (1994), chs. 4 and 11; for Stanier quote see Sapp (1994), p. 179; for “serial endosymbiosis theory” see Sapp (1994), p. 174; for bacteria within bacteria within insects see Bublitz et al. (2019); for Margulis’s original paper (under the name Sagan) see Sagan (1967).

				“sum of its parts”: For “quite analogous” quote see Sagan (1967); for “remarkable examples” quote see Margulis (1981), p. 167. For de Bary, in 1879, the most significant implication of symbiosis was that it could result in evolutionary novelty (Sapp [1994], p. 9). “Symbiogenesis” (“becoming by living together”) was the term given to the process by which symbiosis could give rise to new species by its earliest Russian proponents, Konstantin Mereschkowsky (1855–1921) and Boris Mikhaylovich Kozo-Polyansky (1890–1957) (Sapp [1994], pp. 47–48). Kozo-Polyansky included several references to lichens in his work. “One should not think that lichens are just a simple sum of certain algae and fungi. Rather, they have many specific features found neither in algae nor in fungi…everywhere—in its chemistry, its shape, its structure, its life, its distribution—the composite lichen exhibits new features not characteristic of its separated components” (Kozo-Polyansky trans. [2010], pp. 55–56).

				 				“twentieth-century biology”: For Dawkins and Dennett quotes, among others, see Margulis (1996).

				as fungal hyphae do: “The evolutionary ‘tree of life’ seems like the wrong metaphor,” the geneticist Richard Lewontin remarked. “Perhaps we should think of it as an elaborate bit of macramé” (Lewontin [2001]). It’s not entirely fair on trees. The branches of some species can fuse with each other. It is a process known as “inosculation,” from the Latin osculare, which means “to kiss.” But look at the tree nearest to you. The chances are that it forks more than it fuses. The branches of most trees are not like fungal hyphae, which meld with each other as part of their daily practice. Whether the tree is an appropriate metaphor for evolution has been debated for decades. Darwin himself worried about whether the “coral of life” would make a better image, though he decided in the end that it would make things “excessively complicated” (Gontier [2015a]). In 2009, in one of the most acrimonious upwellings of the tree question, New Scientist published an issue that proclaimed on its cover that “Darwin was wrong.” “Uprooting Darwin’s tree,” shrieked the editorial. Predictably, it inflamed a furious response (Gontier [2015a]). Amid the storm of reaction a letter sent by Daniel Dennett stands out: “What on earth were you thinking when you produced a garish cover proclaiming that ‘Darwin was wrong’…?” You can understand why Dennett was cross. Darwin wasn’t wrong. It is just that he came up with his theory of evolution before DNA, genes, symbiotic mergers, and horizontal gene transfer were known to exist. Our understanding of the history of life has been transformed by these discoveries. But Darwin’s central thesis that evolution proceeds by natural selection is not contested—though the extent to which it is the primary driving force in evolution is debated (O’Malley [2015]). Symbiosis and horizontal gene transfer provide new ways that novelty can be generated; they are new co-authors of evolution. But natural selection remains the editor. Nonetheless, in the light of symbiotic mergers and horizontal gene transfer, many biologists have begun to reimagine the tree of life as a reticulate meshwork formed as lineages branch, fuse, and entangle one another: a “network,” or a “web,” a “net,” a “rhizome,” or a “cobweb” (Gontier [2015a] and Sapp [2009], ch. 21). The lines on these diagrams knot and melt into each other, connecting different species, kingdoms, and even domains of life. Links loop in and out of the world of viruses, genetic entities not even considered to be alive. If anyone wanted a new poster organism for evolution they needn’t look far. This is a vision of life that resembles fungal mycelium more than anything else.

				form their relationship afresh: In some lichens, specialized dispersal structures called “soredia” form, which consist of fungal and algal cells. In some cases, a newly germinated lichen fungus might team up with a photobiont that doesn’t quite satisfy its needs and survive as a small “photosynthetic smudge” known as a “prethallus” until the real thing comes along (Goward [2009c]). Some lichens can disassemble and reassemble without producing spores. If certain lichens are placed in a petri dish with the right kind of nutrients, the partners disentangle and creep apart. Once separated, they can re-form their relationship (though usually imperfectly). In this sense, lichens are reversible. At least in some cases, the honey can be stirred out of the porridge. However, to date only in the case of a single lichen—Endocarpon pusillum—have the partners been separated from each other, grown apart, and then recombined to form all the stages of the lichen, including functional spores—known as a “spore-to-spore” resynthesis (Ahmadjian and Heikkilä [1970]).

				 				“see the lichen itself”: The symbiotic nature of lichens presents some interesting technical problems. Lichens have long been small nightmares for taxonomists. As the situation stands, lichens are referred to by the name of the fungal partner. For example, the lichen that arises through the interaction of the fungus Xanthoria parietina and the alga Trebouxia irregularis is known as Xanthoria parietina. Similarly, the combination of the fungus Xanthoria parietina and the alga Trebouxia arboricola is known as Xanthoria parietina. Lichen names are a synecdoche, in that they refer to a whole by reference to a part (Spribille [2018]). The current system implies that the fungal component of the lichen is the lichen. But this isn’t true. Lichens emerge out of a negotiation between several partners. “To see lichens as fungi,” Goward bemoans, “is to miss seeing lichens altogether” (Goward [2009c]). It is as if chemists called any compound that contained carbon—from diamond to methane to methamphetamine—carbon. You’d be forced to admit that they might be missing something. This is more than semantic grumbling. To name something is to acknowledge that it exists. When any new species is found, it is “described” and given a name. And lichens do have names, plenty of them. Lichenologists aren’t taxonomically ascetic. It’s just that the only names they can give glance off the phenomenon they aim to describe. It is a structural issue. Biology is built around a taxonomic system that has no way to recognize the symbiotic status of lichens. They are literally unnameable.

				worlds writ small: Sancho et al. (2008).

				rehydrated thirty days later: de la Torre Noetzel et al. (2018).

				legacies of the relationship: For unique lichen compounds and human uses see Shukla et al. (2010) and State of the World’s Fungi (2018); for metabolic legacies of lichen relationships see Lutzoni et al. (2001).

				thousands of years old: For a report from the Deep Carbon Observatory see Watts (2018).

				nine thousand years old: For lichens in deserts see Lalley and Viles (2005) and State of the World’s Fungi (2018); for lichens within rocks see de los Ríos et al. (2005) and Burford et al. (2003); for Antarctic Dry Valleys see Sancho et al. (2008); for liquid nitrogen see Oukarroum et al. (2017); for lichen longevity see Goward (1995).

				to make interplanetary journeys: Sancho et al. (2008).

				any living cell whatsoever: For the shock of ejection see Sancho et al. (2008) and Cockell (2008). In a number of studies, bacteria have proved to be more resistant to high temperatures and shock pressures than lichens. For reentry see Sancho et al. (2008).

				 				the question remains open: Sancho et al. (2008) and Lee et al. (2017).

				depending on their circumstances: For origins of lichens see Lutzoni et al. (2018) and Honegger et al. (2012). There is a lot of debate about the identity of ancient lichen-like fossils and their relationship to extant lineages. Marine lichen-like organisms have been found dating from 600 million years ago (Yuan et al. [2005]) and some argue that these marine lichens played a role in the movement of lichens’ ancestors onto the land (Lipnicki [2015]). For multiple evolution of lichens and re-lichenization see Goward (2009c); for de-lichenization see Goward (2010); for optional lichenization see Selosse et al. (2018).

				in each other’s company: Hom and Murray (2014).

				symbiotic way of life: For “the song, not the singer” see Doolittle and Booth (2017).

				well be other planets: Hydropunctaria maura used to be known as Verrucaria maura (or “warty midnight”). For a long-term study of the arrival of lichens on a newly born island see the case of Surtsey at www.anbg.gov.au/lichen/case-studies/surtsey.html [accessed October 29, 2019].

				as well as nouns: For “wholes” and “collections of parts” see Goward (2009a).

				centuries of painstaking scrutiny: Spribille et al. (2016).

				“one fungus and one alga”: For a discussion of diversity of fungi within lichens see Arnold et al. (2009); for additional partners in wolf lichens see Tuovinen et al. (2019) and Jenkins and Richards (2019).

				what living organisms are: For “It doesn’t matter what you call it” see Hillman (2018). Goward has formulated a definition of lichens that takes account of these recent findings: “The enduring physical byproduct of lichenization defined as a process whereby a nonlinear system comprising an unspecified number of fungal, algal and bacterial taxa give rise to a thallus [the shared body of the lichen] viewed as an emergent property of its constituent parts” (Goward 2009b).

				“blob on a dish”: For lichens as microbial reservoirs see Grube et al. (2015), Aschenbrenner et al. (2016), and Cernava et al. (2019).

				“it hard to relate”: For queer theory for lichens see Griffiths (2015).

				Or perhaps y’all: See Gilbert et al. (2012) for a more detailed breakdown of how microbes confuse different definitions of biological individuality. For more on microbes and immunity see McFall-Ngai (2007) and Lee and Mazmanian (2010). Some propose alternative definitions of biological individuals based on the “common fate” of the living system. For instance, Frédéric Bouchard proposes that “A biological individual is a functionally integrated entity whose integration is linked to the common fate of the system when faced with selective pressures from the environment” (Bouchard 2018).

				that they actually exist: Gordon et al. (2013) and Bordenstein and Theis (2015).

				be fraught with tension: For infections caused by gut bacteria see Van Tyne et al. (2019).

				“We are all lichens”: Gilbert et al. (2012).





4. MYCELIAL MINDS




			 				and they answer me: Sabina, from a recording by Gordon Wasson, quoted in Schultes et al. (2001), p. 156.

				bounded sense of self: For a brief summary of clinical studies into psychedelics see Winkelman (2017); for an extended discussion see Pollan (2018).

				act like trip wires: Hughes et al. (2016).

				onto a major vein: For the timing and height of ants’ death grips see Hughes et al. (2011) and Hughes (2013); for orientation see Chung et al. (2017). There are many different species of Ophiocordyceps fungi, and many different species of carpenter ant, but each ant is host to only one species of fungus, and each species of fungus can only control one species of ant (de Bekker et al. [2014]). Different fungus-ant pairings are particular about their choice of death site. Some fungi cause their insect avatars to bite onto twigs, some onto bark, and some onto leaves (Andersen et al. [2009] and Chung et al. [2017]).

				over the ants’ behavior: For fungal proportion of ant biomass see Mangold et al. (2019); for visualization of fungal network within ant bodies see Fredericksen et al. (2017).

				manipulation of ant behavior: For the hypothesis that fungal manipulation takes place by chemical means see Fredericksen et al. (2017); for chemicals produced by Ophiocordyceps see de Bekker et al. (2014); for a discussion of Ophiocordyceps and ergot alkaloids see Mangold et al. (2019).

				minds to manipulate: For fossilized leaf scars see Hughes et al. (2011).

				or less equal measure: For McKenna quote see Letcher (2006), p. 258.

				cultures and spiritual practices: Schultes et al. (2001), p. 9. For wide-ranging if sometimes uncritical discussions of intoxication in the animal world see Siegel (2005) and Samorini (2002).

				caused by convulsive ergotism: For a discussion of Amanita muscaria see Letcher (2006), chs. 7–9. Some hypothesize that the accusers in the Salem witch trials were afflicted by convulsive ergotism (Caporael, 1976 and Matossian, 1982) although their arguments have been robustly countered by Spanos and Gottleib (1976). Known in the Middle Ages and Renaissance as Saint Anthony’s fire, ergot-induced visions and psycho-spiritual anguish are thought to have inspired contemporary visions of hell. For Bosch see Dixon (1984). Livestock, too, are vulnerable to ergot poisoning. “Sleepy grass,” “drunk grass,” and the “ryegrass staggers” are all named after their effects on cattle, horses, and sheep (Clay [1988]). Ergot fungi also have powerful medicinal effects and have been used for hundreds of years by midwives to stop postpartum bleeding. Henry Wellcome, the entrepreneur whose endowment founded the Wellcome Trust, researched reports into the medicinal effects of ergot, the grain fungus. He recorded that ergot was regarded by midwives in sixteenth-century Scotland, Germany, and France “to be of remarkable and certain efficacy” in inducing uterine contractions and controlling bleeding after childbirth. It was from these herbwives or midwives that male physicians learned of the therapeutic properties of ergot, which forms the basis of the drug ergometrine, still used today to treat heavy bleeding following childbirth (Dugan [2011], pp. 20–21). It was for their reputation as obstetric drugs that Albert Hofmann began investigating them at Sandoz Laboratories in the 1930s, a research program that led to the synthesis of LSD in 1938. For a discussion of ergot alkaloids, their history and uses, see Wasson et al. (2009), “A Challenging Question and My Answer.”

				 				accounts of mushroom use: For a discussion of the history of psilocybin mushroom use in Mexico see Letcher (2006), ch. 5; Schultes (1940); and Schultes et al. (2001), “Little Flowers of the Gods.” For the Sahagún quote see Schultes (1940).

				aloft by feathered deities: Letcher (2006), p. 76.

				“of the hominid mind”: For McKenna and the Tassili painting and quote see McKenna (1992), ch. 6; for a discussion of McKenna and the Tassili painting see Metzner (2005), pp. 42–43; for a more critical discussion see Letcher (2006), pp. 37–38.

				a master of the art: A paper published in 2019 analyzed the residues inside a pouch made from a fox snout found in a ritual bundle excavated in Bolivia, dating from more than a thousand years ago. The researchers found traces of multiple psychoactive compounds—including cocaine (from coca), DMT, harmine, and bufotenine. The analysis provided tentative evidence of psilocin—a psychoactive breakdown product of psilocybin—which, if true, would suggest that psilocybin mushrooms had been present in the ritual bundle (Miller et al. [2019]). The Eleusinian Mysteries—a celebration of Demeter, the goddess of grain and harvest, and her daughter Persephone—were one of the major religious festivals in ancient Greece. As part of the celebrations, initiates drank a cup of a liquid known as “kykeon.” Following the drink, initiates experienced ghostly apparitions and awe-inspiring ecstatic and visionary states. Many described being permanently changed by their experience (Wasson et al. [2009], ch. 3). Although the identity of kykeon remained a carefully guarded secret, it is very likely to have been a mind-altering brew—a notorious scandal erupted when it was found that Athenian aristocrats had been drinking kykeon at home with their guests at dinner parties (Wasson et al. [1986], p. 155). There were no registration lists for the rites of Eleusis, and so there is some uncertainty about exactly who attended. However, most Athenian citizens were initiates, and many notable figures are thought to have attended, including Euripides, Sophocles, Pindar, and Aeschylus. Plato wrote about the experience of mystery initiations in some detail in his Symposium and in Phaedrus, using language that refers clearly to the rites at Eleusis (Burkett [1987], pp. 91–93). Aristotle did not refer explicitly to the mysteries at Eleusis but did refer to mystery initiations—a reference that is probably compatible with the Eleusinian Mysteries given the preeminence of the Eleusinian rites by the mid-fourth century BC. Hofmann, along with Gordon Wasson and Carl Ruck, hypothesized that kykeon was made from ergot fungi growing on grain, somehow purified to avoid the dreadful symptoms associated with its accidental consumption (Wasson et al. [2009]). McKenna speculated that the priests at Eleusis distributed psilocybin mushrooms (McKenna [1992], ch. 8). Others have suggested a preparation made from opium poppies. There are other examples of possible use of mushrooms in ancient religious contexts. In central Asia a religious cult sprang up around the use of a mind-altering preparation called “soma.” Soma induced ecstatic states, and devotional hymns to soma are recorded in the Rigveda, an ancient text dating from around 1500 BCE. Like kykeon, the identity of the drink remains unknown. Some—most notably Wasson—have argued that it was the red-and-white-spotted mushroom Amanita muscaria (for a discussion see Letcher [2008], ch. 8). McKenna—true to form—suggested that psilocybin mushrooms are more likely candidates. Others have suggested cannabis. There is no unequivocal evidence either way.

				 				minds of their hosts: For the reference to the fictional monsters see Yong (2017). In 2018, researchers at the University of Ryukyus in Japan discovered that several species of cicada had domesticated Ophiocordyceps fungi that lived within their body (Matsuura et al. [2018]). Like many insects that live mostly on sap, cicadas depend on symbiotic bacteria to produce several essential nutrients and vitamins, without whom they can’t survive. But in a number of Japanese species of cicada, the bacteria have been replaced by a species of Ophiocordyceps. It is the last thing one would expect. Ophiocordyceps are brutally effective killers that have honed their abilities over tens of millions of years. Yet somehow, over the course of their long history together, Ophiocordyceps have become essential life partners of the cicadas. What’s more, it has happened at least three times in three separate lineages of cicada. Domesticated Ophiocordyceps are a reminder that the distinctions between “beneficial” and “parasitic” microbes are not always clear-cut.

				nostrum for eternal youth: For immunosuppressant drugs see State of the World’s Fungi (2018), “Useful Fungi”; for nostrum for eternal youth see Adachi and Chiba (2007).

				of its insect host: Coyle et al. (2018); for “whacky” discovery see twitter.com/mbeisen/status/1019655132940627969 [accessed October 29, 2019].

				nervous systems remain intact: For a description of the behavior of infected flies see Hughes et al. (2016) and Cooley et al. (2018); for “flying saltshakers of death” see Yong (2018).

				a very different story: For the Kasson study see Boyce et al. (2019) and the discussion in Yong (2018). It isn’t the first report that insect-manipulating fungi might control their hosts using chemicals that can also alter human minds; cousins of Ophiocordyceps fungi are eaten alongside psilocybin mushrooms in some indigenous ceremonies in Mexico (Guzmán et al. [1998]).

				how, exactly, isn’t known: Cathinone has been reported to increase aggression in ants, and it might be responsible for the hyperactive behaviors observed in infected cicadas (Boyce et al. [2019]).

				when they hunt elk: See Ovid (1958), p. 186; for Amazonian shamanism see Viveiros de Castro (2004); for Yukaghir people see Willerslev (2007).

				“fungus in ant’s clothing”: See Hughes et al. (2016). Neuromicrobiology is a relatively new field and understanding of gut microbes’ influence on animal behaviors, cognition, and psychological states remains patchy (Hooks et al. [2018]). Nonetheless, some patterns are starting to emerge. Mice, for example, require a healthy gut microflora to develop a functional nervous system in the first place (Bruce-Keller et al. [2018]). If one knocks out the microbiome of adolescent mice before they have had the chance to develop a functional nervous system, they develop cognitive defects. These include memory problems and difficulty identifying objects (de la Fuente-Nunez et al. [2017]). The most dramatic demonstrations come from studies that swap the microbiota between different mouse lines. When “timid” mouse strains are given fecal transplants from “normal” strains, they lose their caution. Likewise, if “normal” strains are inoculated with the microbes of the “timid” strains, they acquire “exaggerated caution and hesitancy” (Bruce-Keller et al. [2018]). Differences in gut microbiota in mice affect the ability of mice to forget the experience of pain (Pennisi [2019b] and Chu et al. [2019]). Many gut microbes produce chemicals which influence the activity of the nervous system, including neurotransmitters and short chain fatty acids (SCFAs). More than 90 percent of the serotonin in our bodies—the neurotransmitter that when abundant makes us feel happy, and when depleted makes us feel depressed—is produced in our guts, and gut microbes play a major role in regulating its production (Yano et al. 2015). Two studies have investigated the effect of transplanting the fecal microbiota of depressed human patients into germ-free mice and rats. The animals developed symptoms of depression, including anxiety and a loss of interest in pleasurable behaviors. These studies suggest that not only can imbalances in the gut microbiota result in depression but that the same imbalances may be responsible for depressed behavior in mice and in humans (Zheng et al. [2016] and Kelly et al. [2016]). Further studies on humans have shown that certain probiotic treatments can reduce symptoms of depression, anxiety, and the occurrence of negative thoughts (Mohajeri et al. [2018] and Valles-Colomer et al. [2019]). However, a multibillion-dollar probiotics industry hovers around the field of neuromicrobiology, and a number of researchers have pointed out the tendency to overhype findings. Gut communities are complex, and manipulating them is a challenge. There are so many variables involved that few studies are able to identify causal links between the action of specific microbes and specific behaviors (Hooks et al. [2018]).

				 				in the pond, and…: For a full exposition of the “extended phenotype” see Dawkins (1982); for “tightly limited speculation” see Dawkins (2004); for a discussion of fungal manipulation of insect behavior in terms of extended phenotypes see Andersen et al. (2009), Hughes (2013 and 2014), and Cooley et al. (2018).

				is simply catching up: For a discussion of the “first wave” of psychedelic research in the 1950s and ’60s see Dyke (2008) and Pollan (2018), ch. 3.

				history of modern medicine: For the Johns Hopkins study see Griffiths et al. (2016); for the NYU study see Ross et al. (2016); for the interview with Griffiths see Fantastic Fungi: The Magic Beneath Us, directed by Louis Schwartzberg; for a general discussion, including the record “treatment effect” sizes, see Pollan (2018), ch. 1.

				defined sense of self: For a study on psilocybin-occasioned mystical experience see Griffiths et al. (2008); for the role of awe in psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy see Hendricks (2018).

				 				with the natural world: For the role of psilocybin in treating tobacco addiction see Johnson et al. (2014 and 2015); for psilocybin-induced “openness” and life satisfaction see MacLean et al. (2011); for a general discussion of the role of psychedelics in treating addiction see Pollan (2018), ch. 6, pt. 2; for sense of connection with the natural world see Lyons and Carhart-Harris (2018) and Studerus et al. (2011). There is a long tradition of Native American communities using the psychedelic cactus peyote as a treatment for alcoholism. Between the 1950s and the 1970s, a number of studies investigated the possibility that psilocybin and LSD could be used to treat drug addiction. Several reported positive effects. In 2012, a meta-analysis pooled the data from the most rigorously controlled trials. It reported that a single dose of LSD had a beneficial effect on alcohol misuse that lasted up to six months (Krebs and Johansen [2012]). In an online survey designed to investigate the “natural ecology” of the phenomenon, Matthew Johnson and his colleagues analyzed accounts from more than three hundred people who reported that they had reduced their tobacco intake or stopped entirely following an experience with psilocybin or LSD (Johnson et al. [2017]).

				of religious belief—exists: For “started out stone-cold” see Pollan (2018), ch. 4; for nonmaterial reality as basis for religious belief see Pollan (2018), ch. 2. Even sitters who guide and observe the sessions at Johns Hopkins have reported unexpected changes in their worldviews. One guide who had sat through dozens of psilocybin sessions described the experience: “I started out on the atheist side, but I began seeing things every day in my work that were at odds with this belief. My world became more and more mysterious as I sat with people on psilocybin” (Pollan [2018], ch. 1).

				and structure of neurons: For the influence of psychedelics on the growth and architecture of neurons see Ly et al. (2018).

				states of cerebral flux: For psilocybin and the DMN see Carhart-Harris et al. (2012) and Petri et al. (2012); for the effects of LSD on brain connectivity see Carhart-Harris et al. (2016b).

				a change in symptoms: For the Hoffer quote see Pollan (2018), ch. 3.

				new cognitive possibilities: For the Johnson quote see Pollan (2018), ch. 6; for the role of psilocybin in treating the “rigid pessimism” of depression see Carhart-Harris et al. (2012).

				relationship to the world: For a discussion of ego-dissolution and “merging” see Pollan (2018), prologue and ch. 5.

				humans or fungi alone: For “cool night of the mind” and “baroque” see McKenna and McKenna (1976), pp. 8–9.

				continent of possible opinion: For the Whitehead quote see Russell (1956), p. 39; for “tightly limited” speculation see Dawkins (2004).

				so for very long: It isn’t straightforward to estimate when exactly the first mushrooms became “magic.” The simplest approach is to assume that the ability to make psilocybin originated in the most recent common ancestor of all the fungi that make psilocybin. However, this doesn’t work because 1) psilocybin has been horizontally transferred between fungal lineages (Reynolds et al. [2018]), and 2) psilocybin biosynthesis has evolved more than once (Awan et al. [2018]). Jason Slot, a researcher at Ohio State University, made the estimate of seventy-five million years based on a hypothesis that the genes needed to make psilocybin first clustered in an ancestor of the genera Gymnopilus and Psilocybe. Slot suspects this to be the case because the other occurrences of the psilocybin gene cluster have been shown to have arisen through horizontal gene transfer.

				 				would have quickly degenerated: For horizontal gene transfer of psilocybin gene cluster see Reynolds et al. (2018); for multiple origins of psilocybin biosynthesis see Awan et al. (2018).

				which makes matters worse: Some relationships between insects and fungi involve more ambiguous manipulation, like “cuckoo fungi,” which capitalize on the social behavior of termites by producing small balls that look like termite eggs, and produce a pheromone found in real termite eggs. Termites carry the fake eggs into their nest, where they tend to them. When they fail to germinate, the fungal “eggs” are thrown into waste piles. Surrounded with a nutrient-rich compost, the cuckoo fungi sprout and are able to live free from competition with other fungi (Matsuura et al. [2009]).

				that benefited the fungus: For leaf-cutter ants foraging for psilocybin mushrooms see Masiulionis et al. (2013); for gnats and other insects that eat psilocybin mushrooms and the “lure” hypothesis of psilocybin see Awan et al. (2018). Pure crystalline psilocybin is expensive, and heavy regulation makes research hard. There is some evidence that psilocybin impedes the behavior of insects and other invertebrates. In a well-known series of experiments in the 1960s, researchers gave a range of drugs to spiders to study the webs that they spun. High doses of psilocybin prevented web-building altogether. Spiders on lower doses spun looser webs, behaving “as if they were heavier.” By contrast, LSD caused the spiders to produce “unusually regular” webs (Witt [1971]). More recently, studies have found that fruit flies given metitepine, a chemical that blocks the serotonin receptors that psilocybin stimulates, lost their appetites. This has led some to suggest that psilocybin may serve to increase the appetite of flies—possibly serving to disperse fungal spores (Awan et al. [2018]). Michael Beug, a biochemist and mycologist at Evergreen State College, is among the researchers who argue against the psilocybin-as-deterrent hypothesis. Mushrooms are a fruit. Just as an apple tree makes its fruit conspicuous to facilitate the dispersal of its seeds, so fungi produce mushrooms to facilitate the dispersal of their spores. Psilocybin, as Beug points out, is found in high concentrations in mushrooms of psilocybin-producing species but in negligible quantities in the mycelium of most psilocybin-producing species (though not all: Psilocybe caerulescens and Psilocybe hoogshagenii/semperviva are reported to contain significant concentrations of psilocybin in their mycelium). Yet it is the mycelium, not the mushrooms, that is in most need of defense. Why would psilocybin mushrooms go to the trouble to defend their fruit while leaving their mycelium unprotected (Pollan [2018], ch. 2)?

				 				human relationships with fungi: Other mammals, too, are known to eat species of psilocybin mushroom with no ill effects. Beug, the biochemist and mycologist in charge of the poisoning reports filed with the North American Mycological Association, has received many such accounts. “With horses or cows, it may or may not be accidental,” Beug told me. In some cases, however, animals do seem to seek them out. “Some dogs will see their owners picking psilocybin mushrooms and take an interest—and then will eat the mushrooms again and again with effects that appear familiar to the human observer.” Only once has he dealt with reports of a cat “who ate mushrooms repeatedly, and appeared to become quite ‘bemushroomed.’ ”

				“visions in brilliant colors”: Schultes (1940).

				“Growths that Produce Visions”: For a discussion of Wasson’s article in Life and its reach see Pollan (2018), ch. 2, and Davis (1996), ch. 4.

				“had nothing to add”: For “trailing our mother” see McKenna (2012). Possibly the first account of a trip in a widely read organ was written by the journalist Sidney Katz, who published an article in the popular Canadian magazine Maclean’s entitled “My Twelve Hours as a Madman.” For a discussion see Pollan (2018), ch. 3.

				“these strange deep realms”: For a discussion of Leary’s “visionary voyage” and the Harvard Psilocybin Project see Letcher (2006), pp. 198–201, and Pollan (2018), ch. 3. For Leary quote, see Leary (2005).

				or driven underground: Letcher (2006), pp. 201 and 254–55; Pollan (2018), ch. 3.

				“in alchemical gold”: For a discussion of the growing interest in magic mushrooms see Letcher (2006), “Underground, Overground”; for a discussion of the development of cultivation techniques see Letcher (2006), “Muck and Brass”; for the grower’s guide see McKenna and McKenna (1976).

				with subtly different effects: For a discussion of The Mushroom Cultivator and the Dutch and English magic mushroom scenes see Letcher (2006), “Muck and Brass.”

				inhospitable temperate climates: In Central American pastures mushrooms grow readily, and there is nothing to suggest that people actively cultivated them.

				“state courthouses and jails”: For psilocybin-containing lichen see Schmull et al. (2014); for global distribution of psilocybin mushrooms see Stamets (1996 and 2005); for “occur in abundance” see Allen and Arthur (2005); for an account of the discovery of psilocybin mushrooms around the world see Letcher (2006), pp. 221–25; for “parks, housing developments” see Stamets (2005).

				“the mushrooms themselves”: Schultes et al. (2001), p. 23.

				James concluded: See James (2002), p. 300.





5. BEFORE ROOTS




			 				Describe the sky to me: Tom Waits/Kathleen Brennan, “Green Grass,” on Real Gone (2004).

				 				nearly all terrestrial organisms: For the evolution of land plants see Lutzoni et al. (2018), Delwiche and Cooper (2015), and Pirozynski and Malloch (1975); for biomass of plants see Bar-On et al. (2018).

				Mollusks thrived: For early biocrusts see Beerling (2019), p. 15, and Wellman and Strother (2015); for Ordovician life see web.archive.org/web/20071221094614/http://www.palaeos.com/Paleozoic/Ordovician/Ordovician.htm#Life [accessed October 29, 2019].

				make it onto land: For incentives of life on land for the ancestors of plants see Beerling (2019), p. 155. Perhaps unsurprisingly, there has not always been consensus on this topic. The idea was first proposed by Kris Pirozynski and David Malloch in their 1975 paper “The origin of land plants: a matter of mycotropism.” In it they made the claim that “land plants never had any independence [from fungi], for if they had, they could never have colonised the land.” It was a radical idea at the time because it posited that symbiosis had been a major force in one of the most significant evolutionary developments in the history of life. Lynn Margulis ran with the idea and described symbiosis as “the moon that pulled the tide of life from its oceanic depths to dry land and up into the air” (Beerling [2019], pp. 126–27). For a discussion of fungi and their role in the evolution of land plants see Lutzoni et al. (2018), Hoysted et al. (2018), Selosse et al. (2015), and Strullu-Derrien et al. (2018).

				can’t afford to sustain: For the proportion of plant species that form mycorrhizal associations see Brundrett and Tedersoo (2018). The seven percent of land plant species that don’t form mycorrhizal associations have evolved alternative strategies, like parasitism or carnivory. This figure may be even less than seven percent: Recent studies have found that plants that are traditionally thought of as “non-mycorrhizal”—those in the cabbage family for example—form relationships with non-mycorrhizal fungi that provide benefit to the plant as mycorrhizal associations do (van der Heijden et al. [2017], Cosme et al. [2018], and Hiruma et al. [2018]).

				an evolutionary refrain: For fungi in seaweeds—“mycophycobiosis”—see Selosse and Tacon (1998); for “soft green balls” see Hom and Murray (2014).

				Field marveled: A group of living plants called “liverworts” are thought to be the earliest-diverging lineage of land plants and may stretch back more than four hundred million years. Liverworts in the genera Treubia and Haplomitrium may provide us with the best glimpse at early plant life (Beerling [2019], p. 25). There are a number of lines of evidence besides fossils. The genetic apparatus responsible for the chemical signals, used by plants to communicate with mycorrhizal fungi, is identical in all living plant groups, implying that it was present in the common ancestor of all plants (Wang et al. [2010], Bonfante and Selosse [2010], and Delaux et al. [2015]). The surviving ancestors of the earliest land plants—the liverworts—form relationships with the most ancient lineages of mycorrhizal fungi (Pressel et al. [2010]). Furthermore, the most recent estimates of the timings suggest that fungi made the transition to land earlier than the ancestors of modern land plants, indicating that it would have been nearly impossible for early plants not to have encountered fungi (Lutzoni et al. [2018]).

				 				fungi (mykes) into being: For evolution of roots see Brundrett (2002) and Brundrett and Tedersoo (2018).

				“fungus-roots, myco-rhizas”: For the evolution of thinner, more opportunistic roots see Ma et al. (2018). The diameter of fine roots varies but is typically between 100 and 500 micrometers. Among one of the most ancient lineages of mycorrhizal fungi—the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi—transport hyphae are around 20 to 30 micrometers in diameter, and their fine absorptive hyphae are as thin as 2 to 7 micrometers (Leake et al. [2004]).

				figures are certainly underestimates: For a third to a half of soil biomass see Johnson et al. (2013); for estimates of lengths of mycorrhizal fungi in top ten centimeters of soil see Leake and Read (2017). These estimates are based on the lengths of mycorrhizal mycelium found in different ecosystems and take into account mycorrhizal type and land-use type (Leake et al. [2004]).

				“tree from the soil”: For Frank’s work on mycorrhizal fungi see Frank (2005); for a discussion of Frank’s work see Trappe (2005).

				grown in sterile conditions: For a description of Frank’s experiments see Beerling (2019), p. 129. One of Frank’s most vocal critics was the botanist and later the dean of Harvard Law School Roscoe Pound, who denounced his propositions as “decidedly fishy.” Pound took the side of more “sober” authors who maintained that mycorrhizal fungi were “probably injurious by taking nourishment properly belonging to the tree.” “In all cases,” Pound thundered, symbiosis “results advantageously to one of the parties, and we can never be sure that the other would not have been nearly as well off, if left to itself” (Sapp [2004]).

				The Lord of the Rings: Tolkien (2014), “For you little gardener” see vol. II, “Farewell to Lórien”; for “Sam Gamgee planted” see vol. III, “The Grey Havens.”

				think it’s probable: For rapid evolution in the Devonian see Beerling (2019), pp. 152 and 155; for the drop in carbon dioxide see Johnson et al. (2013) and Mills et al. (2017). There are alternative hypotheses regarding the triggers for the drop in atmospheric carbon dioxide. For example, carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are emitted by volcanism and other tectonic activity. If levels of volcanic carbon dioxide emissions fell, then levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide would also fall, potentially triggering a period of global cooling (McKenzie et al. [2016]).

				climates start to change: For mycorrhizal assistance to the plant boom in the Devonian see Beerling (2019), p. 162; for a discussion of weathering in light of mycorrhizal activity see Taylor et al. (2009).

				composition of the atmosphere: Mills used the COPSE model (Carbon, Oxygen, Phosphorus, Sulphur, and Evolution), which examines the cycling of all these elements over long periods of evolutionary time in relation to a “simplified representation of the land biota, atmosphere, oceans and sediments” (Mills et al. [2017]).

				“of life on Earth”: Mills et al. (2017); for Field’s experiments on mycorrhizal responses to ancient climates see Field et al. (2012).

				upon a winning strategy: For a general discussion of mycorrhizal evolution see Brundrett and Tedersoo (2018). The group of fungi that helped plants onto land, and which thrive in grasslands and tropical forests—arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi—are thought to have evolved only once. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are the ones that grow into feathery lobes within plant cells. The type that dominates in temperate forests—ectomycorrhizal fungi—has arisen on more than sixty separate occasions (Hibbett et al. [2000]). These fungi—which include truffles—weave themselves into mycelial sleeves around plant root tips, as Frank observed in the late nineteenth century. Orchids have their own type of mycorrhizal relationship, with its own evolutionary history. So do plants in the blueberry family, or Ericaceae (Martin et al. [2017]). Field and her colleagues are studying a completely different group of mycorrhizal fungus that was only discovered in the late 2000s, known as the Mucoromycotina. It occurs across the plant kingdom and is thought to be as old as the earliest land plants, but had gone entirely unnoticed despite decades of study. There may well be more hiding in plain sight (van der Heijden et al.[ 2017], Cosme et al. [2018], Hiruma et al. [2018], and Selosse et al. [2018]).

				 				some less so: For strawberry experiments see Orrell (2018); for a further study on the influence of mycorrhizal fungi on plant-pollinator interactions see Davis et al. (2019).

				I often wonder: For basil see Copetta et al. (2006); for tomatoes see Copetta et al. (2011) and Rouphael et al. (2015); for mint see Gupta et al. (2002); for lettuce see Baslam et al. (2011); for artichokes see Ceccarelli et al. (2010); for Saint-John’s-wort and echinacea see Rouphael et al. (2015); for bread see Torri et al. (2013).

				plants and mycorrhizal fungi: Rayner (1945).

				demanding flurry of interaction: For the “social function of intellect” see Humphrey (1976).

				their own exclusive benefit: For “reciprocal rewards” see Kiers et al. (2011). Kiers and her colleagues were able to be so precise because she used an artificial system. The plants weren’t normal plants but root “organ cultures”—disembodied roots that grow without shoots or leaves. Nonetheless, the ability of plants and fungi to preferentially transfer nutrients or carbon to more favorable partners has been demonstrated with whole plants growing in soil (Bever et al. [2009], Fellbaum et al. [2014], and Zheng et al. [2015]). Exactly how plants and fungi are able to regulate these fluxes is not well understood, but it appears to be a general feature of the relationship (Werner and Kiers [2015]).

				or anything in between: Not all plant and fungal species are able to control their exchange to the same degree. Some species of plant inherit an ability to preferentially supply carbon to favorable fungal partners. Some species just don’t have this talent (Grman [2012]). Some plants depend more on their fungal partners than others. Some species, like those that produce dust seeds, won’t germinate without a fungus present; many plants will. Some plants don’t give anything back to the fungus when they’re young but start to reward the fungus when they get older, a lifestyle that Field calls the “take now, pay later” approach (Field et al. [2015]).

				of supply and demand: For a study on resource inequality see Whiteside et al. (2019).

				 				of carbon in return: Kiers and her colleagues measured the speed of transport through the network, observing maximum speeds of more than fifty micrometers per second—roughly a hundred times faster than passive diffusion—as well as regular changes, or oscillations, in the direction of flow through the network (Whiteside et al. [2019]).

				different outcome: For the role of context in mycorrhizal associations see Hoeksema et al. (2010) and Alzarhani et al. (2019); for the impact of phosphorus on plant “pickiness” see Ji and Bever (2016). Even within plant and fungal species, there is a large amount of variation between the behavior of individual plants and fungi (Mateus et al. [2019]).

				small and back again: For the estimate of number of trees on Earth see Crowther et al. (2015).

				what they’re actually doing: For a discussion of knowledge gaps in mycorrhizal research see Lekberg and Helgason (2018).

				of excitement and frustration: For a discussion of plant and fungal exchange and how it is controlled see Wipf et al. (2019). In one study, a single fungus connected to two different species of plant at the same time—flax and sorghum—supplied more nutrients to flax, even though sorghum supplied the fungus with more carbon. Based on a cost-benefit analysis, one would expect the fungus to supply more nutrients to sorghum (Walder et al. [2012] and Hortal et al. [2017]). Some species of plant are even more extreme and don’t provide any carbon to their mycorrhizal partners at all. In these instances, exchange between partners appears not to be based on reciprocal rewards exchanged tit for tat. Of course, there may be many other benefits and costs that aren’t being taken into account, but it’s hard to measure so many variables at once. For this reason, most studies focus on a small number of easily manipulated parameters, like carbon and phosphorus. This provides fine detail but makes it difficult to extend the findings to complex real-world scenarios (Walder and van der Heijden [2015] and van der Heijden and Walder [2016]).

				ten meters per year: For the influence of mycorrhizal fungi on forest dynamics on a continental scale see Phillips et al. (2013), Bennett et al. (2017), Averill et al. (2018), Zhu et al. (2018), Steidinger et al. (2019), and Chen et al. (2019); for the migration of trees following the retreat of the Laurentide Ice Sheet see Pither et al. (2018).

				arrived somewhere new: For the study at the University of British Columbia see Pither et al. (2018) and commentary by Zobel (2018); for a study on mycorrhiza-mediated encroachment of plants onto heathlands see Collier and Bidartondo (2009); for co-migration of plants and their mycorrhizal partners see Peay (2016).

				the salty coastal soils: Rodriguez et al. (2009).

				one species became two: Osborne et al. (2018), with commentary by Geml and Wagner (2018).

				beyond their prior limits: For involution see Hustak and Myers (2012).

				than in agriculture: For a discussion of the role of plant-fungal relations in adaptation to climate change see Pickles et al. (2012), Giauque and Hawkes (2013), Kivlin et al. (2013), Mohan et al. (2014), Fernandez et al. (2017), and Terrer et al. (2016); for “alarming deterioration” see Sapsford et al. (2017) and van der Linde et al. (2018). Mycorrhizal relationships can pattern the aboveground world in a number of ways, for example through their influence on soil nutrient cycles. One can think of soil nutrient cycles as chemical weather systems. The chemical “climate” set up by different types of fungi helps to determine what kind of plants grow where. The influence of different plants, in turn, feeds back on the behavior of mycorrhizal fungi. Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi—the ancient lineage that grows inside plant cells—steer chemical weather systems in a completely different direction than ectomycorrhizal (EM) fungi—the type that has evolved multiple times, and grows around plant roots in a mycelial sleeve. Unlike AM fungi, EM fungi descended from free-living decomposer fungi. As a result, they are better at decomposing organic matter than arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. On an ecosystem scale, this makes a big difference. EM fungi thrive in colder climates where decomposition is slower. AM fungi thrive in warmer, wetter climates where decomposition is faster. EM fungi tend to compete with free-living decomposers and reduce the rate at which carbon cycles. AM fungi tend to promote the activity of free-living decomposers and increase the rate at which carbon cycles. EM fungi cause more carbon to become immobilized in the upper soil layers. AM fungi cause more carbon to trickle down into lower soil layers and become immobilized there (Phillips et al. [2013], Craig et al. [2018], Zhu et al. [2018], and Steidinger et al. [2019]). Mycorrhizal relationships can also influence the ways that plants interact with each other. In some situations, mycorrhizal fungi increase the diversity of plant life by easing competitive interactions between plants, allowing less dominant plant species to establish themselves (van der Heijden et al. [2008], Bennett and Cahill [2016], Bachelot et al. [2017], and Chen et al. [2019]). In others, they reduce diversity by allowing plants to exclude competitors. In some cases, plant feedbacks with mycorrhizal communities span generations, sometimes known as “legacy effects” (Mueller et al. [2019]). A study into the effects of the deadly pine beetle on the West Coast of North America found that the survival of young pine seedlings varied depending on where their mycorrhizal communities came from. If grown with mycorrhizal fungi taken from areas where adult pines had been killed by pine beetles, seedlings had higher rates of mortality. Mycorrhizal communities allowed the effects of pine beetles to cascade through generations of trees (Karst et al. [2015]).

				 				“future of civilization depends”: Howard (1945), chs. 1 and 2.

				urgency of the crisis: For the doubling of crop production see Tilman et al. (2002); for agricultural emissions and plateau of crop yields see Foley et al. (2005) and Godfray et al. (2010); for the dysfunction using phosphorus fertilizer see Elser and Bennett (2011); for loss of crops see King et al. (2017); for thirty football fields see Arsenault (2014); for projections of global food demand see Tilman et al.

				plants, too, will suffer: For a study of traditional agricultural practices in China see King (1911); for Howard’s concern about the “life of the soil” see Howard (1940); for damage to soil microbial communities by agriculture see Wagg et al. (2014), de Vries et al. (2013), and Toju et al. (2018).

				 				mycelium in the soil: For the Agroscope study see Banerjee et al. (2019); for the impact of plowing on mycorrhizal communities see Helgason et al. (1998); for a comparison of organic and inorganic practices on mycorrhizal communities see Verbruggen et al. (2010), Manoharan et al. (2017), and Rillig et al. (2019).

				ever lived on Earth: For “ecosystem engineers” see Banerjee et al. (2018); for the role of mycorrhizal fungi in soil stability see Leifheit et al. (2014), Mardhiah et al. (2016), Delavaux et al. (2017), Lehmann et al. (2017), Powell and Rillig (2018), and Chen et al. (2018); for the impact of mycorrhizal fungi on soil water absorption see Martínez-García et al. (2017); for carbon stored in soil see Swift (2001) and Scharlemann et al. (2014); for an analysis of soil carbon bound up in fungi see Clemmensen et al. (2013) and Lehmann et al. (2017); for estimates of the number of organisms in the soil see Berendsen et al. (2012); and for the estimate of the number of people who have ever lived see www.prb.org/howmanypeoplehaveeverlivedonearth/ [accessed October 29, 2019].

				can even reduce them: For the impact of mycorrhizal fungi on plant resistance to stress see Zabinski and Bunn (2014), Delavaux et al. (2017), Brito et al. (2018), Rillig et al. (2018), and Chialva et al. (2018). Other studies have found that by inoculating crops with the endophytic fungi that live in plants’ shoots, they can dramatically increase crops’ tolerance to drought and heat stress (Redman and Rodriguez [2017]).

				Field pointed out: For unpredictable outcomes of mycorrhizal associations on crop yields see Ryan and Graham (2018), but see Rillig et al. (2019) and Zhang et al. (2019); for Field’s studies on crop responses to mycorrhizal fungi see Thirkell et al. (2017); for variability of mycorrhizal response between crop varieties see Thirkell et al. (2019).

				to damaged gut flora: For a discussion of the effectiveness of commercial mycorrhizal products see Hart et al. (2018) and Kaminsky et al. (2018). There are a growing number of products that use fungal endophytes of plants to protect crops. In 2019 the US Environmental Protection Agency gave approval to a fungal pesticide designed to be delivered to plants by bees (Fritts [2019]).

				needs of plants above their own: See Kiers and Denison (2014).

				better cultivate one another: See Howard (1940), ch. 11.

				very same fungal network: Bateson (1987), ch. 4.94; Merleau-Ponty (2002), pt. 1, “The Spatiality of One’s Own Body and Motility.”





6. WOOD WIDE WEBS




			 				net-like, entangled fabric: Humboldt (1845), vol. 1, p. 33. Translation here by Anna Westermeier. The sentence containing the phrase “net-like, entangled fabric” (Eine allgemeine Verkettung, nicht in einfacher linearer Richtung, sondern in netzartig verschlugenem Gewebe, […], stellt sich allmählich dem forschenden Natursinn dar) does not occur in the published English translation of 1849.

				 				via a fungal pathway: The Russian botanist was F. Kamienski, who published his speculation about Monotropa in 1882 (Trappe [2015]); for a study with radioactive glucose see Björkman (1960).

				net and fabric real: For a discussion of Humboldt’s “net-like, entangled fabric” see Wulf (2015), ch. 18.

				in a natural environment: For Read’s study with radioactive carbon dioxide see Francis and Read (1984). In 1988, Edward I. Newman, the author of a classic review on the subject of shared mycorrhizal networks, commented that “if this phenomenon is widespread, it could have profound implications for the functioning of ecosystems.” Newman identified five routes by which shared mycorrhizal networks might make an impact: 1) seedlings may quickly become linked into a large hyphal network and begin to benefit from it at an early stage; 2) one plant may receive organic materials (such as energy-rich carbon compounds) from another via hyphal links, perhaps sufficient to increase the “receiver’s” growth and chance of survival; 3) the balance of competition between plants may be altered if they are obtaining mineral nutrients from a common mycelial network, rather than separately taking them up from the soil; 4) mineral nutrients may pass from one plant to another, thus perhaps reducing competitive dominance; and 5) nutrients released from dying roots may pass directly via hyphal links to living roots without ever entering the soil solution (Newman [1988)].

				from plenty to scarcity: Simard et al. (1997). Simard grew seedlings of three species of tree in a forest in British Columbia. Two of the species—paper birch and Douglas fir—form relationships with the same type of mycorrhizal fungus. The third species—western red cedar—forms relationships with a quite unrelated type of mycorrhizal fungus. This meant that she could be fairly sure that the birch and fir shared a network, while the cedar just shared root space with no direct fungal connections (although this approach does not show beyond doubt that the plants remain unconnected—a point for which her study was later criticized). In an important twist on Read’s previous studies, Simard exposed pairs of tree seedlings to carbon dioxide labeled with two different radioactive isotopes of carbon. With only a single isotope, it’s impossible to follow the bidirectional movement of carbon between plants. One might well find that a receiver plant has taken up labeled carbon from a donor plant. But the donor plant might have taken up just as much carbon from the receiver and one would have no way of knowing. Simard’s approach allowed her to calculate the net movement between plants.

				“The Wood Wide Web”: Read (1997).

				“resources within the community”: For root grafts see Bader and Leuzinger (2019); for “we should place” see Read (1997). Root grafts have received comparatively little attention in the last few decades, yet account for a number of interesting phenomena, such as “living stumps,” which continue to survive long after they have been cut. Root grafts can occur between roots of a single individual, individuals of the same species, and even individuals of different species.

				 				“enter the public consciousness”: Barabási (2001).

				phenomenon using a network model: For a study of the World Wide Web see Barabási and Albert (1999); for a general discussion of developments in network science in the mid-1990s see Barabási (2014); for “more in common” see Barabási (2001); for “cosmic web” and network structure of the universe see accessible summary by Ferreira (2019), also Gott (2016), ch. 9, Govoni et al. (2019), and Umehata et al. (2019), with commentary from Hamden (2019).

				an important ecological role: For a summary of the studies that have found biologically meaningful transfer of resources between plants see Simard et al. (2015). For “two hundred eighty kilograms” see Klein et al. (2016) and commentary by van der Heijden (2016). The study by Klein et al. (2016) was unusual in measuring the transfer of carbon between mature trees in a forest. The trees were of similar age, meaning there were no obvious source–sink gradients between them.

				mycorrhizal partner would: For studies that report little or variable benefit see van der Heijden et al. (2009) and Booth (2004). On the whole, experiments that have found clear benefits to plants have looked at species that form relationships with a group known as ectomycorrhizal fungi. Studies that have found more ambiguous effects have examined one of the oldest groups, the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi.

				space with one another: For a discussion of the variety of opinions within the research community and the differences in interpretation of the evidence see Hoeksema (2015). Part of the problem is that experimenting on shared mycorrhizal networks is complicated in controlled lab conditions, let alone in wild soils. To start with, it’s very difficult to show that two plants are connected by the very same fungus. Living systems are leaky. There are countless ways that a radioactive label applied to one plant could end up in another. What’s more, any experiment on networks must compare networked with non-networked plants. The problem is that networks are the default mode. Some researchers sever the fungal ties between plants by moving the position of fine mesh barriers between them. Others dig trenches to separate plants, but it’s hard to know whether these interventions are causing collateral damage.

				do Simard’s fir seedlings: For multiple origins of mycoheterotrophy see Merckx (2013). Darwin was a great orchid enthusiast and spent time puzzling over how orchids could survive with such small seeds. In 1863, in a letter to Joseph Hooker, the director of Kew Gardens, Darwin wrote that although he had “not a fact to go on,” he had a “firm conviction” that germinating orchid seeds “are parasites in early youth on cryptogams [or fungi].” It was not until three decades later that fungi were shown to be crucial for the germination of orchid seeds (Beerling [2019], p. 141).

				he reflected fondly: For the snow plant see Muir (1912), ch. 8; for the “thousand invisible cords” see Wulf (2015), ch. 23. This was a recurring theme for Muir, who also wrote of “innumerable unbreakable cords,” besides his more well-known line: “When we try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the universe.”

				 				remain sinks forever: Source–sink dynamics regulate plant photosynthesis. When the products of photosynthesis accumulate, the rate of photosynthesis is reduced. Mycorrhizal fungal networks increase the rate of plant photosynthesis by acting as a carbon sink, thereby preventing the buildup of the products of photosynthesis, which would normally slow the process (Gavito et al. [2019]).

				living plants were sinks: For Simard shading fir seedlings see Simard et al. (1997); for dying plants see Eason et al. (1991).

				areas of scarcity: For the switching of direction of carbon flow see Simard et al. (2015).

				soon be weeded out: For a discussion of the evolutionary puzzle see Wilkinson (1998) and Gorzelak et al. (2015).

				in the shaded understory: For sharing of surplus resources as a “public good” see Walder and van der Heijden (2015). Another possibility is that the receiver plants harbor a multitude of different fungal species. Plant A might benefit from plant B’s community of fungi when conditions change. Diverse fungal communities offer insurance against environmental uncertainty (Moeller and Neubert [2016]).

				to move between them: For kin selection mediated by shared mycorrhizal connections see Gorzelak et al. (2015), Pickles et al. (2017), and Simard (2018). A number of species of fern have employed a form of kin selection, or parental “care,” using shared mycorrhizal networks, and have probably done so for millions of years (Beerling [2019], pp. 138–40). These fern species (in the genera Lycopodium, Huperzia, Psilotum, Botrychium, and Ophioglossum) have two phases of their life cycle. Spores germinate into a structure called a “gametophyte.” Gametophytes are small underground structures that don’t photosynthesize. They are where fertilization takes place. Once a gametophyte has been fertilized, it develops into the aboveground adult phase called a “sporophyte.” The sporophyte is where photosynthesis takes place. Gametophytes are only able to survive underground because they are supplied with carbon via mycorrhizal networks, shared with the adult sporophytes. It is a case of “take now, pay later.”

				between source and sink: For bidirectional transport see Lindahl et al. (2001) and Schmieder et al. (2019).

				into a digital utopia: For studies showing benefits of plant participation in shared mycorrhizal networks see Booth (2004), McGuire (2007), Bingham and Simard (2011), and Simard et al. (2015).

				are cut back: For a study showing no benefit of participation in a shared mycorrhizal network see Booth (2004); for amplification of competition by shared mycorrhizal networks see Weremijewicz et al. (2016) and Jakobsen and Hammer (2015).

				reducing their growth: For “fungal fast lane” and fungal transport of poisons see Barto et al. (2011 and 2012), and Achatz and Rillig (2014).

				have barely been explored: For hormones see Pozo et al. (2015); for nuclear transport through mycorrhizal fungal networks see Giovannetti et al. (2004 and 2006); for transport of RNA between a parasitic plant and its host see Kim et al. (2014); for RNA-mediated interaction between plants and fungal pathogens see Cai et al. (2018).

				 				and some for consumption: For bacterial use of fungal networks see Otto et al. (2017), Berthold et al. (2016), and Zhang et al. (2018); for influence of “endohyphal” bacteria on fungal metabolism see Vannini et al. (2016), Bonfante and Desirò (2017), and Deveau et al. (2018); for bacterial farming in thick-footed morel see Pion et al. (2013) and Lohberger et al. (2019).

				and their wasp allies: Babikova et al. (2013).

				Johnson pondered: For plant-plant information transfer between tomato plants see Song and Zeng (2010); for stress-signaling between Douglas fir and pine seedlings see Song et al. (2015a); for transfer between Douglas fir and pine seedlings see Song et al. (2015b).

				“is actually being sent”: For electrical signaling in plants see Mousavi et al. (2013), Toyota et al. (2018), and commentary by Muday and Brown-Harding (2018); for plant electrical response to herbivory see Salvador-Recatalà et al. (2014). Many questions remain about the chemical conversations that take place between plant roots and fungi that allow them to form their relationships in the first place. Read once tried to grow the mycoheterotrophic snow plant—Muir’s “glowing pillar of fire”—and made some progress before hitting “a brick wall.” “It was fascinating,” Read recalled, “the fungus grew toward the seed and showed huge excitement and interest—it fluffed up and said ‘hi.’ There’s clearly signaling going on. The sadness is that we never had plants big enough to let it go further. These signaling questions are questions that the next generation of researchers will have to work on.”

				connected to each other: Beiler et al. (2009 and 2015). Other studies have looked at the architecture of shared mycorrhizal networks based on which species interact, but these have not been explicit about the spatial arrangement of trees within an ecosystem. These include Southworth et al. (2005), Toju et al. (2014 and 2016), and Toju and Sato (2018).

				serious disruption will ensue: If one drew lines between the trees in Beiler’s forest plot randomly, each tree would end up with a similar number of links between them. Trees with an exceptionally high or exceptionally low number of links would be rare. One could calculate an average number of links per tree, and most trees would fall somewhere around this number. In network language this characteristic node would represent the network’s “scale.” In reality we see something different. In Beiler’s plots, Barabási’s map of the Web, or a network of airplane routes, a few highly connected hubs account for the vast majority of connections in the network. The nodes in this type of network differ from one another so greatly that there is no such thing as a characteristic node. The networks have no scale, and are described as “scale-free.” Barabási’s discovery of scale-free networks in the late 1990s helped to provide a framework to model the behavior of complex systems. For the difference between well-connected and poorly connected hubs see Barabási (2014), “The Sixth Link: The 80/20 Rule”; for vulnerability of scale-free networks see Albert et al. (2000) and Barabási (2001); for a discussion of scale-free networks in the natural world see Bascompte (2009).

				 				range of fungal species: For a discussion of different types of shared mycorrhizal networks and their contrasting architectures see Simard et al. (2012); for a discussion of fusion between different arbuscular mycorrhizal networks see Giovannetti et al. (2015). Just because two trees are linked, it doesn’t mean that they are linked in the same way. Some types of alder tree, for instance, associate with a very low number of fungal species, which in turn tend not to associate with plants other than alders. This means that alders have an isolationist tendency and form closed, inward-facing networks with one another. In terms of the overall architecture of a patch of forest, an alder grove would be a “module”—well connected inside but only sparsely inter-linked (Kennedy et al. [2015]). We are used to this idea. Plot a network of your acquaintances on a piece of paper. Then consider that each link is a relationship. How many of your relationships are equivalent? What do you forfeit when you count your relationship with your sister, your third cousin, your friend from work, and your landlord as equivalent links in your social network? The network scientists Nicholas Christakis and James Fowler describe how influential a given link in a social network is in terms of its “contagion.” You may have a social link between your sister and your landlord, but the amount of influence, the contagion, each of these links carries will differ. Christakis and Fowler have a theory known as “three degrees of influence” to describe how social influence drops off after three degrees of separation (Christakis and Fowler [2009], ch. 1).

				shimmering, unceasing turnover: Prigogine and Stengers (1984), ch. 1.

				are sneezes, and orgasms: For ecosystems as complex adaptive systems see Levin (2005); for the dynamic nonlinear behavior of ecosystems see Hastings et al. (2018).

				“who connects to whom”: For Simard’s parallels between shared mycorrhizal networks and neural networks see Simard (2018). Researchers in other fields share this view. Manicka and Levin (2019) argue that tools so far only used to study brain function should be transferred to other biological arenas to overcome the problem of “thematic silos” that segregate fields of biological inquiry. In neuroscience, a “connectome” is a map of neural connections within a brain. Would it be possible to plot the mycorrhizal connectome of an ecosystem? “If I had unlimited funding,” Beiler told me, “I would sample the hell out of a forest. Then you could get a very precise view of the network—who exactly is associating with whom and where—and also a broad view of the system as a whole.” For an example of a study in neuroscience that takes an analogous approach see Markram et al. (2015).

				fungi at these junctions: Simard (2018).

				have interacted with plants: “Many fungi interact with roots in a loose way,” Selosse explained to me. “Take truffles, for example. Of course, you can find truffle mycelium growing on the roots of its official ‘host’ trees. But you can also find it in the roots of surrounding plants which aren’t its normal hosts and don’t usually form mycorrhizal associations at all. These casual relationships aren’t strictly mycorrhizal, but they nonetheless exist.” For more on non-mycorrhizal fungi that link different plants see Toju and Sato (2018).





7. RADICAL MYCOLOGY




			 				our being in it: Le Guin (2017).

				climate-change-inducing pollutant: Many of these early plants—classed as lycophytes and pteridophytes—produced comparatively little “true” wood and are thought to have been made up mostly of a bark-like material known as “periderm” (Nelsen et al. [2016]).

				gigatons of carbon: For three trillion trees see Crowther et al. (2015). The current best estimates of global biomass distributions put plants at around eighty percent of the total biomass on Earth. Around seventy percent of this plant fraction is estimated to be “woody” stem and trunk, making wood around sixty percent of global biomass (Bar-On et al. [2018]).

				matrix of molecular rings: For the composition of wood and relative abundances of lignin and cellulose see Moore (2013a), ch. 1.

				emitted around ten gigatons: For an introduction to wood decomposition and enzymatic combustion see Moore et al. (2011), ch. 10.7, and Watkinson et al. (2015), ch. 5; for eighty-five gigatons see Hawksworth (2009); for 2018 global carbon budget see Quéré et al. (2018). The other major group of decomposing fungi are brown rot fungi, so called because they cause wood to turn a brown color. Brown rot fungi largely digest the cellulose component of wood. But they are able, too, to use radical chemistry to accelerate the breakdown of lignin. Their approach is slightly different from white rot fungi. Rather than use free radicals to break apart lignin molecules, they produce radicals that react with lignin and make it vulnerable to bacterial decay (Tornberg and Olsson [2002]).

				their apparatus of decay: How so much wood could go un-rotted for such a long time has been the subject of considerable discussion. In a paper published in Science in 2012, a team headed by David Hibbett argued that the evolution of lignin peroxidases in the white rot fungi approximately coincided with the “sharp decrease” in carbon burial at the end of the Carboniferous period, suggesting that the Carboniferous deposits may have arisen because fungi hadn’t yet evolved the ability to degrade lignin (Floudas et al. [2012], with commentary by Hittinger [2012]). This finding supported the hypothesis first proposed by Jennifer Robinson (1990). In 2016, Matthew Nelsen et al. published a paper refuting this hypothesis, on several grounds: 1) Many of the plants that formed the Carboniferous deposits responsible for large amounts of carbon burial were not major lignin producers. 2) Lignin-degrading fungi and bacteria may have been present before the Carboniferous period. 3) Significant coal seams have formed after the point at which white rot fungi are estimated to have evolved lignin-degrading enzymes. 4) If there had been no degradation of lignin before the Carboniferous period, all the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere would have been removed in less than a million years. See Nelsen et al. (2016), with commentary by Montañez (2016). The case isn’t clear-cut. The relative rates of decomposition versus carbon burial are difficult to measure, and it is hard to imagine that the ability of white rot fungi to degrade lignin and other tough components of wood, such as crystalline cellulose, would have no impact on the global levels of carbon burial (Hibbett et al. [2016]).

				 				material escaped fungal attention: For fungal degradation of coal see Singh (2006), pp. 14–15; the “kerosene fungus” is a yeast, Candida keroseneae (Buddie et al. [2011]).

				distinct field, even today: Hawksworth (2009). See also Rambold et al. (2013), who argue that “mycology should be recognized as a field in biology at eye level with other major disciplines.”

				in the year 2000: For mycology in ancient China see Yun-Chang (1985); for the state of mycology in modern China and global production of mushrooms see State of the World’s Fungi (2018); for deaths by mushroom poisoning see Marley (2010).

				outlet for fungal inquiry: State of the World’s Fungi (2018); Hawksworth (2009).

				Or just amateurs: For a discussion of the recent history of citizen science and the “zooniverse”—a digital platform that allows people to participate in research projects across a wide number of fields—see Lintott (2019), reviewed by West (2019); for a classic discussion of “lay experts” with regard to the AIDS crisis see Epstein (1995); for a discussion of modern crowdsourced participation in science see Kelty (2010); for citizen science in ecology see Silvertown (2009); for a discussion of the history of experimental “thrifty” science as conducted at home see Werrett (2019). The work of Darwin is a notable example. For most of his life, he conducted almost all of his work at home. He bred orchids on the windowsills, apples in the orchard, racing pigeons, and earthworms on the terrace. Much of the evidence Darwin mobilized in support of his theory of evolution came from networks of amateur animal and plant breeders, and he maintained a large volume of correspondence with well-organized networks of hobbyist collectors and backyard enthusiasts (Boulter [2010]). Today, digital platforms open new possibilities. In late 2018, a low-frequency seismic hum traveled around the world, evading mainstream earthquake-detection systems. Its trajectory and identity were pieced together in an impromptu collaboration between academic and citizen seismologists interacting on Twitter (Sample [2018]).

				or its “grassroots”: For a history of DIY mycology see Steinhardt (2018).

				“that mycelium spreads”: McCoy (2016), p. xx.

				air quality is improved: For figures on agricultural waste see Moore et al. (2011), ch. 11.6; for diapers in Mexico City see Espinosa-Valdemar et al. (2011)—when the plastic was left on, the mass loss was still an impressive seventy percent. For agricultural waste in India see Prasad (2018).

				was a matsutake mushroom: For fungal proliferation at the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction see Vajda and McLoughlin (2004); for matsutake mushrooms after Hiroshima see Tsing (2015), “Prologue.” Tsing writes in her notes that the source of this story is difficult to pin down.

				out of the top: For a video of Pleurotus on cigarette butts see https://web.archive.org/web/20200429100059/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fCAX9P50SNU [accessed October 29, 2019].

				 				a commonplace challenge: For a discussion of nonspecific fungal enzymes and the potential for breaking down toxins see Harms et al. (2011).

				“What do we do”: In 2015, Stamets was given an award by the Mycological Society of America. In the official announcement, he was described as a “highly original, self-trained member of the mycological community who has had a huge and sustained impact on the field of Mycology” (fungi.com/blogs/articles/paul-receives-the-gordon-and-tina-wasson-award [accessed October 29, 2019]). In a 2018 interview with Tim Ferris, Stamets explained that he had been given the award for “bringing more students into mycology than anyone in history” (tim.blog/2018/10/15/the-tim-ferriss-show-transcripts-paul-stamets/ [accessed October 29, 2019]).

				are white rot fungi: For DMMP see Stamets (2011), “Part II: Mycorestoration.” Note that Psilocybe azurescens is not mentioned here—Stamets told me about this in person.

				antibiotics to synthetic hormones: For a summary of fungal ability to break down toxins see Harms et al. (2011); for a broader discussion of mycoremediation see McCoy (2016), ch. 10.

				gold from electronic waste: For mycelial highways see Harms et al. (2011); for the mycofiltration of E. coli see Taylor et al. (2015); for the Finnish company reclaiming gold with mycelium see https://web.archive.org/web/20200429095819/https://phys.org/news/2014-04-filter-recover-gold-mobile-scrap.html [accessed October 29, 2019]. A number of studies reported mushrooms enriched in the radioactive heavy metal cesium following the nuclear fallout at Chernobyl (Oolbekkink and Kuyper [1989], Kammerer et al. [1994], and Nikolova et al. [1997]).

				and we’re inside it: For a discussion of additional fungal needs see Harms et al. (2011); for challenges see McCoy (2016), ch. 10.

				None has reached maturity: For CoRenewal see corenewal.org [accessed October 29, 2019]; for fungal cleanup after California fires see newfoodeconomy.org/mycoremediation-radical-mycology-mushroom-natural-disaster-pollution-clean-up/ [accessed October 29, 2019]; for Pleurotus booms in the Danish harbor see www.sailing.org/news/87633.php#.XCkcIc9KiOE [accessed October 29, 2019].

				degrade polyurethane plastic: For the polyurethane digesting fungus see Khan et al. (2017); for another example of a plastic-digesting fungus see Brunner et al. (2018). The mycologist Tradd Cotter at the organization Mushroom Mountain runs a crowdsourced initiative to collect strains of fungi from unusual places; see newfoodeconomy.org/mycoremediation-radical-mycology-mushroom-natural-disaster-pollution-clean-up/ [accessed October 29, 2019].

				and remained largely unavailable: For Mary Hunt see Bennett and Chung (2001). The “crowd” need not always be “non-scientists.” In 2017, a study published by the Earth Microbiome Project in Nature attracted attention for its unusual methodology. Researchers put out a call to scientists around the world for well-preserved environmental samples for inclusion in the survey of global microbial diversity (Raes [2017]).

				 				award of $1 million: Every year Darwin competed with his cousin, a vicar, as to who could grow the largest pears by crossing the latest varieties. It was a contest that became a source of much family entertainment. See Boulter (2010), p. 31.

				about a decade old: For Wu San Kwung see McCoy (2016), p. 71; for “Paris” mushrooms see Monaco (2017); for a general history of cultivation in Europe see Ainsworth (1976), ch. 4. There is a modern twist in the story of underground mushroom growing in Paris. Car ownership in Paris is falling, and several underground car parks have been converted into successful edible mushroom farms; see www.bbc.co.uk/news/av/business-49928362/turning-paris-s-underground-car-parks-into-mushrooms-farms [accessed October 29, 2019].

				precursors to radical mycology: The preparation of mushrooms is certainly not limited to humans. Several species of North American squirrels are known to dry mushrooms and cache them for later (O’Regan et al. [2016]).

				by any insect group: For the age of Macrotermes mounds see Erens et al. (2015); for the complexity of Macrotermes societies see Aanen et al. (2002).

				passes through Macrotermes mounds: For a discussion of Macrotermes digestion and prolific metabolisms see Aanen et al. (2002), Poulsen et al. (2014), and Yong (2014).

				populations of malarial mosquitoes: For termites eating “private property” see Margonelli (2018), ch. 1; for termites eating banknotes see www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-south-asia-13194864 [accessed October 29, 2019]; for a discussion of Stamets’s insect-killing fungal products see Stamets (2011), “Mycopesticides.” A study published in Science in 2019 reported that a genetically modified strain of Metarhizium eliminated nearly all of the mosquitoes in an experimental “near-natural environment” in Burkina Faso. The authors propose the use of the modified strain of Metarhizium to fight the spread of malaria (Lovett et al. [2019]).

				quickly abandoned their post: For “waking up” the soil see Fairhead and Scoones (2005); for the benefits of termite earths see Fairhead (2016); for the destruction of the French garrison see Fairhead and Leach (2003).

				the largest possible scale: For spiritual hierarchies see Fairhead (2016). In parts of Guinea, people plaster the walls of houses with earth harvested from the inside of Macrotermes mounds (Fairhead [2016]).

				materials out of mycelium: For a discussion of materials made from fungi see Haneef et al. (2017) and Jones et al. (2019); for portabello mushrooms and batteries see Campbell et al. (2015); for fungal skin substitutes see Suarato et al. (2018).

				Stamets’s termite-killing fungi: For termite-resistant mycomaterials see phys.org/news/2018-06-scientists-material-fungus-rice-glass.html [accessed October 29, 2019]. Mycelial building materials have been used in a number of high-profile exhibits, including the 2014 PS1 gallery pavilion at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, and the Shell Mycelium Installation in Kochi, in India.

				“at really low cost”: For NASA growing structures in space see www.nasa.gov/directorates/spacetech/niac/2018_Phase_I_Phase_II/Myco-architecture_off_planet/ [accessed October 29, 2019]; for “self-healing” concrete using fungi see Luo et al. (2018).

				 				shaped like a lampshade: To make the wood-mycelium composite, sawdust and corn are mixed into a damp slurry. The mixture is inoculated with fungal mycelium and loaded into plastic molds. The mycelium “runs” through the substrate, forming a cast made of interlocked mass of mycelium and partially digested wood. It is a different story for the leather and soft foam. Rather than pack the inoculated substrate into molds, it is spread on flat sheets. By controlling the growth conditions, the mycelium is persuaded to grow upward into the air. In less than a week, the spongy layer can be harvested. When compressed and tanned, it produces a material that feels remarkably like leather. If dried as it is, it forms a foam.

				their mycelium will make: Bayer’s longer-term goal is to understand the biophysics of how mycelium creates physical structures. “I think about fungi as nanotech assemblers that put molecules in place,” he explained. “We’re trying to understand how the 3-D orientation of the microfibers influence the properties of the materials; their strength, durability, and flexibility.” Bayer’s vision is to develop genetically programmable fungi. With this level of control, he explained, “we’ll be able to dial in a different material. You could even have it excrete a plasticizing compound like glycerin. Then you’d have something that’s naturally more flexible and water resistant. There’s so much you could do.” Could is the operative word. Fungal genetics are byzantine and poorly understood. To insert a gene and have the fungus express it is one thing. To insert a gene and have the fungus express it in a stable and predictable way is another. To program fungal behavior by issuing a stream of genetic commands is yet another.

				with a mycelial alternative: There is no precedent for building with fungi, so a lot of the research has to be done from scratch. This is a bigger focus for Bayer than straightforward production. Over the last ten years, they have invested $30 million in research. To work with mycelium in these ways requires new methods, new ways to persuade the fungus to grow, to behave differently.

				“millimeter of the building”: For FUNGAR see info.uwe.ac.uk/news/uwenews/news.aspx?id=3970 and www.theregister.co.uk/2019/09/17/like_computers_love_fungus/ [both accessed October 29, 2019].

				range of deadly viruses: For the importance of pollinators and pollinator decline see Klein et al. (2007) and Potts et al. (2010); for problems caused by varroa mites see Stamets et al. (2018).

				more recent brain wave: For a review of fungal antiviral compounds see Linnakoski et al. (2018); for a discussion of Project BioShield see Stamets (2011), ch. 4. Stamets told me that the fungi found to have the strongest antiviral activity were agarikon (Laricifomes officinalis), chaga (Inonotus obliquus), reishi (Ganoderma spp.), birch polypore (Fomitopsis betulina), and turkey tail (Trametes versicolor). The most richly documented histories of fungal cures come from China, where medicinal mushrooms have occupied a central place in the pharmacopeia for at least two thousand years. The classic herbal dating from around AD 200, the Shennong Ben Cao, thought to be a compilation of far older orally transmitted traditions, includes several fungi still in medicinal use today, including reishi (Ganoderma lucidum) and the umbrella polypore (Polyporus umbellatus). Reishi was one of the most venerated and can be found depicted in countless paintings, carvings, and embroidery (Powell [2014]).

				 				bees to this extent: Stamets et al. (2018).





8. MAKING SENSE OF FUNGI




			 				which systems systematize systems: Haraway (2016), ch. 4.

				yeasts were discovered: For yeasts in the human microbiome see Huffnagle and Noverr (2013). For sequencing of the yeast genome see Goffeau et al. (1996); for Nobel Prizes on yeast see State of the World’s Fungi (2018), “Useful Fungi.”

				brewing for far longer: For a discussion of evidence for early brewing practices see Money (2018), ch. 2.

				of years before humans: Lévi-Strauss (1973), p. 473.

				yeasts have domesticated us: For the domestication of yeast see Money (2018), ch. 1, and Legras et al. (2007); for bread-before-beer see Wadley and Hayden (2015) and Dunn (2012). The development of agriculture affected a number of human relationships with fungi. Many fungal pathogens of plants are considered to have evolved in parallel with domesticated crops. As is the case today, domestication and cultivation provide fungal pathogens of plants with new opportunities (Dugan [2008], p. 56).

				filled up with bottles: I was inspired by the excellent book Sacred Herbal and Healing Beers (Buhner [1998]).

				human cultural categories: For Sumerians and The Egyptian Book of the Dead see Katz (2003), ch. 2; for Ch’orti’ see Aasved (1988), p. 757; for Dionysus see Kerényi (1976) and Paglia (2001), ch. 3.

				machine that is built: For a discussion of yeast in biotechnology see Money (2018), ch. 5; for Sc2.0 see syntheticyeast.org/sc2-0/introduction/ [accessed October 29, 2019].

				have never stayed clear: For rhapsodic verse see Yun-Chang (1985); Yamaguchi Sodo quoted in Tsing (2015), “Prologue,”; Magnus quoted in Letcher (2006), p. 50; Gerard quoted in Letcher (2006), p. 49.

				power in different ways: Wasson and Wasson (1957), vol. II, ch. 18. The Wassons divided up much of the world into their categories. The United States (Wasson was American) was mycophobic, along with Anglo-Saxons and Scandinavians. Russia (Valentina was Russian) was mycophilic, along with Slavs and Catalans. “The Greeks,” the Wassons observed disdainfully, “have always been mycophobes.” “From beginning to end in the writings of the ancient Greeks we find not one enthusiastic word for mushrooms.” Of course, things are rarely so straightforward. The Wassons confected a binary system and were the first to dissolve its hard edges. They observed that Finns were “by tradition mycophobes,” but in areas where the Russians used to go on vacation had learned to “know and love many species.” Where exactly the reformed Finns fell between the two poles of their system the Wassons neglected to say.

				 				what fungi actually are: For reclassification of fungi and bacteria see Sapp (2009), p. 47; for a discussion of the history of fungal taxonomy see Ainsworth (1976), ch. 10.

				“what is a Variety”: For Theophrastus see Ainsworth (1976), p. 35; for the association of fungi with lightning strikes and a general discussion of the European understanding of fungi see Ainsworth (1976), ch. 2; for “The order of Fungi” and a good general history of fungal taxonomy see Ramsbottom (1953), ch. 3.

				be abandoned altogether: Money (2013).

				morals of the maids: Raverat (1952), p. 136.

				person doing the describing: One of the first recorded taxonomic attempts to order the fungi was made in 1601, and divided mushroom species into categories of “edible” and “poisonous,” that is, the potential relationship they would have with a human body (Ainsworth [1976], p. 183). These judgments are seldom meaningful. Brewer’s yeast can be used to make bread and alcohol, yet can cause a life-threatening infection if it gets into your blood.

				conceptual and ideological tinderbox: The word “mutualism” was explicitly political for the first decades of its life, describing a school of early anarchist thought. The concept of the “organism,” too, was understood in explicitly political terms by German biologists of the late nineteenth century. Rudolf Virchow understood the organism to be made up of a community of cooperating cells, each working for the good of the whole, just as a population of interdependent cooperating citizens underpinned the operation of a healthy nation-state (Ball [2019], ch. 1).

				to exist at all: For “close to the margins” see Sapp (2004). The relationship between Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection, Thomas Malthus’s analysis of food supply and human populations, and Adam Smith’s theory of the market has received considerable scholarly attention. See for example Young (1985).

				“bodily, intellectual, and moral”: Sapp (1994), ch. 2.

				“for this year’s Symposium”: Sapp (2004).

				free of cultural bias: For Needham see Haraway (2004), p. 106; Lewontin (2000), p. 3.

				and “market gains”: Toby Kiers, professor at Vrije University in the Netherlands, is one of the leading proponents of applying “biological market frameworks” to plant and fungal interactions. Biological markets are not themselves a new idea—they have been used to think about animal behavior for decades. But Kiers and her colleagues are the first to apply them to organisms that don’t have brains (see for example Werner et al. [2014], Wyatt et al. [2014], Kiers et al. [2016], and Noë and Kiers [2018]). For Kiers, economic metaphors underpin economic models, which are helpful investigative tools. “It’s not about trying to make analogies to human markets,” she told me. Instead, “it allows us to make more testable predictions.” Rather than sweep the dizzyingly variable world of plant and fungal exchange into vague notions of “complexity” or “context-dependency,” economic models make it possible to break down dense webs of interactions and test basic hypotheses. Kiers became interested in biological markets after she found that plants and mycorrhizal fungi use “reciprocal rewards” to regulate their exchange of carbon and phosphorus. Plants that receive more phosphorus from a fungus provide it with more carbon; fungi that receive more carbon provide the plant with more phosphorus (Kiers et al. [2011]). In Kiers’s view, market models provide a way to understand how these “strategic trading behaviors” might have evolved, and how they might change in different conditions. “So far it’s been a very useful tool, even in the way that it allows us to set up different experiments,” she explained. “We might say, ‘Theory suggests that as we increase the number of partners that the trade strategy is going to change in a certain way depending on those resources.’ That allows us to set up an experiment: Let’s try changing the number of partners and see if this strategy actually changes. It’s a sounding board rather than a strict protocol.” In this case, the market frameworks are a tool, a set of stories based on human interactions that help to formulate questions about the world, to generate new perspectives. It is not to say, as Kropotkin did, that humans should base their behavior on the behavior of nonhuman organisms. Nor is it to say that plants and fungi are actually capitalist individuals making rational decisions. Of course, even if they were it is unlikely that their behavior would fit perfectly within a given human economic model. As any economist will admit, human markets don’t behave like “ideal” markets in practice. The messy complexity of human economic life spills out of the models built to house it. And in fact, fungal lives don’t fit neatly into biological market theory either. For a start, biological markets depend—like the human capitalist markets from which they derive—on being able to identify individual “traders” that act in their own interest. The truth of the matter is that it is not clear what counts as an individual “trader” (Noë and Kiers [2018]). The mycelium of a “single” mycorrhizal fungus might fuse with another and end up with several different types of nucleus—several different genomes—traveling around its network. What counts as an individual? An individual nucleus? A single interconnected network? One tuft of a network? Kiers is straightforward about these challenges. “If biological market theory is not a useful way to study interactions between plants and fungi, then we’ll stop using it.” Market frameworks are tools whose utility is not known in advance. Nonetheless, biological markets are a problem for some researchers in the field. As Kiers remarked, “This debate can get emotional with no particular reason for it to get emotional.” Perhaps it is the fact that biological market frameworks touch a sociopolitical nerve? Human economic systems are many and diverse. Yet the body of theory known as biological market frameworks bears a striking resemblance to free-market capitalism. Would it help to compare the value of economic models drawn from different cultural systems? There are many ways to attribute value. There might be other currencies that haven’t been taken into account.

				 				treat them as such: The Internet and World Wide Web are more of a self-organizing system than many human technologies (in Barabási’s words, the World Wide Web appears to have “more in common with a cell or an ecological system than with a Swiss watch”). Nonetheless, these networks are built from machines and protocols which are not self-organizing, and which would cease to function without constant human attention.

				 				“to make artificial dichotomies”: Sapp told me a story that illustrates how easy it is for biologists’ metaphors to become a flash point. He noticed that many portrayed larger, more complex organisms, like animals and plants, as more “successful” than the bacteria or fungi that they partnered with. Sapp gave this argument short shrift. “By what definition of success? The last time I looked, the world was primarily microbial. This planet belongs to microbes. Microbes were at the beginning and they will be at the end, long after complex ‘higher’ animals are gone. They created the atmosphere and life as we know it, they make up most of our bodies.” Sapp explained how he had observed the evolutionary biologist John Maynard Smith playing down microbes by changing a metaphor. If a microbe was gaining from a relationship, Maynard Smith called it a “microbial parasite” and the large organism the “host.” However, if the large organism was manipulating the microbe, Maynard Smith didn’t call the big organism the parasite. He changed metaphors, and called the big organism the “master” and the microbe the “slave.” Sapp’s concern lay in the fact that the microbe was either a parasite or a slave, but for Maynard Smith it could never be understood as a dominant partner manipulating the host. The microbe could never be the one in control.

				robust, root, sappy, radical: For puhpowee see Kimmerer (2013), “Learning the Grammar of Animacy” and “Allegiance to Gratitude.” The Dutch primatologist Frans de Waal, frustrated at people using the charge of “anthropomorphism” to defend human exceptionalism, complains of “anthropodenial”: “the a priori rejection of shared characteristics between humans and animals when in fact they may exist” (de Waal [1999]).

				“beyond his left side”: Hustak and Myers (2012).

				as “typical” life-forms: Ingold asks how human thought would look different if fungi, not animals, had been taken as the “paradigmatic instance of a life-form.” He explores the implications of adopting a “fungal model” of life, arguing that humans are no less embedded in networks, it is just that our “pathways of relationship” are more difficult to see than those of fungi (Ingold [2003]).

				mycologists and bacteriologists: For “Sharing resources” see Waller et al. (2018).

				these extraordinary creatures: Deleuze and Guattari (2005), p. 11.

				metabolic sense of them: Carrigan et al. (2015). Alcohol dehydrogenase is different from acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, another enzyme responsible for alcohol metabolism that varies in between human populations and can cause people to have trouble metabolizing alcohol.

				much more ancient fascination: For the drunken monkey hypothesis see Dudley (2014). Fungal infestations have been shown to boost fruit aroma and removal by animals and birds (Peris et al. [2017]).

				negative effects of inebriation: Wiens et al. (2008) and Money (2018), ch. 2.

				 				human agricultural transformation: For consequences of biofuel production in the United States see Money (2018), ch. 5; for land-use change and biofuels see Wright and Wimberly (2013); for subsidies and carbon release see Lu et al. (2018).

				drawing power in matter: Stukeley (1752).





EPILOGUE: THIS COMPOST




			 				beautiful in this world: Ladinsky (2002).






PREFACE


			Hold out your hands and let me lay upon them a sheaf of freshly picked sweetgrass, loose and flowing, like newly washed hair. Golden green and glossy above, the stems are banded with purple and white where they meet the ground. Hold the bundle up to your nose. Find the fragrance of honeyed vanilla over the scent of river water and black earth and you understand its scientific name: Hierochloe odorata, meaning the fragrant, holy grass. In our language it is called wiingaashk, the sweet-smelling hair of Mother Earth. Breathe it in and you start to remember things you didn’t know you’d forgotten.

			A sheaf of sweetgrass, bound at the end and divided into thirds, is ready to braid. In braiding sweetgrass—so that it is smooth, glossy, and worthy of the gift—a certain amount of tension is needed. As any little girl with tight braids will tell you, you have to pull a bit. Of course you can do it yourself—by tying one end to a chair, or by holding it in your teeth and braiding backward away from yourself—but the sweetest way is to have someone else hold the end so that you pull gently against each other, all the while leaning in, head to head, chatting and laughing, watching each other’s hands, one holding steady while the other shifts the slim bundles over one another, each in its turn. Linked by sweetgrass, there is reciprocity between you, linked by sweetgrass, the holder as vital as the braider. The braid becomes finer and thinner as you near the end, until you’re braiding individual blades of grass, and then you tie it off.

			Will you hold the end of the bundle while I braid? Hands joined by grass, can we bend our heads together and make a braid to honor the earth? And then I’ll hold it for you, while you braid, too.

			I could hand you a braid of sweetgrass, as thick and shining as the plait that hung down my grandmother’s back. But it is not mine to give, nor yours to take. Wiingaashk belongs to herself. So I offer, in its place, a braid of stories meant to heal our relationship with the world. This braid is woven from three strands: indigenous ways of knowing, scientific knowledge, and the story of an Anishinabekwe scientist trying to bring them together in service to what matters most. It is an intertwining of science, spirit, and story—old stories and new ones that can be medicine for our broken relationship with earth, a pharmacopoeia of healing stories that allow us to imagine a different relationship, in which people and land are good medicine for each other.



BRAIDING SWEETGRASS





PLANTING SWEETGRASS


			Sweetgrass is best planted not by seed, but by putting roots directly in the ground. Thus the plant is passed from hand to earth to hand across years and generations. Its favored habitat is sunny, well-watered meadows. It thrives along disturbed edges.





Skywoman Falling


			In winter, when the green earth lies resting beneath a blanket of snow, this is the time for storytelling. The storytellers begin by calling upon those who came before who passed the stories down to us, for we are only messengers.

			In the beginning there was the Skyworld.


She fell like a maple seed, pirouetting on an autumn breeze.* A column of light streamed from a hole in the Skyworld, marking her path where only darkness had been before. It took her a long time to fall. In fear, or maybe hope, she clutched a bundle tightly in her hand.

			*Adapted from oral tradition and Shenandoah and George, 1988.

			Hurtling downward, she saw only dark water below. But in that emptiness there were many eyes gazing up at the sudden shaft of light. They saw there a small object, a mere dust mote in the beam. As it grew closer, they could see that it was a woman, arms outstretched, long black hair billowing behind as she spiraled toward them.

			The geese nodded at one another and rose together from the water in a wave of goose music. She felt the beat of their wings as they flew beneath to break her fall. Far from the only home she’d ever known, she caught her breath at the warm embrace of soft feathers as they gently carried her downward. And so it began.

			The geese could not hold the woman above the water for much longer, so they called a council to decide what to do. Resting on their wings, she saw them all gather: loons, otters, swans, beavers, fish of all kinds. A great turtle floated in their midst and offered his back for her to rest upon. Gratefully, she stepped from the goose wings onto the dome of his shell. The others understood that she needed land for her home and discussed how they might serve her need. The deep divers among them had heard of mud at the bottom of the water and agreed to go find some.

			Loon dove first, but the distance was too far and after a long while he surfaced with nothing to show for his efforts. One by one, the other animals offered to help—Otter, Beaver, Sturgeon—but the depth, the darkness, and the pressures were too great for even the strongest of swimmers. They returned gasping for air with their heads ringing. Some did not return at all. Soon only little Muskrat was left, the weakest diver of all. He volunteered to go while the others looked on doubtfully. His small legs flailed as he worked his way downward and he was gone a very long time.

			They waited and waited for him to return, fearing the worst for their relative, and, before long, a stream of bubbles rose with the small, limp body of the muskrat. He had given his life to aid this helpless human. But then the others noticed that his paw was tightly clenched and, when they opened it, there was a small handful of mud. Turtle said, “Here, put it on my back and I will hold it.”

			Skywoman bent and spread the mud with her hands across the shell of the turtle. Moved by the extraordinary gifts of the animals, she sang in thanksgiving and then began to dance, her feet caressing the earth. The land grew and grew as she danced her thanks, from the dab of mud on Turtle’s back until the whole earth was made. Not by Skywoman alone, but from the alchemy of all the animals’ gifts coupled with her deep gratitude. Together they formed what we know today as Turtle Island, our home.

			Like any good guest, Skywoman had not come empty-handed. The bundle was still clutched in her hand. When she toppled from the hole in the Skyworld she had reached out to grab onto the Tree of Life that grew there. In her grasp were branches—fruits and seeds of all kinds of plants. These she scattered onto the new ground and carefully tended each one until the world turned from brown to green. Sunlight streamed through the hole from the Skyworld, allowing the seeds to flourish. Wild grasses, flowers, trees, and medicines spread everywhere. And now that the animals, too, had plenty to eat, many came to live with her on Turtle Island.


Our stories say that of all the plants, wiingaashk, or sweetgrass, was the very first to grow on the earth, its fragrance a sweet memory of Skywoman’s hand. Accordingly, it is honored as one of the four sacred plants of my people. Breathe in its scent and you start to remember things you didn’t know you’d forgotten. Our elders say that ceremonies are the way we “remember to remember,” and so sweetgrass is a powerful ceremonial plant cherished by many indigenous nations. It is also used to make beautiful baskets. Both medicine and a relative, its value is both material and spiritual.

			There is such tenderness in braiding the hair of someone you love. Kindness and something more flow between the braider and the braided, the two connected by the cord of the plait. Wiingaashk waves in strands, long and shining like a woman’s freshly washed hair. And so we say it is the flowing hair of Mother Earth. When we braid sweetgrass, we are braiding the hair of Mother Earth, showing her our loving attention, our care for her beauty and well-being, in gratitude for all she has given us. Children hearing the Skywoman story from birth know in their bones the responsibility that flows between humans and the earth.

			The story of Skywoman’s journey is so rich and glittering it feels to me like a deep bowl of celestial blue from which I could drink again and again. It holds our beliefs, our history, our relationships. Looking into that starry bowl, I see images swirling so fluidly that the past and the present become as one. Images of Skywoman speak not just of where we came from, but also of how we can go forward.


I have Bruce King’s portrait of Skywoman, Moment in Flight, hanging in my lab. Floating to earth with her handful of seeds and flowers, she looks down on my microscopes and data loggers. It might seem an odd juxtaposition, but to me she belongs there. As a writer, a scientist, and a carrier of Skywoman’s story, I sit at the feet of my elder teachers listening for their songs.

			On Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays at 9:35 a.m., I am usually in a lecture hall at the university, expounding about botany and ecology—trying, in short, to explain to my students how Skywoman’s gardens, known by some as “global ecosystems,” function. One otherwise unremarkable morning I gave the students in my General Ecology class a survey. Among other things, they were asked to rate their understanding of the negative interactions between humans and the environment. Nearly every one of the two hundred students said confidently that humans and nature are a bad mix. These were third-year students who had selected a career in environmental protection, so the response was, in a way, not very surprising. They were well schooled in the mechanics of climate change, toxins in the land and water, and the crisis of habitat loss. Later in the survey, they were asked to rate their knowledge of positive interactions between people and land. The median response was “none.”

			I was stunned. How is it possible that in twenty years of education they cannot think of any beneficial relationships between people and the environment? Perhaps the negative examples they see every day— brownfields, factory farms, suburban sprawl—truncated their ability to see some good between humans and the earth. As the land becomes impoverished, so too does the scope of their vision. When we talked about this after class, I realized that they could not even imagine what beneficial relations between their species and others might look like. How can we begin to move toward ecological and cultural sustainability if we cannot even imagine what the path feels like? If we can’t imagine the generosity of geese? These students were not raised on the story of Skywoman.


On one side of the world were people whose relationship with the living world was shaped by Skywoman, who created a garden for the well-being of all. On the other side was another woman with a garden and a tree. But for tasting its fruit, she was banished from the garden and the gates clanged shut behind her. That mother of men was made to wander in the wilderness and earn her bread by the sweat of her brow, not by filling her mouth with the sweet juicy fruits that bend the branches low. In order to eat, she was instructed to subdue the wilderness into which she was cast.

			Same species, same earth, different stories. Like Creation stories everywhere, cosmologies are a source of identity and orientation to the world. They tell us who we are. We are inevitably shaped by them no matter how distant they may be from our consciousness. One story leads to the generous embrace of the living world, the other to banishment. One woman is our ancestral gardener, a cocreator of the good green world that would be the home of her descendants. The other was an exile, just passing through an alien world on a rough road to her real home in heaven.

			And then they met—the offspring of Skywoman and the children of Eve—and the land around us bears the scars of that meeting, the echoes of our stories. They say that hell hath no fury like a woman scorned, and I can only imagine the conversation between Eve and Skywoman: “Sister, you got the short end of the stick . . .”


The Skywoman story, shared by the original peoples throughout the Great Lakes, is a constant star in the constellation of teachings we call the Original Instructions. These are not “instructions” like commandments, though, or rules; rather, they are like a compass: they provide an orientation but not a map. The work of living is creating that map for yourself. How to follow the Original Instructions will be different for each of us and different for every era.

			In their time, Skywoman’s first people lived by their understanding of the Original Instructions, with ethical prescriptions for respectful hunting, family life, ceremonies that made sense for their world. Those measures for caring might not seem to fit in today’s urban world, where “green” means an advertising slogan, not a meadow. The

			buffalo are gone and the world has moved on. I can’t return salmon to the river, and my neighbors would raise the alarm if I set fire to my yard to produce pasture for elk.

			The earth was new then, when it welcomed the first human. It’s old now, and some suspect that we have worn out our welcome by casting the Original Instructions aside. From the very beginning of the world, the other species were a lifeboat for the people. Now, we must be theirs. But the stories that might guide us, if they are told at all, grow dim in the memory. What meaning would they have today? How can we translate from the stories at the world’s beginning to this hour so much closer to its end? The landscape has changed, but the story remains. And as I turn it over again and again, Skywoman seems to look me in the eye and ask, in return for this gift of a world on Turtle’s back, what will I give in return?

			It is good to remember that the original woman was herself an immigrant. She fell a long way from her home in the Skyworld, leaving behind all who knew her and who held her dear. She could never go back. Since 1492, most here are immigrants as well, perhaps arriving on Ellis Island without even knowing that Turtle Island rested beneath their feet. Some of my ancestors are Skywoman’s people, and I belong to them. Some of my ancestors were the newer kind of immigrants, too: a French fur trader, an Irish carpenter, a Welsh farmer. And here we all are, on Turtle Island, trying to make a home. Their stories, of arrivals with empty pockets and nothing but hope, resonate with Skywoman’s. She came here with nothing but a handful of seeds and the slimmest of instructions to “use your gifts and dreams for good,” the same instructions we all carry. She accepted the gifts from the other beings with open hands and used them honorably. She shared the gifts she brought from Skyworld as she set herself about the business of flourishing, of making a home.

			Perhaps the Skywoman story endures because we too are always falling. Our lives, both personal and collective, share her trajectory. Whether we jump or are pushed, or the edge of the known world just crumbles at our feet, we fall, spinning into someplace new and unexpected. Despite our fears of falling, the gifts of the world stand by to catch us.

			As we consider these instructions, it is also good to recall that, when Skywoman arrived here, she did not come alone. She was pregnant. Knowing her grandchildren would inherit the world she left behind, she did not work for flourishing in her time only. It was through her actions of reciprocity, the give and take with the land, that the original immigrant became indigenous. For all of us, becoming indigenous to a place means living as if your children’s future mattered, to take care of the land as if our lives, both material and spiritual, depended on it.

			In the public arena, I’ve heard the Skywoman story told as a bauble of colorful “folklore.” But, even when it is misunderstood, there is power in the telling. Most of my students have never heard the origin story of this land where they were born, but when I tell them, something begins to kindle behind their eyes. Can they, can we all, understand the Skywoman story not as an artifact from the past but as instructions for the future? Can a nation of immigrants once again follow her example to become native, to make a home?

			Look at the legacy of poor Eve’s exile from Eden: the land shows the bruises of an abusive relationship. It’s not just land that is broken, but more importantly, our relationship to land. As Gary Nabhan has written, we can’t meaningfully proceed with healing, with restoration, without “re-story-ation.” In other words, our relationship with land cannot heal until we hear its stories. But who will tell them?

			In the Western tradition there is a recognized hierarchy of beings, with, of course, the human being on top—the pinnacle of evolution, the darling of Creation—and the plants at the bottom. But in Native ways of knowing, human people are often referred to as “the younger brothers of Creation.” We say that humans have the least experience with how to live and thus the most to learn—we must look to our teachers among the other species for guidance. Their wisdom is apparent in the way that they live. They teach us by example. They’ve been on the earth far longer than we have been, and have had time to figure things out. They live both above and below ground, joining Skyworld to the earth. Plants know how to make food and medicine from light and water, and then they give it away.

			I like to imagine that when Skywoman scattered her handful of seeds across Turtle Island, she was sowing sustenance for the body and also for the mind, emotion, and spirit: she was leaving us teachers. The plants can tell us her story; we need to learn to listen.





The Council of Pecans


			Heat waves shimmer above the grasses, the air heavy and white and ringing with the buzz of cicadas. They’ve been shoeless all summer long, but even so the dry September stubble of 1895 pricks their feet as they trot across the sunburned prairie, lifting their heels like grass dancers. Just young willow whips in faded dungarees and nothing else, their ribs showing beneath narrow brown chests as they run. They veer off toward the shady grove where the grass is soft and cool underfoot, flopping in the tall grass with the loose-limbed abandon of boys. They rest for a few moments in the shade and then spring to their feet, palming grasshoppers for bait.

			The fishing poles are right where they left them, leaning up against an old cottonwood. They hook the grasshoppers through the back and throw out a line while the silt of the creek bottom oozes up cool between their toes. But the water hardly moves in the paltry channel left by drought. Nothing’s biting but a few mosquitoes. After a bit, the prospect of a fish dinner seem as thin as their bellies, beneath faded denim pants held up with twine. Looks like nothing but biscuits and redeye gravy for supper tonight. Again. They hate to go home empty-handed and disappoint Mama, but even a dry biscuit fills the belly.

			The land here, along the Canadian River, smack in the middle of Indian Territory, is a rolling savanna of grass with groves of trees in the bottomlands. Much of it has never been plow broke, as no one has a plow. The boys follow the stream from grove to grove back up toward the home place on the allotment, hoping for a deep pool somewhere, finding nothing. Until one boy stubs his toe on something hard and round hidden in the long grass.

			There’s one and then another, and then another—so many he can hardly walk. He takes up a hard green ball from the ground and whips it through the trees at his brother like a fastball as he yells, “Piganek! Let’s bring ’em home!” The nuts have just begun to ripen and fall and blanket the grass. The boys fill their pockets in no time and then pile up a great heap more. Pecans are good eating but hard to carry, like trying to carry a bushel of tennis balls: the more you pick up, the more end up on the ground. They hate to go home empty-handed, and Mama would be glad for these—but you can’t carry more than a handful . . .

			The heat eases a little as the sun sinks low and evening air settles in the bottomland, cool enough for them to run home for supper. Mama hollers for them and the boys come running, their skinny legs pumping and their underpants flashing white in the fading light. It looks like they’re each carrying a big forked log, hung like a yoke over their shoulders. They throw them down at her feet with grins of triumph: two pairs of worn-out pants, tied shut with twine at the ankles and bulging with nuts.


One of those skinny little boys was my grandpa, hungry enough to gather up food whenever he found it, living in a shanty on the Oklahoma prairie when it was still “Indian Territory,” just before it all blew away. As unpredictable as life may be, we have even less control over the stories they tell about us after we’re gone. He’d laugh so hard to hear that his great-grandchildren know him not as a decorated World War I veteran, not as a skilled mechanic for newfangled automobiles, but as a barefoot boy on the reservation running home in his underwear with his pants stuffed with pecans.

			The word pecan—the fruit of the tree known as the pecan hickory (Carya illinoensis) —comes to English from indigenous languages. Pigan is a nut, any nut. The hickories, black walnuts, and butternuts of our northern homelands have their own specific names. But those trees, like the homelands, were lost to my people. Our lands around Lake Michigan were wanted by settlers, so in long lines, surrounded by soldiers, we were marched at gunpoint along what became known as the Trail of Death. They took us to a new place, far from our lakes and forests. But someone wanted that land too, so the bedrolls were packed again, thinner this time. In the span of a single generation my ancestors were “removed” three times—Wisconsin to Kansas, points in between, and then to Oklahoma. I wonder if they looked back for a last glimpse of the lakes, glimmering like a mirage. Did they touch the trees in remembrance as they became fewer and fewer, until there was only grass?

			So much was scattered and left along that trail. Graves of half the people. Language. Knowledge. Names. My great-grandmother Sha-note, “wind blowing through,” was renamed Charlotte. Names the soldiers or the missionaries could not pronounce were not permitted.

			When they got to Kansas they must have been relieved to find groves of nut trees along the rivers—a type unknown to them, but delicious and plentiful. Without a name for this new food they just called them nuts—pigan—which became pecan in English.

			I only make pecan pie at Thanksgiving, when there are plenty around to eat it all. I don’t even like it especially, but I want to honor that tree. Feeding guests its fruit around the big table recalls the trees’ welcome to our ancestors when they were lonesome and tired and so far from home.

			The boys may have come home fishless, but they brought back nearly as much protein as if they’d had a stringer of catfish. Nuts are like the pan fish of the forest, full of protein and especially fat—“poor man’s meat,” and they were poor. Today we eat them daintily, shelled and toasted, but in the old times they’d boil them up in a porridge. The fat floated to the top like a chicken soup and they skimmed it and stored it as nut butter: good winter food. High in calories and vitamins—everything you needed to sustain life. After all, that’s the whole point of nuts: to provide the embryo with all that is needed to start a new life.

			. . . .

			Butternuts, black walnuts, hickories, and pecans are all closely related members of the same family (Juglandaceae). Our people carried them wherever they migrated, more often in baskets than in pants, though. Pecans today trace the rivers through the prairies, populating fertile bottomlands where people settled. My Haudenosaunee neighbors say that their ancestors were so fond of butternuts that they are a good marker of old village sites today. Sure enough, there is a grove of butternuts, uncommon in “wild” forests, on the hill above the spring at my house. I clear the weeds around the young ones every year and slosh a bucket of water on them when the rains are late. Remembering.

			The old family home place on the allotment in Oklahoma has a pecan tree shading what remains of the house. I imagine Grammy pouring nuts out to prepare them and one rolling away to a welcoming spot at the edge of the dooryard. Or maybe she paid her debt to the trees by planting a handful in her garden right then and there.

			Thinking back to that old story again, it strikes me that the boys in the pecan grove were very wise to carry home all that they could: nut trees don’t make a crop every year, but rather produce at unpredictable intervals. Some years a feast, most years a famine, a boom and bust cycle known as mast fruiting. Unlike juicy fruits and berries, which invite you to eat them right away before they spoil, nuts protect themselves with a hard, almost stony shell and a green, leathery husk. The tree does not mean for you to eat them right away with juice dripping down your chin. They are designed to be food for winter, when you need fat and protein, heavy calories to keep you warm. They are safety for hard times, the embryo of survival. So rich is the reward that the contents are protected in a vault, double locked, a box inside a box. This protects the embryo within and its food supply, but it also virtually guarantees that the nut will be squirreled away someplace safe.

			The only way through the shell is a lot of work, and a squirrel would be unwise to sit gnawing it in the open where a hawk would gladly take advantage of its preoccupation. Nuts are designed to be brought inside, to save for later in a chipmunk’s cache, or in the root cellar of an Oklahoma cabin. In the way of all hoards, some will surely be forgotten—and then a tree is born.

			For mast fruiting to succeed in generating new forests, each tree has to make lots and lots of nuts—so many that it overwhelms the would-be seed predators. If a tree just plodded along making a few nuts every year, they’d all get eaten and there would be no next generation of pecans. But given the high caloric value of nuts, the trees can’t afford this outpouring every year—they have to save up for it, as a family saves up for a special event. Mast-fruiting trees spend years making sugar, and rather than spending it little by little, they stick it under the proverbial mattress, banking calories as starch in their roots. When the account has a surplus, only then could my Grandpa bring home pounds of nuts.

			This boom and bust cycle remains a playground of hypotheses for tree physiologists and evolutionary biologists. Forest ecologists hypothesize that mast fruiting is the simple outcome of this energetic equation: make fruit only when you can afford it. That makes sense. But trees grow and accumulate calories at different rates depending on their habitats. So, like the settlers who got the fertile farmland, the fortunate ones would get rich quickly and fruit often, while their shaded neighbors would struggle and only rarely have an abundance, waiting for years to reproduce. If this were true, each tree would fruit on its own schedule, predictable by the size of its reserves of stored starch. But they don’t. If one tree fruits, they all fruit—there are no soloists. Not one tree in a grove, but the whole grove; not one grove in the forest, but every grove; all across the county and all across the state. The trees act not as individuals, but somehow as a collective. Exactly how they do this, we don’t yet know. But what we see is the power of unity. What happens to one happens to us all. We can starve together or feast together. All flourishing is mutual.

			In the summer of 1895, the root cellars throughout Indian Territory were full of pecans, and so were the bellies of boys and squirrels. For people, the pulse of abundance felt like a gift, a profusion of food to be simply picked up from the ground. That is, if you got there before the squirrels. And if you didn’t, at least there would be lots of squirrel stew that winter. The pecan groves give, and give again. Such communal generosity might seem incompatible with the process of evolution, which invokes the imperative of individual survival. But we make a grave error if we try to separate individual well-being from the health of the whole. The gift of abundance from pecans is also a gift to themselves. By sating squirrels and people, the trees are ensuring their own survival. The genes that translate to mast fruiting flow on evolutionary currents into the next generations, while those that lack the ability to participate will be eaten and reach an evolutionary dead end. Just so, people who know how to read the land for nuts and carry them home to safety will survive the February blizzards and pass on that behavior to their progeny, not by genetic transmission but by cultural practice.

			Forest scientists describe the generosity of mast fruiting with the predator-satiation hypothesis. The story seems to go like this: When the trees produce more than the squirrels can eat, some nuts escape predation. Likewise, when the squirrel larders are packed with nuts, the plump pregnant mamas have more babies in each litter and the squirrel population skyrockets. Which means that the hawk mamas have more babies, and fox dens are full too. But when the next fall comes, the happy days are over, because the trees have shut off nut production. There’s little to fill the squirrels’ larders now—they come home empty-handed—so they go out looking, harder and harder, exposing themselves to the increased population of watchful hawks and hungry foxes. The predator-prey ratio is not in their favor, and through starvation and predation the squirrel population plummets and the woods grow quiet without their chattering. You can imagine the trees whispering to each other at this point, “There are just a few squirrels left. Wouldn’t this be a good time to make some nuts?” All across the landscape, out come the pecan flowers poised to become a bumper crop again. Together, the trees survive, and thrive.


The federal government’s Indian Removal policies wrenched many Native peoples from our homelands. It separated us from our traditional knowledge and lifeways, the bones of our ancestors, our sustaining plants—but even this did not extinguish identity. So the government tried a new tool, separating children from their families and cultures, sending them far away to school, long enough, they hoped, to make them forget who they were.

			Throughout Indian Territory there are records of Indian agents being paid a bounty for rounding up kids to ship to the government boarding schools. Later, in a pretense of choice, the parents had to sign papers to let their children go “legally.” Parents who refused could go to jail. Some may have hoped it would give their children a better future than a dust-bowl farm. Sometimes federal rations—weevilly flour and rancid lard that were supposed to replace the buffalo—would be withheld until the children were signed over. Maybe it was a good pecan year that staved off the agents for one more season. The threat of being sent away would surely make a small boy run home half naked, his pants stuffed with food. Maybe it was a low year for pecans when the Indian agent came again, looking for skinny brown kids who had no prospect of supper—maybe that was the year Grammy signed the papers.

			Children, language, lands: almost everything was stripped away, stolen when you weren’t looking because you were trying to stay alive. In the face of such loss, one thing our people could not surrender was the meaning of land. In the settler mind, land was property, real estate, capital, or natural resources. But to our people, it was everything: identity, the connection to our ancestors, the home of our nonhuman kinfolk, our pharmacy, our library, the source of all that sustained us. Our lands were where our responsibility to the world was enacted, sacred ground. It belonged to itself; it was a gift, not a commodity, so it could never be bought or sold. These are the meanings people took with them when they were forced from their ancient homelands to new places. Whether it was their homeland or the new land forced upon them, land held in common gave people strength; it gave them something to fight for. And so—in the eyes of the federal government—that belief was a threat.

			So after thousands of miles of forced moves and loss and finally settling us in Kansas, the federal government came once again to my people and offered another move, this time to a place that would be theirs forever, a move to end all moves. And what’s more, the people were offered a chance to become United States citizens, to be part of the great country that surrounded them and to be protected by its power. Our leaders, my grandpa’s grandpa among them, studied and counciled and sent delegations to Washington to consult. The U.S. Constitution apparently had no power to protect the homelands of indigenous peoples. Removal had made that abundantly clear. But the Constitution did explicitly protect the land rights of citizens who were individual property owners. Perhaps that was the route to a permanent home for the people.

			The leaders were offered the American Dream, the right to own their own property as individuals, inviolate from the vagaries of shifting Indian policy. They’d never be forced off their lands again. There would be no more graves along a dusty road. All they had to do was agree to surrender their allegiance to land held in common and agree to private property. With heavy hearts, they sat in council all summer, struggling to decide and weighing the options, which were few. Families were divided against families. Stay in Kansas on communal land and run the risk of losing it all, or go to Indian Territory as individual landowners with a legal guarantee. This historic council met all that hot summer in a shady place that came to be known as the Pecan Grove.

			We have always known that the plants and animals have their own councils, and a common language. The trees, especially, we recognize as our teachers. But it seems no one listened that summer when the Pecans counseled: Stick together, act as one. We Pecans have learned that there is strength in unity, that the lone individual can be picked off as easily as the tree that has fruited out of season. The teachings of Pecans were not heard, or heeded.

			And so our families packed the wagon one more time and moved west to Indian Territory, to the promised land, to become the Citizen Potawatomi. Tired and dusty but hopeful for their future, they found an old friend their first night on the new lands: a pecan grove. They rolled their wagons beneath the shelter of its branches and began again. Every tribal member, even my grandpa, a baby in arms, was given title to an allotment of land the federal government deemed sufficient for making a living as a farmer. By accepting citizenship, they ensured that their allotments could not be taken from them. Unless, of course, a citizen could not pay his taxes. Or a rancher offered a keg of whiskey and a lot of money, “fair and square.” Any unallocated parcels were snapped up by non-Indian settlers just as hungry squirrels snap up pecans. During the allotment era, more than two-thirds of the reservation lands were lost. Barely a generation after land was “guaranteed” through the sacrifice of common land converted to private property, most of it was gone.

			The pecan trees and their kin show a capacity for concerted action, for unity of purpose that transcends the individual trees. They ensure somehow that all stand together and thus survive. How they do so is still elusive. There is some evidence that certain cues from the environment may trigger fruiting, like a particularly wet spring or a long growing season. These favorable physical conditions help all the trees achieve an energy surplus that they can spend on nuts. But, given the individual differences in habitat, it seems unlikely that environment alone could be the key to synchrony.

			In the old times, our elders say, the trees talked to each other. They’d stand in their own council and craft a plan. But scientists decided long ago that plants were deaf and mute, locked in isolation without communication. The possibility of conversation was summarily dismissed. Science pretends to be purely rational, completely neutral, a system of knowledge-making in which the observation is independent of the observer. And yet the conclusion was drawn that plants cannot communicate because they lack the mechanisms that animals use to speak. The potentials for plants were seen purely through the lens of animal capacity. Until quite recently no one seriously explored the possibility that plants might “speak” to one another. But pollen has been carried reliably on the wind for eons, communicated by males to receptive females to make those very nuts. If the wind can be trusted with that fecund responsibility, why not with messages?

			There is now compelling evidence that our elders were right—the trees are talking to one another. They communicate via pheromones, hormonelike compounds that are wafted on the breeze, laden with meaning. Scientists have identified specific compounds that one tree will release when it is under the stress of insect attack—gypsy moths gorging on its leaves or bark beetles under its skin. The tree sends out a distress call: “Hey, you guys over there? I’m under attack here. You might want to raise the drawbridge and arm yourselves for what is coming your way.” The downwind trees catch the drift, sensing those few molecules of alarm, the whiff of danger. This gives them time to manufacture defensive chemicals. Forewarned is forearmed. The trees warn each other and the invaders are repelled. The individual benefits, and so does the entire grove. Trees appear to be talking about mutual defense. Could they also communicate to synchronize masting? There is so much we cannot yet sense with our limited human capacity. Tree conversations are still far above our heads.

			Some studies of mast fruiting have suggested that the mechanism for synchrony comes not through the air, but underground. The trees in a forest are often interconnected by subterranean networks of mycorrhizae, fungal strands that inhabit tree roots. The mycorrhizal symbiosis enables the fungi to forage for mineral nutrients in the soil and deliver them to the tree in exchange for carbohydrates. The mycorrhizae may form fungal bridges between individual trees, so that all the trees in a forest are connected. These fungal networks appear to redistribute the wealth of carbohydrates from tree to tree. A kind of Robin Hood, they take from the rich and give to the poor so that all the trees arrive at the same carbon surplus at the same time. They weave a web of reciprocity, of giving and taking. In this way, the trees all act as one because the fungi have connected them. Through unity, survival. All flourishing is mutual. Soil, fungus, tree, squirrel, boy—all are the beneficiaries of reciprocity.

			How generously they shower us with food, literally giving themselves so that we can live. But in the giving their lives are also ensured. Our taking returns benefit to them in the circle of life making life, the chain of reciprocity. Living by the precepts of the Honorable Harvest—to take only what is given, to use it well, to be grateful for the gift, and to reciprocate the gift—is easy in a pecan grove. We reciprocate the gift by taking care of the grove, protecting it from harm, planting seeds so that new groves will shade the prairie and feed the squirrels.


Now, two generations later, after removal, after allotment, after the boarding schools, after diaspora, my family returns to Oklahoma, to what is left of my grandfather’s allotment. From the hilltop you can still see pecan groves along the river. At night we dance on the old powwow grounds. The ancient ceremonies greet the sunrise. The smell of corn soup and the sound of drums fill the air as the nine bands of Potawatomi, scattered across the country by this history of removal, come together again for a few days each year in a search for belonging. The Potawatomi Gathering of Nations reunites the people, an antidote to the divide-andconquer strategy that was used to separate our people from each other and from our homelands. The synchrony of our Gathering is determined by our leaders, but more importantly, there is something like a mycorrhizal network that unites us, an unseen connection of history and family and responsibility to both our ancestors and our children. As a nation, we are beginning to follow the guidance of our elders the pecans by standing together for the benefit of all. We are remembering what they said, that all flourishing is mutual.

			This is a mast year for my family; we are all here at the Gathering, thick on the ground, like seeds for the future. Like an embryo provisioned and protected inside layers of stony shell, we have survived the lean years and flower together. I go walking in the pecan grove, perhaps the very place where my grandfather stuffed his pant legs full. He would be surprised to find us all here, dancing the circle, remembering pecans.





The Gift of Strawberries


			I once heard Evon Peter—a Gwich’in man, a father, a husband, an environmental activist, and Chief of Arctic Village, a small village in northeastern Alaska—introduce himself simply as “a boy who was raised by a river.” A description as smooth and slippery as a river rock. Did he mean only that he grew up near its banks? Or was the river responsible for rearing him, for teaching him the things he needed to live? Did it feed him, body and soul? Raised by a river: I suppose both meanings are true—you can hardly have one without the other.

			In a way, I was raised by strawberries, fields of them. Not to exclude the maples, hemlocks, white pines, goldenrod, asters, violets, and mosses of upstate New York, but it was the wild strawberries, beneath dewy leaves on an almost-summer morning, who gave me my sense of the world, my place in it. Behind our house were miles of old hay fields divided by stone walls, long abandoned from farming but not yet grown up to forest. After the school bus chugged up our hill, I’d throw down my red plaid book bag, change my clothes before my mother could think of a chore, and jump across the crick to go wandering in the goldenrod. Our mental maps had all the landmarks we kids needed: the fort under the sumacs, the rock pile, the river, the big pine with branches so evenly spaced you could climb to the top as if it were a ladder—and the strawberry patches.

			White petals with a yellow center—like a little wild rose—they dotted the acres of curl grass in May during the Flower Moon, waabigwanigiizis. We kept good track of them, peeking under the trifoliate leaves to check their progress as we ran through on our way to catch frogs. After the flower finally dropped its petals, a tiny green nub appeared in its place, and as the days got longer and warmer it swelled to a small white berry. These were sour but we ate them anyway, impatient for the real thing.

			You could smell ripe strawberries before you saw them, the fragrance mingling with the smell of sun on damp ground. It was the smell of June, the last day of school, when we were set free, and the Strawberry Moon, ode’mini-giizis. I’d lie on my stomach in my favorite patches, watching the berries grow sweeter and bigger under the leaves. Each tiny wild berry was scarcely bigger than a raindrop, dimpled with seeds under the cap of leaves. From that vantage point I could pick only the reddest of the red, leaving the pink ones for tomorrow.

			Even now, after more than fifty Strawberry Moons, finding a patch of wild strawberries still touches me with a sensation of surprise, a feeling of unworthiness and gratitude for the generosity and kindness that comes with an unexpected gift all wrapped in red and green. “Really? For me? Oh, you shouldn’t have.” After fifty years they still raise the question of how to respond to their generosity. Sometimes it feels like a silly question with a very simple answer: eat them.

			But I know that someone else has wondered these same things. In our Creation stories the origin of strawberries is important. Skywoman’s beautiful daughter, whom she carried in her womb from Skyworld, grew on the good green earth, loving and loved by all the other beings. But tragedy befell her when she died giving birth to her twins, Flint and Sapling. Heartbroken, Skywoman buried her beloved daughter in the earth. Her final gifts, our most revered plants, grew from her body. The strawberry arose from her heart. In Potawatomi, the strawberry is ode min, the heart berry. We recognize them as the leaders of the berries, the first to bear fruit.

			Strawberries first shaped my view of a world full of gifts simply scattered at your feet. A gift comes to you through no action of your own, free, having moved toward you without your beckoning. It is not a reward; you cannot earn it, or call it to you, or even deserve it. And yet it appears. Your only role is to be open-eyed and present. Gifts exist in a realm of humility and mystery—as with random acts of kindness, we do not know their source.

			Those fields of my childhood showered us with strawberries, raspberries, blackberries, hickory nuts in the fall, bouquets of wildflowers brought to my mom, and family walks on Sunday afternoon. They were our playground, retreat, wildlife sanctuary, ecology classroom, and the place where we learned to shoot tin cans off the stone wall. All for free. Or so I thought.

			I experienced the world in that time as a gift economy, “goods and services” not purchased but received as gifts from the earth. Of course I was blissfully unaware of how my parents must have struggled to make ends meet in the wage economy raging far from this field.

			In our family, the presents we gave one another were almost always homemade. I thought that was the definition of a gift: something you made for someone else. We made all our Christmas gifts: piggy banks from old Clorox bottles, hot pads from broken clothespins, and puppets from retired socks. My mother says it was because we had no money for store-bought presents. It didn’t seem like a hardship to me; it was something special.

			My father loves wild strawberries, so for Father’s Day my mother would almost always make him strawberry shortcake. She baked the crusty shortcakes and whipped the heavy cream, but we kids were responsible for the berries. We each got an old jar or two and spent the Saturday before the celebration out in the fields, taking forever to fill them as more and more berries ended up in our mouths. Finally, we returned home and poured them out on the kitchen table to sort out the bugs. I’m sure we missed some, but Dad never mentioned the extra protein.

			In fact, he thought wild strawberry shortcake was the best possible present, or so he had us convinced. It was a gift that could never be bought. As children raised by strawberries, we were probably unaware that the gift of berries was from the fields themselves, not from us. Our gift was time and attention and care and red-stained fingers. Heart berries, indeed.


Gifts from the earth or from each other establish a particular relationship, an obligation of sorts to give, to receive, and to reciprocate. The field gave to us, we gave to my dad, and we tried to give back to the strawberries. When the berry season was done, the plants would send out slender red runners to make new plants. Because I was fascinated by the way they would travel over the ground looking for good places to take root, I would weed out little patches of bare ground where the runners touched down. Sure enough, tiny little roots would emerge from the runner and by the end of the season there were even more plants, ready to bloom under the next Strawberry Moon. No person taught us this—the strawberries showed us. Because they had given us a gift, an ongoing relationship opened between us.

			Farmers around us grew a lot of strawberries and frequently hired kids to pick for them. My siblings and I would ride our bikes a long way to Crandall’s farm to pick berries to earn spending money. A dime for every quart we picked. But Mrs. Crandall was a persnickety overseer. She stood at the edge of the field in her bib apron and instructed us how to pick and warned us not to crush any berries. She had other rules, too. “These berries belong to me,” she said, “not to you. I don’t want to see you kids eating my berries.” I knew the difference: In the fields behind my house, the berries belonged to themselves. At this lady’s roadside stand, she sold them for sixty cents a quart.

			It was quite a lesson in economics. We’d have to spend most of our wages if we wanted to ride home with berries in our bike baskets. Of course those berries were ten times bigger than our wild ones, but not nearly so good. I don’t believe we ever put those farm berries in Dad’s shortcake. It wouldn’t have felt right.

			. . . .

			It’s funny how the nature of an object—let’s say a strawberry or a pair of socks—is so changed by the way it has come into your hands, as a gift or as a commodity. The pair of wool socks that I buy at the store, red and gray striped, are warm and cozy. I might feel grateful for the sheep that made the wool and the worker who ran the knitting machine. I hope so. But I have no inherent obligation to those socks as a commodity, as private property. There is no bond beyond the politely exchanged “thank yous” with the clerk. I have paid for them and our reciprocity ended the minute I handed her the money. The exchange ends once parity has been established, an equal exchange. They become my property. I don’t write a thank-you note to JCPenney.

			But what if those very same socks, red and gray striped, were knitted by my grandmother and given to me as a gift? That changes everything. A gift creates ongoing relationship. I will write a thank-you note. I will take good care of them and if I am a very gracious grandchild I’ll wear them when she visits even if I don’t like them. When it’s her birthday, I will surely make her a gift in return. As the scholar and writer Lewis Hyde notes, “It is the cardinal difference between gift and commodity exchange that a gift establishes a feeling-bond between two people.”

			Wild strawberries fit the definition of gift, but grocery store berries do not. It’s the relationship between producer and consumer that changes everything. As a gift-thinker, I would be deeply offended if I saw wild strawberries in the grocery store. I would want to kidnap them all. They were not meant to be sold, only to be given. Hyde reminds us that in a gift economy, one’s freely given gifts cannot be made into someone else’s capital. I can see the headline now: “Woman Arrested for Shoplifting Produce. Strawberry Liberation Front Claims Responsibility.”

			This is the same reason we do not sell sweetgrass. Because it is given to us, it should only be given to others. My dear friend Wally “Bear” Meshigaud is a ceremonial firekeeper for our people and uses a lot of sweetgrass on our behalf. There are folks who pick for him in a good way, to keep him supplied, but even so, at a big gathering sometimes he runs out. At powwows and fairs you can see our own people selling sweetgrass for ten bucks a braid. When Wally really needs wiingashk for a ceremony, he may visit one of those booths among the stalls selling frybread or hanks of beads. He introduces himself to the seller, explains his need, just as he would in a meadow, asking permission of the sweetgrass. He cannot pay for it, not because he doesn’t have the money, but because it cannot be bought or sold and still retain its essence for ceremony. He expects sellers to graciously give him what he needs, but sometimes they don’t. The guy at the booth thinks he’s being shaken down by an elder. “Hey, you can’t get something for nothin’,” he says. But that is exactly the point. A gift is something for nothing, except that certain obligations are attached. For the plant to be sacred, it cannot be sold. Reluctant entrepreneurs will get a teaching from Wally, but they’ll never get his money.

			Sweetgrass belongs to Mother Earth. Sweetgrass pickers collect properly and respectfully, for their own use and the needs of their community. They return a gift to the earth and tend to the well-being of the wiingashk. The braids are given as gifts, to honor, to say thank you, to heal and to strengthen. The sweetgrass is kept in motion. When Wally gives sweetgrass to the fire, it is a gift that has passed from hand to hand, growing richer as it is honored in every exchange.

			That is the fundamental nature of gifts: they move, and their value increases with their passage. The fields made a gift of berries to us and we made a gift of them to our father. The more something is shared, the greater its value becomes. This is hard to grasp for societies steeped in notions of private property, where others are, by definition, excluded from sharing. Practices such as posting land against trespass, for example, are expected and accepted in a property economy but are unacceptable in an economy where land is seen as a gift to all.

			Lewis Hyde wonderfully illustrates this dissonance in his exploration of the “Indian giver.” This expression, used negatively today as a pejorative for someone who gives something and then wants to have it back, actually derives from a fascinating cross-cultural misinterpretation between an indigenous culture operating in a gift economy and a colonial culture predicated on the concept of private property. When gifts were given to the settlers by the Native inhabitants, the recipients understood that they were valuable and were intended to be retained. Giving them away would have been an affront. But the indigenous people understood the value of the gift to be based in reciprocity and would be affronted if the gifts did not circulate back to them. Many of our ancient teachings counsel that whatever we have been given is supposed to be given away again.

			From the viewpoint of a private property economy, the “gift” is deemed to be “free” because we obtain it free of charge, at no cost. But in the gift economy, gifts are not free. The essence of the gift is that it creates a set of relationships. The currency of a gift economy is, at its root, reciprocity. In Western thinking, private land is understood to be a “bundle of rights,” whereas in a gift economy property has a “bundle of responsibilities” attached.


I was once lucky enough to spend time doing ecological research in the Andes. My favorite part was market day in the local village, when the square filled with vendors. There were tables loaded with platanos, carts of fresh papaya, stalls in bright colors with pyramids of tomatoes, and buckets of hairy yucca roots. Other vendors spread blankets on the ground, with everything you could need, from flip-flops to woven palm hats. Squatting behind her red blanket, a woman in a striped shawl and navy blue bowler spread out medicinal roots as beautifully wrinkled as she was. The colors, the smells of corn roasting on a wood fire and sharp limes, and the sounds of all the voices mingle wonderfully in my memory. I had a favorite stall where the owner, Edita, looked for me each day. She’d kindly explain how to cook unfamiliar items and pull out the sweetest pineapple she’d been saving under the table. Once she even had strawberries. I know that I paid the gringa prices but the experience of abundance and goodwill were worth every peso.

			I dreamed not long ago of that market with all its vivid textures. I walked through the stalls with a basket over my arm as always and went right to Edita for a bunch of fresh cilantro. We chatted and laughed and when I held out my coins she waved them off, patting my arm and sending me away. A gift, she said. Muchas gracias, señora, I replied. There was my favorite panadera, with clean cloths laid over the round loaves. I chose a few rolls, opened my purse, and this vendor too gestured away my money as if I were impolite to suggest paying. I looked around in bewilderment; this was my familiar market and yet everything had changed. It wasn’t just for me—no shopper was paying. I floated through the market with a sense of euphoria. Gratitude was the only currency accepted here. It was all a gift. It was like picking strawberries in my field: the merchants were just intermediaries passing on gifts from the earth.

			I looked in my basket: two zucchinis, an onion, tomatoes, bread, and a bunch of cilantro. It was still half empty, but it felt full. I had everything I needed. I glanced over at the cheese stall, thinking to get some, but knowing it would be given, not sold, I decided I could do without. It’s funny: Had all the things in the market merely been a very low price, I probably would have scooped up as much as I could. But when everything became a gift, I felt self-restraint. I didn’t want to take too much. And I began thinking of what small presents I might bring to the vendors tomorrow.

			The dream faded, of course, but the feelings first of euphoria and then of self-restraint remain. I’ve thought of it often and recognize now that I was witness there to the conversion of a market economy to a gift economy, from private goods to common wealth. And in that transformation the relationships became as nourishing as the food I was getting. Across the market stalls and blankets, warmth and compassion were changing hands. There was a shared celebration of abundance for all we’d been given. And since every market basket contained a meal, there was justice.

			I’m a plant scientist and I want to be clear, but I am also a poet and the world speaks to me in metaphor. When I speak of the gift of berries, I do not mean that Fragaria virginiana has been up all night making a present just for me, strategizing to find exactly what I’d like on a summer morning. So far as we know, that does not happen, but as a scientist I am well aware of how little we do know. The plant has in fact been up all night assembling little packets of sugar and seeds and fragrance and color, because when it does so its evolutionary fitness is increased. When it is successful in enticing an animal such as me to disperse its fruit, its genes for making yumminess are passed on to ensuing generations with a higher frequency than those of the plant whose berries were inferior. The berries made by the plant shape the behaviors of the dispersers and have adaptive consequences.

			What I mean of course is that our human relationship with strawberries is transformed by our choice of perspective. It is human perception that makes the world a gift. When we view the world this way, strawberries and humans alike are transformed. The relationship of gratitude and reciprocity thus developed can increase the evolutionary fitness of both plant and animal. A species and a culture that treat the natural world with respect and reciprocity will surely pass on genes to ensuing generations with a higher frequency than the people who destroy it. The stories we choose to shape our behaviors have adaptive consequences.

			Lewis Hyde has made extensive studies of gift economies. He finds that “objects . . . will remain plentiful because they are treated as gifts.” A gift relationship with nature is a “formal give-and-take that acknowledges our participation in, and dependence upon, natural increase. We tend to respond to nature as a part of ourselves, not a stranger or alien available for exploitation. Gift exchange is the commerce of choice, for it is commerce that harmonizes with, or participates in, the process of [nature’s] increase.”

			In the old times, when people’s lives were so directly tied to the land, it was easy to know the world as gift. When fall came, the skies would darken with flocks of geese, honking “Here we are.” It reminds the people of the Creation story, when the geese came to save Skywoman. The people are hungry, winter is coming, and the geese fill the marshes with food. It is a gift and the people receive it with thanksgiving, love, and respect.

			But when the food does not come from a flock in the sky, when you don’t feel the warm feathers cool in your hand and know that a life has been given for yours, when there is no gratitude in return—that food may not satisfy. It may leave the spirit hungry while the belly is full. Something is broken when the food comes on a Styrofoam tray wrapped in slippery plastic, a carcass of a being whose only chance at life was a cramped cage. That is not a gift of life; it is a theft.

			How, in our modern world, can we find our way to understand the earth as a gift again, to make our relations with the world sacred again? I know we cannot all become hunter-gatherers—the living world could not bear our weight—but even in a market economy, can we behave “as if ” the living world were a gift?

			We could start by listening to Wally. There are those who will try to sell the gifts, but, as Wally says of sweetgrass for sale, “Don’t buy it.” Refusal to participate is a moral choice. Water is a gift for all, not meant to be bought and sold. Don’t buy it. When food has been wrenched from the earth, depleting the soil and poisoning our relatives in the name of higher yields, don’t buy it.

			In material fact, Strawberries belong only to themselves. The exchange relationships we choose determine whether we share them as a common gift or sell them as a private commodity. A great deal rests on that choice. For the greater part of human history, and in places in the world today, common resources were the rule. But some invented a different story, a social construct in which everything is a commodity to be bought and sold. The market economy story has spread like wildfire, with uneven results for human well-being and devastation for the natural world. But it is just a story we have told ourselves and we are free to tell another, to reclaim the old one.

			One of these stories sustains the living systems on which we depend. One of these stories opens the way to living in gratitude and amazement at the richness and generosity of the world. One of these stories asks us to bestow our own gifts in kind, to celebrate our kinship with the world. We can choose. If all the world is a commodity, how poor we grow. When all the world is a gift in motion, how wealthy we become.

			In those childhood fields, waiting for strawberries to ripen, I used to eat the sour white ones, sometimes out of hunger but mostly from impatience. I knew the long-term results of my short-term greed, but I took them anyway. Fortunately, our capacity for self-restraint grows and develops like the berries beneath the leaves, so I learned to wait. A little. I remember lying on my back in the fields watching the clouds go by and rolling over to check the berries every few minutes. When I was young, I thought the change might happen that fast. Now I am old and I know that transformation is slow. The commodity economy has been here on Turtle Island for four hundred years, eating up the white strawberries and everything else. But people have grown weary of the sour taste in their mouths. A great longing is upon us, to live again in a world made of gifts. I can scent it coming, like the fragrance of ripening strawberries rising on the breeze.





An Offering


			Our people were canoe people. Until they made us walk. Until our lakeshore lodges were signed away for shanties and dust. Our people were a circle, until we were dispersed. Our people shared a language with which to thank the day, until they made us forget. But we didn’t forget. Not quite.


Most summer mornings of childhood I woke to the sound of the outhouse door—the squeak of the hinge followed by the hollow thunk as it shut. I rose to consciousness through the hazy songs of vireos and thrushes, the lapping of the lake, and finally the sound of my father pumping the tank on the Coleman stove. By the time my brother and sisters and I emerged from our sleeping bags the sun would just be topping the eastern shore, pulling mist off the lake in long white coils. The small four-cup coffeepot of battered aluminum, blackened with the smoke of many fires, would already be thumping. Our family spent summers canoe camping in the Adirondacks and every day began this way.

			I can picture my father, in his red-checked wool shirt, standing atop the rocks above the lake. When he lifts the coffeepot from the stove the morning bustle stops; we know without being told that it’s time to pay attention. He stands at the edge of camp with the coffeepot in his hands, holding the top in place with a folded pot holder. He pours coffee out on the ground in a thick brown stream. The sunlight catches the flow, striping it amber and brown and black as it falls to the earth and steams in the cool morning air. With his face to the morning sun, he pours and speaks into the stillness, “Here’s to the gods of Tahawus.” The stream runs down over smooth granite to merge with the lake water, as clear and brown as the coffee. I watch it trickle, picking up bits of pale lichen and soaking a tiny clump of moss as it follows a crack to the water’s edge. The moss swells with the liquid and unfurls its leaves to the sun. Then and only then does he pour out steaming cups of coffee for himself and my mother, who stands at the stove making pancakes. So begins each morning in the north woods: the words that come before all else.

			I was pretty sure that no other family I knew began their day like this, but I never questioned the source of those words and my father never explained. They were just part of our life among the lakes. But their rhythm made me feel at home and the ceremony drew a circle around our family. By those words we said “Here we are,” and I imagined that the land heard us—murmured to itself, “Ohh, here are the ones who know how to say thank you.”

			Tahawus is the Algonquin name for Mount Marcy, the highest peak in the Adirondacks. It’s called Mount Marcy to commemorate a governor who never set foot on those wild slopes. Tahawus, “the Cloud Splitter,” is its true name, invoking its essential nature. Among our Potawatomi people, there are public names and true names. True names are used only by intimates and in ceremony. My father had been on Tahawus’s summit many times and knew it well enough to call it by name, speaking with intimate knowledge of the place and the people who came before. When we call a place by name it is transformed from wilderness to homeland. I imagined that this beloved place knew my true name as well, even when I myself did not.

			Sometimes my father would name the gods of Forked Lake or South Pond or Brandy Brook Flow, wherever our tents were settled for the night. I came to know that each place was inspirited, was home to others before we arrived and long after we left. As he called out the names and offered a gift, the first coffee, he quietly taught us the respect we owed these other beings and how to show our thanks for summer mornings.

			I knew that in the long-ago times our people raised their thanks in morning songs, in prayer, and the offering of sacred tobacco. But at that time in our family history we didn’t have sacred tobacco and we didn’t know the songs—they’d been taken away from my grandfather at the doors of the boarding school. But history moves in a circle and here we were, the next generation, back to the loon-filled lakes of our ancestors, back to canoes.

			My mother had her own more pragmatic ritual of respect: the translation of reverence and intention into action. Before we paddled away from any camping place she made us kids scour the place to be sure that it was spotless. No burnt matchstick, no scrap of paper escaped her notice. “Leave this place better than you found it,” she admonished. And so we did. We also had to leave wood for the next person’s fire, with tinder and kindling carefully sheltered from rain by a sheet of birch bark. I liked to imagine their pleasure, those other paddlers, arriving after dark to find a ready pile of fuel to warm their evening meal. My mother’s ceremony connected us to them, too.

			The offering was made only under an open sky and never back in town where we lived. On Sundays, when other kids would go to church, my folks would take us out along the river to look for herons and muskrats, to the woods to hunt for spring flowers, or on picnics. The words came along. For our winter picnics, we would walk all morning on snowshoes and then build a fire in the center of a circle stomped down with our webbed feet. This time the pot was full of bubbling tomato soup, and the first draught poured was for the snow. “Here’s to the gods of Tahawus”—only then would we wrap mittened hands around our steaming cups.

			And yet, as I grew to adolescence, the offering began to leave me angry or sad. The circle that had brought me a sense of belonging turned inside out. I heard in the words a message that we did not belong because we spoke in the language of exiles. It was a secondhand ceremony. Somewhere there were people who knew the right ceremony, who knew the lost language and spoke the true names, including my own.

			But, still, every morning I watched the coffee disappear into the crumbly brown humus, as if returning to itself. In the same way that the flow of coffee down the rock opened the leaves of the moss, ceremony brought the quiescent back to life, opened my mind and heart to what I knew, but had forgotten. The words and the coffee called us to remember that these woods and lakes were a gift. Ceremonies large and small have the power to focus attention to a way of living awake in the world. The visible became invisible, merging with the soil. It may have been a secondhand ceremony, but even through my confusion I recognized that the earth drank it up as if it were right. The land knows you, even when you are lost.

			A people’s story moves along like a canoe caught in the current, being carried closer and closer to where we had begun. As I grew up, my family found again the tribal connections that had been frayed, but never broken, by history. We found the people who knew our true names. And when I first heard in Oklahoma the sending of thanks to the four directions at the sunrise lodge—the offering in the old language of the sacred tobacco—I heard it as if in my father’s voice. The language was different but the heart was the same.

			Ours was a solitary ceremony, but fed from the same bond with the land, founded on respect and gratitude. Now the circle drawn around us is bigger, encompassing a whole people to which we again belong. But still the offering says, “Here we are,” and still I hear at the end of the words the land murmuring to itself, “Ohh, here are the ones who know how to say thank you.” Today, my father can speak his prayer in our language. But it was “Here’s to the gods of Tahawus” that came first, in the voice that I will always hear.

			It was in the presence of the ancient ceremonies that I understood that our coffee offering was not secondhand, it was ours.

			. . . .

			Much of who I am and what I do is wrapped up in my father’s offering by the lakeshore. Each day still begins with a version of “Here’s to the gods of Tahawus,” a thanksgiving for the day. My work as an ecologist, a writer, a mother, as a traveler between scientific and traditional ways of knowing, grows from the power of those words. It reminds me of who we are; it reminds me of our gifts and our responsibility to those gifts. Ceremony is a vehicle for belonging—to a family, to a people, and to the land.

			At last, I thought that I understood the offering to the gods of Tahawus. It was, for me, the one thing that was not forgotten, that which could not be taken by history: the knowing that we belonged to the land, that we were the people who knew how to say thank you. It welled up from a deep blood memory that the land, the lakes, and the spirit had held for us. But years later, with my own answer already in place, I asked my father, “Where did the ceremony come from—did you learn it from your father, and he from his? Did it stretch all the way back to the time of the canoes?”

			He thought for a long time. “No, I don’t think so. It’s just what we did. It seemed right.” That was all.

			Some weeks went by, though, and when we spoke again he said, “I’ve been thinking about the coffee and how we started giving it to the ground. You know, it was boiled coffee. There’s no filter and if it boils too hard the grounds foam up and get stuck in the spout. So the first cup you pour would get that plug of grounds and be spoiled. I think we first did it to clear the spout.” It was as if he’d told me that the water didn’t change to wine—the whole web of gratitude, the whole story of remembrance, was nothing more than the dumping of the grounds?

			“But, you know,” he said, “there weren’t always grounds to clear. It started out that way, but it became something else. A thought. It was a kind of respect, a kind of thanks. On a beautiful summer morning, I suppose you could call it joy.”

			That, I think, is the power of ceremony: it marries the mundane to the sacred. The water turns to wine, the coffee to a prayer. The material and the spiritual mingle like grounds mingled with humus, transformed like steam rising from a mug into the morning mist.

			What else can you offer the earth, which has everything? What else can you give but something of yourself? A homemade ceremony, a ceremony that makes a home.





Asters and Goldenrod


			The girl in the picture holds a slate with her name and “class of ’75” chalked in, a girl the color of deerskin with long dark hair and inky unreadable eyes that meet yours and won’t look away. I remember that day. I was wearing the new plaid shirt that my parents had given me, an outfit I thought to be the hallmark of all foresters. When I looked back at the photo later in life, it was a puzzle to me. I recall being elated to be going to college, but there is no trace of that in the girl’s face.

			Even before I arrived at school, I had all of my answers prepared for the freshman intake interview. I wanted to make a good first impression. There were hardly any women at the forestry school in those days and certainly none who looked like me. The adviser peered at me over his glasses and said, “So, why do you want to major in botany?” His pencil was poised over the registrar’s form.

			How could I answer, how could I tell him that I was born a botanist, that I had shoeboxes of seeds and piles of pressed leaves under my bed, that I’d stop my bike along the road to identify a new species, that plants colored my dreams, that the plants had chosen me? So I told him the truth. I was proud of my well-planned answer, its freshman sophistication apparent to anyone, the way it showed that I already knew some plants and their habitats, that I had thought deeply about their nature and was clearly well prepared for college work. I told him that I chose botany because I wanted to learn about why asters and goldenrod looked so beautiful together. I’m sure I was smiling then, in my red plaid shirt.

			But he was not. He laid down his pencil as if there was no need to record what I had said. “Miss Wall,” he said, fixing me with a disappointed smile, “I must tell you that that is not science. That is not at all the sort of thing with which botanists concern themselves.” But he promised to put me right. “I’ll enroll you in General Botany so you can learn what it is.” And so it began.


I like to imagine that they were the first flowers I saw, over my mother’s shoulder, as the pink blanket slipped away from my face and their colors flooded my consciousness. I’ve heard that early experience can attune the brain to certain stimuli, so that they are processed with greater speed and certainty, so that they can be used again and again, so that we remember. Love at first sight. Through cloudy newborn eyes their radiance formed the first botanical synapses in my wide-awake, newborn brain, which until then had encountered only the blurry gentleness of pink faces. I’m guessing all eyes were on me, a little round baby all swaddled in bunting, but mine were on Goldenrod and Asters. I was born to these flowers and they came back for my birthday every year, weaving me into our mutual celebration.

			People flock to our hills for the fiery suite of October but they often miss the sublime prelude of September fields. As if harvest time were not enough—peaches, grapes, sweet corn, squash—the fields are also embroidered with drifts of golden yellow and pools of deepest purple, a masterpiece.

			If a fountain could jet bouquets of chrome yellow in dazzling arches of chrysanthemum fireworks, that would be Canada Goldenrod. Each three-foot stem is a geyser of tiny gold daisies, ladylike in miniature, exuberant en masse. Where the soil is damp enough, they stand side by side with their perfect counterpart, New England Asters. Not the pale domesticates of the perennial border, the weak sauce of lavender or sky blue, but full-on royal purple that would make a violet shrink. The daisylike fringe of purple petals surrounds a disc as bright as the sun at high noon, a golden-orange pool, just a tantalizing shade darker than the surrounding goldenrod. Alone, each is a botanical superlative. Together, the visual effect is stunning. Purple and gold, the heraldic colors of the king and queen of the meadow, a regal procession in complementary colors. I just wanted to know why.

			Why do they stand beside each other when they could grow alone? Why this particular pair? There are plenty of pinks and whites and blues dotting the fields, so is it only happenstance that the magnificence of purple and gold end up side by side? Einstein himself said that “God doesn’t play dice with the universe.” What is the source of this pattern? Why is the world so beautiful? It could so easily be otherwise: flowers could be ugly to us and still fulfill their own purpose. But they’re not. It seemed like a good question to me.

			But my adviser said, “It’s not science,” not what botany was about. I wanted to know why certain stems bent easily for baskets and some would break, why the biggest berries grew in the shade and why they made us medicines, which plants are edible, why those little pink orchids only grow under pines. “Not science,” he said, and he ought to know, sitting in his laboratory, a learned professor of botany. “And if you want to study beauty, you should go to art school.” He reminded me of my deliberations over choosing a college, when I had vacillated between training as a botanist or as a poet. Since everyone told me I couldn’t do both, I’d chosen plants. He told me that science was not about beauty, not about the embrace between plants and humans.

			I had no rejoinder; I had made a mistake. There was no fight in me, only embarrassment at my error. I did not have the words for resistance. He signed me up for my classes and I was dismissed to go get my photo taken for registration. I didn’t think about it at the time, but it was happening all over again, an echo of my grandfather’s first day at school, when he was ordered to leave everything—language, culture, family—behind. The professor made me doubt where I came from, what I knew, and claimed that his was the right way to think. Only he didn’t cut my hair off.

			In moving from a childhood in the woods to the university I had unknowingly shifted between worldviews, from a natural history of experience, in which I knew plants as teachers and companions to whom I was linked with mutual responsibility, into the realm of science. The questions scientists raised were not “Who are you? ” but “What is it?” No one asked plants, “What can you tell us?” The primary question was “How does it work?” The botany I was taught was reductionist, mechanistic, and strictly objective. Plants were reduced to objects; they were not subjects. The way botany was conceived and taught didn’t seem to leave much room for a person who thought the way I did. The only way I could make sense of it was to conclude that the things I had always believed about plants must not be true after all.


That first plant science class was a disaster. I barely scraped by with a C and could not muster much enthusiasm for memorizing the concentrations of essential plant nutrients. There were times when I wanted to quit, but the more I learned, the more fascinated I became with the intricate structures that made up a leaf and the alchemy of photosynthesis. Companionship between asters and goldenrod was never mentioned, but I memorized botanical Latin as if it was poetry, eagerly tossing aside the name “goldenrod” for Solidago canadensis. I was mesmerized by plant ecology, evolution, taxonomy, physiology, soils, and fungi. All around me were my good teachers, the plants. I found good mentors, too, warm and kind professors who were doing heart-driven science, whether they could admit it or not. They too were my teachers. And yet there was always something tapping at my shoulder, willing me to turn around. When I did, I did not know how to recognize what stood behind me.

			My natural inclination was to see relationships, to seek the threads that connect the world, to join instead of divide. But science is rigorous in separating the observer from the observed, and the observed from the observer. Why two flowers are beautiful together would violate the division necessary for objectivity.

			I scarcely doubted the primacy of scientific thought. Following the path of science trained me to separate, to distinguish perception from physical reality, to atomize complexity into its smallest components, to honor the chain of evidence and logic, to discern one thing from another, to savor the pleasure of precision. The more I did this, the better I got at it, and I was accepted to do graduate work in one of the world’s finest botany programs, no doubt on the strength of the letter of recommendation from my adviser, which read, “She’s done remarkably well for an Indian girl.”

			A master’s degree, a PhD, and a faculty position followed. I am grateful for the knowledge that was shared with me and deeply privileged to carry the powerful tools of science as a way of engaging the world. It took me to other plant communities, far from the asters and goldenrod. I remember feeling, as a new faculty member, as if I finally understood plants. I too began to teach the mechanics of botany, emulating the approach that I had been taught.

			It reminds me of a story told by my friend Holly Youngbear Tibbetts. A plant scientist, armed with his notebooks and equipment, is exploring the rainforests for new botanical discoveries, and he has hired an indigenous guide to lead him. Knowing the scientist’s interests, the young guide takes care to point out the interesting species. The botanist looks at him appraisingly, surprised by his capacity. “Well, well, young man, you certainly know the names of a lot of these plants.” The guide nods and replies with downcast eyes. “Yes, I have learned the names of all the bushes, but I have yet to learn their songs.”

			I was teaching the names and ignoring the songs.


When I was in graduate school in Wisconsin, my then husband and I had the good fortune to land jobs as caretakers at the university arboretum. In return for a little house at the edge of the prairie, we had only to make the nighttime rounds, checking that doors and gates were secure before we left the darkness to the crickets. There was just one time that a light was left burning, a door left ajar, in the horticulture garage. There was no mischief, but as my husband checked around, I stood and idly scanned the bulletin board. There was a news clipping there with a photo of a magnificent American elm, which had just been named the champion for its species, the largest of its kind. It had a name: The Louis Vieux Elm.

			My heart began to pound and I knew my world was about to change, for I’d known the name Louis Vieux all my life and here was his face looking at me from a news clipping. He was our Potawatomi grandfather, one who had walked all the way from the Wisconsin forests to the Kansas prairie with my grandma Sha-note. He was a leader, one who took care of the people in their hardship. That garage door was left ajar, that light was left burning, and it shone on the path back home for me. It was the beginning of a long, slow journey back to my people, called out to me by the tree that stood above their bones.

			To walk the science path I had stepped off the path of indigenous knowledge. But the world has a way of guiding your steps. Seemingly out of the blue came an invitation to a small gathering of Native elders, to talk about traditional knowledge of plants. One I will never forget—a Navajo woman without a day of university botany training in her life—spoke for hours and I hung on every word. One by one, name by name, she told of the plants in her valley. Where each one lived, when it bloomed, who it liked to live near and all its relationships, who ate it, who lined their nests with its fibers, what kind of medicine it offered. She also shared the stories held by those plants, their origin myths, how they got their names, and what they have to tell us. She spoke of beauty.

			Her words were like smelling salts waking me to what I had known back when I was picking strawberries. I realized how shallow my understanding was. Her knowledge was so much deeper and wider and engaged all the human ways of understanding. She could have explained asters and goldenrod. To a new PhD, this was humbling. It was the beginning of my reclaiming that other way of knowing that I had helplessly let science supplant. I felt like a malnourished refugee invited to a feast, the dishes scented with the herbs of home.

			I circled right back to where I had begun, to the question of beauty. Back to the questions that science does not ask, not because they aren’t important, but because science as a way of knowing is too narrow for the task. Had my adviser been a better scholar, he would have celebrated my questions, not dismissed them. He offered me only the cliché that beauty is in the eye of the beholder, and since science separates the observer and the observed, by definition beauty could not be a valid scientific question. I should have been told that my questions were bigger than science could touch.


He was right about beauty being in the eye of the beholder, especially when it comes to purple and yellow. Color perception in humans relies on banks of specialized receptor cells, the rods and cones in the retina. The job of the cone cells is to absorb light of different wavelengths and pass it on to the brain’s visual cortex, where it can be interpreted. The visible light spectrum, the rainbow of colors, is broad, so the most effective means of discerning color is not one generalized jack-of-all-trades cone cell, but rather an array of specialists, each perfectly tuned to absorb certain wavelengths. The human eye has three kinds. One type excels at detecting red and associated wavelengths. One is tuned to blue. The other optimally perceives light of two colors: purple and yellow.

			The human eye is superbly equipped to detect these colors and send a signal pulsing to the brain. This doesn’t explain why I perceive them as beautiful, but it does explain why that combination gets my undivided attention. I asked my artist buddies about the power of purple and gold, and they sent me right to the color wheel: these two are complementary colors, as different in nature as could be. In composing a palette, putting them together makes each more vivid; just a touch of one will bring out the other. In an 1890 treatise on color perception, Goethe, who was both a scientist and a poet, wrote that “the colors diametrically opposed to each other . . . are those which reciprocally evoke each other in the eye.” Purple and yellow are a reciprocal pair.

			Our eyes are so sensitive to these wavelengths that the cones can get oversaturated and the stimulus pours over onto the other cells. A printmaker I know showed me that if you stare for a long time at a block of yellow and then shift your gaze to a white sheet of paper, you will see it, for a moment, as violet. This phenomenon—the colored afterimage— occurs because there is energetic reciprocity between purple and yellow pigments, which goldenrod and asters knew well before we did.

			If my adviser was correct, the visual effect that so delights a human like me may be irrelevant to the flowers. The real beholder whose eye they hope to catch is a bee bent on pollination. Bees perceive many flowers differently than humans do due to their perception of additional spectra such as ultraviolet radiation. As it turns out, though, goldenrod and asters appear very similarly to bee eyes and human eyes. We both think they’re beautiful. Their striking contrast when they grow together makes them the most attractive target in the whole meadow, a beacon for bees. Growing together, both receive more pollinator visits than they would if they were growing alone. It’s a testable hypothesis; it’s a question of science, a question of art, and a question of beauty.

			Why are they beautiful together? It is a phenomenon simultaneously material and spiritual, for which we need all wavelengths, for which we need depth perception. When I stare too long at the world with science eyes, I see an afterimage of traditional knowledge. Might science and traditional knowledge be purple and yellow to one another, might they be goldenrod and asters? We see the world more fully when we use both.

			The question of goldenrod and asters was of course just emblematic of what I really wanted to know. It was an architecture of relationships, of connections that I yearned to understand. I wanted to see the shimmering threads that hold it all together. And I wanted to know why we love the world, why the most ordinary scrap of meadow can rock us back on our heels in awe.

			When botanists go walking the forests and fields looking for plants, we say we are going on a foray. When writers do the same, we should call it a metaphoray, and the land is rich in both. We need them both; scientist and poet Jeffrey Burton Russell writes that “as the sign of a deeper truth, metaphor was close to sacrament. Because the vastness and richness of reality cannot be expressed by the overt sense of a statement alone.”

			Native scholar Greg Cajete has written that in indigenous ways of knowing, we understand a thing only when we understand it with all four aspects of our being: mind, body, emotion, and spirit. I came to understand quite sharply when I began my training as a scientist that science privileges only one, possibly two, of those ways of knowing: mind and body. As a young person wanting to know everything about plants, I did not question this. But it is a whole human being who finds the beautiful path.

			There was a time when I teetered precariously with an awkward foot in each of two worlds—the scientific and the indigenous. But then I learned to fly. Or at least try. It was the bees that showed me how to move between different flowers—to drink the nectar and gather pollen from both. It is this dance of cross-pollination that can produce a new species of knowledge, a new way of being in the world. After all, there aren’t two worlds, there is just this one good green earth.

			That September pairing of purple and gold is lived reciprocity; its wisdom is that the beauty of one is illuminated by the radiance of the other. Science and art, matter and spirit, indigenous knowledge and Western science—can they be goldenrod and asters for each other? When I am in their presence, their beauty asks me for reciprocity, to be the complementary color, to make something beautiful in response.





Learning the Grammar of Animacy


			To be native to a place we must learn to speak its language.


I come here to listen, to nestle in the curve of the roots in a soft hollow of pine needles, to lean my bones against the column of white pine, to turn off the voice in my head until I can hear the voices outside it: the shhh of wind in needles, water trickling over rock, nuthatch tapping, chipmunks digging, beechnut falling, mosquito in my ear, and something more—something that is not me, for which we have no language, the wordless being of others in which we are never alone. After the drumbeat of my mother’s heart, this was my first language.

			I could spend a whole day listening. And a whole night. And in the morning, without my hearing it, there might be a mushroom that was not there the night before, creamy white, pushed up from the pine needle duff, out of darkness to light, still glistening with the fluid of its passage. Puhpowee.

			Listening in wild places, we are audience to conversations in a language not our own. I think now that it was a longing to comprehend this language I hear in the woods that led me to science, to learn over the years to speak fluent botany. A tongue that should not, by the way, be mistaken for the language of plants. I did learn another language in science, though, one of careful observation, an intimate vocabulary that names each little part. To name and describe you must first see, and science polishes the gift of seeing. I honor the strength of the language that has become a second tongue to me. But beneath the richness of its vocabulary and its descriptive power, something is missing, the same something that swells around you and in you when you listen to the world. Science can be a language of distance which reduces a being to its working parts; it is a language of objects. The language scientists speak, however precise, is based on a profound error in grammar, an omission, a grave loss in translation from the native languages of these shores.

			My first taste of the missing language was the word Puhpowee on my tongue. I stumbled upon it in a book by the Anishinaabe ethnobotanist Keewaydinoquay, in a treatise on the traditional uses of fungi by our people. Puhpowee, she explained, translates as “the force which causes mushrooms to push up from the earth overnight.” As a biologist, I was stunned that such a word existed. In all its technical vocabulary, Western science has no such term, no words to hold this mystery. You’d think that biologists, of all people, would have words for life. But in scientific language our terminology is used to define the boundaries of our knowing. What lies beyond our grasp remains unnamed.

			In the three syllables of this new word I could see an entire process of close observation in the damp morning woods, the formulation of a theory for which English has no equivalent. The makers of this word understood a world of being, full of unseen energies that animate everything. I’ve cherished it for many years, as a talisman, and longed for the people who gave a name to the life force of mushrooms. The language that holds Puhpowee is one that I wanted to speak. So when I learned that the word for rising, for emergence, belonged to the language of my ancestors, it became a signpost for me.

			Had history been different, I would likely speak Bodewadmimwin, or Potawatomi, an Anishinaabe language. But, like many of the three hundred and fifty indigenous languages of the Americas, Potawatomi is threatened, and I speak the language you read. The powers of assimilation did their work as my chance of hearing that language, and yours too, was washed from the mouths of Indian children in government boarding schools where speaking your native tongue was forbidden.

			Children like my grandfather, who was taken from his family when he was just a little boy of nine years old. This history scattered not only our words but also our people. Today I live far from our reservation, so even if I could speak the language, I would have no one to talk to. But a few summers ago, at our yearly tribal gathering, a language class was held and I slipped into the tent to listen.


There was a great deal of excitement about the class because, for the first time, every single fluent speaker in our tribe would be there as a teacher. When the speakers were called forward to the circle of folding chairs, they moved slowly—with canes, walkers, and wheelchairs, only a few entirely under their own power. I counted them as they filled the chairs. Nine. Nine fluent speakers. In the whole world. Our language, millennia in the making, sits in those nine chairs. The words that praised creation, told the old stories, lulled my ancestors to sleep, rests today in the tongues of nine very mortal men and women. Each in turn addresses the small group of would-be students.

			A man with long gray braids tells how his mother hid him away when the Indian agents came to take the children. He escaped boarding school by hiding under an overhung bank where the sound of the stream covered his crying. The others were all taken and had their mouths washed out with soap, or worse, for “talking that dirty Indian language.” Because he alone stayed home and was raised up calling the plants and animals by the name Creator gave them, he is here today, a carrier of the language. The engines of assimilation worked well. The speaker’s eyes blaze as he tells us, “We’re the end of the road. We are all that is left. If you young people do not learn, the language will die. The missionaries and the U.S. government will have their victory at last.” A great-grandmother from the circle pushes her walker up close to the microphone. “It’s not just the words that will be lost,” she says. “The language is the heart of our culture; it holds our thoughts, our way of seeing the world. It’s too beautiful for English to explain.” Puhpowee.

			Jim Thunder, at seventy-five the youngest of the speakers, is a round brown man of serious demeanor who spoke only in Potawatomi. He began solemnly, but as he warmed to his subject his voice lifted like a breeze in the birch trees and his hands began to tell the story. He became more and more animated, rising to his feet, holding us rapt and silent although almost no one understood a single word. He paused as if reaching the climax of his story and looked out at the audience with a twinkle of expectation. One of the grandmothers behind him covered her mouth in a giggle and his stern face suddenly broke into a smile as big and sweet as a cracked watermelon. He bent over laughing and the grandmas dabbed away tears of laughter, holding their sides, while the rest of us looked on in wonderment. When the laughter subsided, he spoke at last in English: “What will happen to a joke when no one can hear it anymore? How lonely those words will be, when their power is gone. Where will they go? Off to join the stories that can never be told again.”

			So now my house is spangled with Post-it notes in another language, as if I were studying for a trip abroad. But I’m not going away, I’m coming home.


Ni pi je ezhyayen? asks the little yellow sticky note on my back door. My hands are full and the car is running, but I switch my bag to the other hip and pause long enough to respond. Odanek nde zhya, I’m going to town. And so I do, to work, to class, to meetings, to the bank, to the grocery store. I talk all day and sometimes write all evening in the beautiful language I was born to, the same one used by 70 percent of the world’s people, a tongue viewed as the most useful, with the richest vocabulary in the modern world. English. When I get home at night to my quiet house, there is a faithful Post-it note on the closet door. Gisken I gbiskewagen! And so I take off my coat.

			I cook dinner, pulling utensils from cupboards labeled emkwanen, nagen. I have become a woman who speaks Potawatomi to household objects. When the phone rings I barely glance at the Post-it there as I dopnen the giktogan. And whether it is a solicitor or a friend, they speak English. Once a week or so, it is my sister from the West Coast who says Bozho. Moktthewenkwe nda—as if she needed to identify herself: who else speaks Potawatomi? To call it speaking is a stretch. Really, all we do is blurt garbled phrases to each other in a parody of conversation: How are you? I am fine. Go to town. See bird. Red. Frybread good. We sound like Tonto’s side of the Hollywood dialogue with the Lone Ranger. “Me try talk good Injun way.” On the rare occasion when we actually can string together a halfway coherent thought, we freely insert high school Spanish words to fill in the gaps, making a language we call Spanawatomi.

			Tuesdays and Thursdays at 12:15 Oklahoma time, I join the Potawatomi lunchtime language class, streaming from tribal headquarters via the Internet. There are usually about ten of us, from all over the country. Together we learn to count and to say pass the salt. Someone asks, “How do you say please pass the salt?” Our teacher, Justin Neely, a young man devoted to language revival, explains that while there are several words for thank you, there is no word for please. Food was meant to be shared, no added politeness needed; it was simply a cultural given that one was asking respectfully. The missionaries took this absence as further evidence of crude manners.

			Many nights, when I should be grading papers or paying bills, I’m at the computer running through Potawatomi language drills. After months, I have mastered the kindergarten vocabulary and can confidently match the pictures of animals to their indigenous names. It reminds me of reading picture books to my children: “Can you point to the squirrel? Where is the bunny?” All the while I’m telling myself that I really don’t have time for this, and what’s more, little need to know the words for bass and fox anyway. Since our tribal diaspora left us scattered to the four winds, who would I talk to?

			The simple phrases I’m learning are perfect for my dog. Sit! Eat! Come here! Be quiet! But since she scarcely responds to these commands in English, I’m reluctant to train her to be bilingual. An admiring student once asked me if I spoke my native language. I was tempted to say, “Oh yes, we speak Potawatomi at home”—me, the dog, and the Post-it notes. Our teacher tells us not to be discouraged and thanks us every time a word is spoken—thanks us for breathing life into the language, even if we only speak a single word. “But I have no one to talk to,” I complain. “None of us do,” he reassures me, “but someday we will.”

			So I dutifully learn the vocabulary but find it hard to see the “heart of our culture” in translating bed and sink into Potawatomi. Learning nouns was pretty easy; after all, I’d learned thousands of botanical Latin names and scientific terms. I reasoned that this could not be too much different—just a one-for-one substitution, memorization. At least on paper, where you can see the letters, this is true. Hearing the language is a different story. There are fewer letters in our alphabet, so the distinction among words for a beginner is often subtle. With the beautiful clusters of consonants of zh and mb and shwe and kwe and mshk, our language sounds like wind in the pines and water over rocks, sounds our ears may have been more delicately attuned to in the past, but no longer. To learn again, you really have to listen.

			To actually speak, of course, requires verbs, and here is where my kindergarten proficiency at naming things leaves off. English is a nounbased language, somehow appropriate to a culture so obsessed with things. Only 30 percent of English words are verbs, but in Potawatomi that proportion is 70 percent. Which means that 70 percent of the words have to be conjugated, and 70 percent have different tenses and cases to be mastered.

			European languages often assign gender to nouns, but Potawatomi does not divide the world into masculine and feminine. Nouns and verbs both are animate and inanimate. You hear a person with a word that is completely different from the one with which you hear an airplane. Pronouns, articles, plurals, demonstratives, verbs—all those syntactical bits I never could keep straight in high school English are all aligned in Potawatomi to provide different ways to speak of the living world and the lifeless one. Different verb forms, different plurals, different everything apply depending on whether what you are speaking of is alive.

			No wonder there are only nine speakers left! I try, but the complexity makes my head hurt and my ear can barely distinguish between words that mean completely different things. One teacher reassures us that this will come with practice, but another elder concedes that these close similarities are inherent in the language. As Stewart King, a knowledge keeper and great teacher, reminds us, the Creator meant for us to laugh, so humor is deliberately built into the syntax. Even a small slip of the tongue can convert “We need more firewood” to “Take off your clothes.” In fact, I learned that the mystical word Puhpowee is used not only for mushrooms, but also for certain other shafts that rise mysteriously in the night.

			My sister’s gift to me one Christmas was a set of magnetic tiles for the refrigerator in Ojibwe, or Anishinabemowin, a language closely related to Potawatomi. I spread them out on my kitchen table looking for familiar words, but the more I looked, the more worried I got. Among the hundred or more tiles, there was but a single word that I recognized: megwech, thank you. The small feeling of accomplishment from months of study evaporated in a moment.

			I remember paging through the Ojibwe dictionary she sent, trying to decipher the tiles, but the spellings didn’t always match and the print was too small and there are way too many variations on a single word and I was feeling that this was just way too hard. The threads in my brain knotted and the harder I tried, the tighter they became. Pages blurred and my eyes settled on a word—a verb, of course: “to be a Saturday.” Pfft! I threw down the book. Since when is Saturday a verb? Everyone knows it’s a noun. I grabbed the dictionary and flipped more pages and all kinds of things seemed to be verbs: “to be a hill,” “to be red,” “to be a long sandy stretch of beach,” and then my finger rested on wiikwegamaa: “to be a bay.” “Ridiculous!” I ranted in my head. “There is no reason to make it so complicated. No wonder no one speaks it. A cumbersome language, impossible to learn, and more than that, it’s all wrong. A bay is most definitely a person, place, or thing—a noun and not a verb.” I was ready to give up. I’d learned a few words, done my duty to the language that was taken from my grandfather. Oh, the ghosts of the missionaries in the boarding schools must have been rubbing their hands in glee at my frustration. “She’s going to surrender,” they said.

			And then I swear I heard the zap of synapses firing. An electric current sizzled down my arm and through my finger, and practically scorched the page where that one word lay. In that moment I could smell the water of the bay, watch it rock against the shore and hear it sift onto the sand. A bay is a noun only if water is dead. When bay is a noun, it is defined by humans, trapped between its shores and contained by the word. But the verb wiikwegamaa—to be a bay—releases the water from bondage and lets it live. “To be a bay” holds the wonder that, for this moment, the living water has decided to shelter itself between these shores, conversing with cedar roots and a flock of baby mergansers. Because it could do otherwise—become a stream or an ocean or a waterfall, and there are verbs for that, too. To be a hill, to be a sandy beach, to be a Saturday, all are possible verbs in a world where everything is alive. Water, land, and even a day, the language a mirror for seeing the animacy of the world, the life that pulses through all things, through pines and nuthatches and mushrooms. This is the language I hear in the woods; this is the language that lets us speak of what wells up all around us. And the vestiges of boarding schools, the soap-wielding missionary wraiths, hang their heads in defeat.

			This is the grammar of animacy. Imagine seeing your grandmother standing at the stove in her apron and then saying of her, “Look, it is making soup. It has gray hair.” We might snicker at such a mistake, but we also recoil from it. In English, we never refer to a member of our family, or indeed to any person, as it. That would be a profound act of disrespect. It robs a person of self hood and kinship, reducing a person to a mere thing. So it is that in Potawatomi and most other indigenous languages, we use the same words to address the living world as we use for our family. Because they are our family.

			To whom does our language extend the grammar of animacy? Naturally, plants and animals are animate, but as I learn, I am discovering that the Potawatomi understanding of what it means to be animate diverges from the list of attributes of living beings we all learned in Biology 101. In Potawatomi 101, rocks are animate, as are mountains and water and fire and places. Beings that are imbued with spirit, our sacred medicines, our songs, drums, and even stories, are all animate. The list of the inanimate seems to be smaller, filled with objects that are made by people. Of an inanimate being, like a table, we say, “What is it?” And we answer Dopwen yewe. Table it is. But of apple, we must say, “Who is that being?” And reply Mshimin yawe. Apple that being is.

			Yawe—the animate to be. I am, you are, s/he is. To speak of those possessed with life and spirit we must say yawe. By what linguistic confluence do Yahweh of the Old Testament and yawe of the New World both fall from the mouths of the reverent? Isn’t this just what it means, to be, to have the breath of life within, to be the offspring of Creation? The language reminds us, in every sentence, of our kinship with all of the animate world.

			English doesn’t give us many tools for incorporating respect for animacy. In English, you are either a human or a thing. Our grammar boxes us in by the choice of reducing a nonhuman being to an it, or it must be gendered, inappropriately, as a he or a she. Where are our words for the simple existence of another living being? Where is our yawe? My friend Michael Nelson, an ethicist who thinks a great deal about moral inclusion, told me about a woman he knows, a field biologist whose work is among other-than-humans. Most of her companions are not two-legged, and so her language has shifted to accommodate her relationships. She kneels along the trail to inspect a set of moose tracks, saying, “Someone’s already been this way this morning.” “Someone is in my hat,” she says, shaking out a deerfly. Someone, not something.

			When I am in the woods with my students, teaching them the gifts of plants and how to call them by name, I try to be mindful of my language, to be bilingual between the lexicon of science and the grammar of animacy. Although they still have to learn scientific roles and Latin names, I hope I am also teaching them to know the world as a neighborhood of nonhuman residents, to know that, as ecotheologian Thomas Berry has written, “we must say of the universe that it is a communion of subjects, not a collection of objects.”

			One afternoon, I sat with my field ecology students by a wiikwegamaa and shared this idea of animate language. One young man, Andy, splashing his feet in the clear water, asked the big question. “Wait a second,” he said as he wrapped his mind around this linguistic distinction, “doesn’t this mean that speaking English, thinking in English, somehow gives us permission to disrespect nature? By denying everyone else the right to be persons? Wouldn’t things be different if nothing was an it? ”

			Swept away with the idea, he said it felt like an awakening to him. More like a remembering, I think. The animacy of the world is something we already know, but the language of animacy teeters on extinction—not just for Native peoples, but for everyone. Our toddlers speak of plants and animals as if they were people, extending to them self and intention and compassion—until we teach them not to. We quickly retrain them and make them forget. When we tell them that the tree is not a who, but an it, we make that maple an object; we put a barrier between us, absolving ourselves of moral responsibility and opening the door to exploitation. Saying it makes a living land into “natural resources.” If a maple is an it, we can take up the chain saw. If a maple is a her, we think twice.

			Another student countered Andy’s argument. “But we can’t say he or she. That would be anthropomorphism.” They are well-schooled biologists who have been instructed, in no uncertain terms, never to ascribe human characteristics to a study object, to another species. It’s a cardinal sin that leads to a loss of objectivity. Carla pointed out that “it’s also disrespectful to the animals. We shouldn’t project our perceptions onto them. They have their own ways—they’re not just people in furry costumes.” Andy countered, “But just because we don’t think of them as humans doesn’t mean they aren’t beings. Isn’t it even more disrespectful to assume that we’re the only species that counts as ‘persons’?” The arrogance of English is that the only way to be animate, to be worthy of respect and moral concern, is to be a human.

			A language teacher I know explained that grammar is just the way we chart relationships in language. Maybe it also reflects our relationships with each other. Maybe a grammar of animacy could lead us to whole new ways of living in the world, other species a sovereign people, a world with a democracy of species, not a tyranny of one—with moral responsibility to water and wolves, and with a legal system that recognizes the standing of other species. It’s all in the pronouns.

			Andy is right. Learning the grammar of animacy could well be a restraint on our mindless exploitation of land. But there is more to it. I have heard our elders give advice like “You should go among the standing people” or “Go spend some time with those Beaver people.” They remind us of the capacity of others as our teachers, as holders of knowledge, as guides. Imagine walking through a richly inhabited world of Birch people, Bear people, Rock people, beings we think of and therefore speak of as persons worthy of our respect, of inclusion in a peopled world. We Americans are reluctant to learn a foreign language of our own species, let alone another species. But imagine the possibilities. Imagine the access we would have to different perspectives, the things we might see through other eyes, the wisdom that surrounds us. We don’t have to figure out everything by ourselves: there are intelligences other than our own, teachers all around us. Imagine how much less lonely the world would be.

			Every word I learn comes with a breath of gratitude for our elders who have kept this language alive and passed along its poetry. I still struggle mightily with verbs, can hardly speak at all, and I’m still most adept with only kindergarten vocabulary. But I like that in the morning I can go for my walk around the meadow greeting neighbors by name. When Crow caws at me from the hedgerow, I can call back Mno gizhget andushukwe! I can brush my hand over the soft grasses and murmur Bozho mishkos. It’s a small thing, but it makes me happy.

			I’m not advocating that we all learn Potawatomi or Hopi or Seminole, even if we could. Immigrants came to these shores bearing a legacy of languages, all to be cherished. But to become native to this place, if we are to survive here, and our neighbors too, our work is to learn to speak the grammar of animacy, so that we might truly be at home.

			I remember the words of Bill Tall Bull, a Cheyenne elder. As a young person, I spoke to him with a heavy heart, lamenting that I had no native language with which to speak to the plants and the places that I love. “They love to hear the old language,” he said, “it’s true.” “But,” he said, with fingers on his lips, “You don’t have to speak it here.” “If you speak it here,” he said, patting his chest, “They will hear you.”





TENDING SWEETGRASS


			Wild meadow sweetgrass grows long and fragrant when it is looked after by humans. Weeding and care for the habitat and neighboring plants strengthens its growth.





Maple Sugar Moon


			When Nanabozho, the Anishinaabe Original Man, our teacher, part man, part manido, walked through the world, he took note of who was flourishing and who was not, of who was mindful of the Original Instructions and who was not. He was dismayed when he came upon villages where the gardens were not being tended, where the fishnets were not repaired and the children were not being taught the way to live. Instead of seeing piles of firewood and caches of corn, he found the people lying beneath maple trees with their mouths wide open, catching the thick, sweet syrup of the generous trees. They had become lazy and took for granted the gifts of the Creator. They did not do their ceremonies or care for one another. He knew his responsibility, so he went to the river and dipped up many buckets of water. He poured the water straight into the maple trees to dilute the syrup. Today, maple sap flows like a stream of water with only a trace of sweetness to remind the people both of possibility and of responsibility. And so it is that it takes forty gallons of sap to make a gallon of syrup.*

			* Adapted from oral tradition and Ritzenthaler and Ritzenthaler, 1983.


Plink. On an afternoon in March, when the late winter sun is starting to strengthen and moving north a degree or so each day, the sap runs strong. Plink. The yard of our old farmhouse in Fabius, New York, is graced with seven Maples, big ones, planted almost two hundred years ago to shade the house. The largest tree is as wide at its base as our picnic table is long.

			When we first moved here my daughters reveled in rooting through the loft above the old stable, a space full of the flotsam of almost two centuries of families before us. One day I found them playing with an entire village of little metal pup tents set up under the trees. “They’re going camping,” they said of their various dolls and stuffed animals, who were peeking out from under their shelter. The loft was full of such “tents” that fit over old-time sap buckets to keep out the rain and snow during sugaring season. When the girls discovered what these little tents were for, of course they wanted to make maple syrup. We scrubbed out the mouse droppings and readied the buckets for spring.

			During that first winter I read up on the whole process. We had buckets and covers, but no spiles—the spouts you need to drive into the tree to allow the sap out. But we live in Maple Nation and a nearby hardware store carried all things maple sugaring. All things: molds for forming maple sugar leaves, evaporators of every size, miles of rubber tubing, hydrometers, kettles, filters, and jars—none of which I could afford. But tucked away in the back they had old-fashioned spiles, which hardly anyone wants anymore. I got a whole box for seventyfive cents each.

			Sugaring has changed over the years. Gone are the days of emptying buckets and sledging barrels of sap through the snowy woods. In many sugaring operations, plastic tubing runs right from the trees to the sugar house. But there are still purists out there who cherish the plink of sap into a metal bucket, and that requires a spile. One end is formed into a tube like a drinking straw, which you tap into a hole drilled in the tree. The tube then opens into a trough about four inches long. And at the base there is a handy hook on which to hang the bucket. I bought a big clean garbage can to store the sap and we were ready. I didn’t think we’d need all that storage space, but better to be prepared.

			In a climate where winter lasts six months, we always search assiduously for signs of spring, but never more eagerly than after we decided to make syrup. The girls ask every day, “Can we start yet?” But our beginning was entirely determined by the season. For the sap to run you need a combination of warm days and freezing nights. Warm is a relative term, of course, thirty-five to forty-two degrees, so that the sun thaws the trunk and starts the flow of sap inside. We watch the calendar and the thermometer, and Larkin asks, “How do the trees know it’s time if they can’t see the thermometer?” Indeed, how does a being without eyes or nose or nerves of any kind know what to do and when to do it? There are not even leaves out to detect the sun; every bit of the tree, except the buds, is swathed in thick, dead bark. And yet the trees are not fooled by a midwinter thaw.

			The fact is, Maples have a far more sophisticated system for detecting spring than we do. There are photosensors by the hundreds in every single bud, packed with light-absorbing pigments called phytochromes. Their job is to take the measure of light every day. Tightly furled, covered in red-brown scales, each bud holds an embryonic copy of a maple branch, and each bud wants desperately to someday be a full-fledged branch, leaves rustling in the wind and soaking up sun. But if the buds come out too soon they’ll be killed by freezing. Too late and they’ll miss the spring. So the buds keep the calendar. But those baby buds need energy for their growth into branches—like all newborns, they are hungry.

			We who lack such sophisticated sensors look for other signs. When hollows appear in the snow around the tree bases, I start to think it’s tapping time. The dark bark absorbs the growing heat of the sun and then radiates it back to slowly melt the snow that has lain there all winter. When those circles of bare ground appear, that’s when the first drops of sap will plop onto your head from a broken branch in the canopy.

			And so with drill in hand we circle our trees searching out just the right spot, three feet up, on a smooth face. Lo and behold, there are scars of past taps long healed over, made by whoever had left those sap buckets in our loft. We don’t know their names or their faces, but our fingers rest right where theirs had been and we know what they too were doing one morning in April long ago. And we know what they had on their pancakes. Our stories are linked in this run of sap; our trees knew them as they know us today.

			The spiles begin to drip almost as soon as we tap them into place. The first drops splat onto the bottom of the bucket. The girls slide the tented covers on, which makes the sound echo even more. Trees of this diameter could accept six taps without damage, but we don’t want to be greedy and only place three. By the time we’re done setting them up, the first bucket is already singing a different tune, the plink of another drop into the half inch of sap. All day long they change pitch as the buckets fill, like water glasses of different pitch. Plink, ploink, plonk— the tin buckets and their tented tops reverberate with every drop and the yard is singing. This is spring music as surely as the cardinal’s insistent whistle.

			My girls watch in fascination. Each drop is as clear as water but somehow thicker, catching the light and hanging for a second at the end of the spile, growing invitingly into a larger and larger drop. The girls stretch out their tongues and slurp with a look of bliss, and unaccountably I am moved to tears. It reminds me of when I alone fed them. Now, on sturdy young legs, they are nursed by a maple—as close as they can come to being suckled by Mother Earth.

			All day long the buckets fill and by evening they are brimming. The girls and I haul all twenty-one to the big garbage can and pour until it is almost full. I had no idea there would be so much. The girls rehang the buckets while I build the fire. Our evaporator is just my old canning kettle, set on an oven rack, spanning stacks of cinder blocks scavenged from the barn. It takes a long time to heat up a kettle of sap and the girls lose interest pretty quickly. I am in and out of the house, keeping fires going in both places. When I tuck them into bed that night, they are full of anticipation of syrup by morning.

			I set up a lawn chair on the packed-down snow next to the fire, feeding it constantly to keep up a good boil in the now-freezing night. Steam billows from the pot, covering and uncovering the moon in the dry, cold sky.

			I taste the sap as it boils down, and with every passing hour it is discernibly sweeter, but the yield from this four-gallon kettle will be nothing more than a skin of syrup on the bottom of the pan, scarcely enough for one pancake. So as it boils down I add more fresh sap from the garbage can, hoping to have just one cup of syrup by morning. I add wood, then wrap myself back in blankets, dozing until I can add more logs or sap.

			I don’t know what time I woke, but I was cold and stiff in my lawn chair, and the fire was burnt to embers, leaving the sap lukewarm. Beaten, I went inside to bed.

			When I returned in the morning, I found the sap in the garbage can frozen hard. As I got the fire going again, I remembered something I had heard about how our ancestors made maple sugar. The ice on the surface was pure water, so I cracked it and threw it on the ground like a broken window.

			People of the Maple Nation made sugar long before they possessed trade kettles for boiling. Instead, they collected sap in birch bark pails and poured it into log troughs hollowed from basswood trees. The large surface area and shallow depth of the troughs was ideal for ice formation. Every morning, ice was removed, leaving a more concentrated sugar solution behind. The concentrated solution could then be boiled to sugar with far less energy required. The freezing nights did the work of many cords of firewood, a reminder of elegant connections: maple sap runs at the one time of year when this method is possible.

			Wooden evaporating dishes were placed on flat stones over the coals of a fire that burned night and day. In the old times, families would all move together to “sugar camp,” where firewood and equipment had been stored the year before. Grandmothers and the youngest babies would be pulled on toboggans through the softening snow so that all could attend to the process—it took all the knowledge and all the arms to make sugar. Most of the time was spent stirring, good storytelling time when folks from the dispersed winter camps came together. But there were also pulses of furious activity: when the syrup reached just the right consistency, it was beaten so that it would solidify in the desired way, into soft cakes, hard candy, and granulated sugar. The women stored it in birch bark boxes called makaks, sewn tight with spruce root. Given birch bark’s natural antifungal preservatives, the sugars would keep for years.

			It is said that our people learned to make sugar from the squirrels. In late winter, the hungry time, when caches of nuts are depleted, squirrels take to the treetops and gnaw on the branches of sugar maples. Scraping the bark allows sap to exude from the twig, and the squirrels drink it. But the real goods come the next morning, when they follow the same circuit they made the day before, licking up the sugar crystals that formed on the bark overnight. Freezing temperatures cause the water in the sap to sublimate, leaving a sweet crystalline crust like rock candy behind, enough to tide them over through the hungriest time of year.

			Our people call this time the Maple Sugar Moon, Zizibaskwet Giizis, The month before is known as the Hard Crust on Snow Moon. People living a subsistence lifestyle also know it as the Hunger Moon, when stored food has dwindled and game is scarce. But the maples carried the people through, provided food just when they needed it most. They had to trust that Mother Earth would find a way to feed them even in the depths of winter. But mothers are like that. In return, ceremonies of thanksgiving are held at the start of the sap run.

			The Maples each year carry out their part of the Original Instructions, to care for the people. But they care for their own survival at the same time. The buds that sensed the incipient turn of the season are hungry. For shoots that are only one millimeter long to become full-fledged leaves, they need food. So when the buds sense spring, they send a hormonal signal down the trunk to the roots, a wake-up call, telegraphed from the light world to the underworld. The hormone triggers the formation of amylase, the enzyme responsible for cleaving large molecules of starch stored in the roots into small molecules of sugar. When the concentration of sugar in the roots begins to grow, it creates an osmotic gradient that draws water in from the soil. Dissolved in this water from the spring-wet earth, the sugar streams upward as rising sap to feed the buds. It takes a lot of sugar to feed people and buds, so the tree uses its sapwood, the xylem, as the conduit. Sugar transport is usually restricted to the thin layer of phloem tissue under the bark. But in spring, before there are leaves to make their own sugar, the need is so great that xylem is called into duty as well. At no other time of year does sugar move this way, only now when it is needed. Sugar flows upstream for a few weeks in the spring. But when the buds break and leaves emerge, they start making sugar on their own and the sapwood returns to its work as the water conduit.

			Because the mature leaves make more sugar than they can use right away, the sugar stream starts to flow in the opposite direction, from leaves back to roots, through the phloem. And so the roots, which fed the buds, are now fed in return by the leaves all summer long. The sugar is converted back to starch, stored in the original “root cellar.” The syrup we pour over pancakes on a winter morning is summer sunshine flowing in golden streams to pool on our plates.


Night after night I stayed up tending the fire, boiling our little kettle of sap. All day long the plink plink plink of sap filled the buckets and the girls and I gathered them after school to pour into the collecting can. The trees gave sap much faster than I could boil it so we bought another garbage can to hold the excess. And then another. Eventually we pulled the spiles from the trees to stop the flow and avoid wasting the sugars. The end result was terrible bronchitis from sleeping in a lawn chair in the driveway in March and three quarts of syrup, a little bit gray with wood ash.

			When my daughters remember our sugaring adventure now, they roll their eyes and groan, “That was so much work.” They remember hauling branches to feed the fire and slopping sap on their jackets as they carried heavy buckets. They tease me about being a wretched mother who wove their connection to the land through forced labor. They were awfully little to be doing the work of a sugaring crew. But they also remember the wonder of drinking sap straight from the tree. Sap, but not syrup. Nanabozho made certain that the work would never be too easy. His teachings remind us that one half of the truth is that the earth endows us with great gifts, the other half is that the gift is not enough. The responsibility does not lie with the maples alone. The other half belongs to us; we participate in its transformation. It is our work, and our gratitude, that distills the sweetness.

			Night after night I sat by the fire, the girls tucked safely in bed, the rustle of the fire and the bubbling sap a lullaby. Transfixed by the fire, I hardly noticed the sky silver as the Maple Sugar Moon rose in the east. So bright on a clear freezing night, it threw tree shadows against the house—bold black embroidery around the windows where the girls lay sleeping, the shadows of the twin trees. These two, perfectly matched in girth and form, stand centered in front of the house by the edge of the road, their shadows framing the front door like dark columns of a maple portico. They rise in unison without a branch until they reach the roofline, where they spread like an umbrella. They grew up with this house, shaped by its protection.

			There was a custom in the mid-eighteen hundreds of planting twin trees to celebrate a marriage and the starting of a home. The stance of these two, just ten feet apart, recalls a couple standing together on the porch steps, holding hands. The reach of their shade links the front porch with the barn across the road, creating a shady path of back and forth for that young family.

			I realize that those first homesteaders were not the beneficiaries of that shade, at least not as a young couple. They must have meant for their people to stay here. Surely those two were sleeping up on Cemetery Road long before the shade arched across the road. I am living today in the shady future they imagined, drinking sap from trees planted with their wedding vows. They could not have imagined me, many generations later, and yet I live in the gift of their care. Could they have imagined that when my daughter Linden was married, she would choose leaves of maple sugar for the wedding giveaway?

			Such a responsibility I have to these people and these trees, left to me, an unknown come to live under the guardianship of the twins, with a bond physical, emotional, and spiritual. I have no way to pay them back. Their gift to me is far greater than I have ability to reciprocate. They’re so huge as to be nearly beyond my care, although I do scatter granules of fertilizer at their feet and turn the hose on them in summer drought. Perhaps all I can do is love them. All I know to do is to leave another gift, for them and for the future, those next unknowns who will live here. I heard once that Maori people make beautiful wood sculptures that they carry long distances into the forest and leave there as a gift to the trees. And so I plant Daffodils, hundreds of them, in sunny flocks beneath the Maples, in homage to their beauty and in reciprocity for their gift.

			Even now, as the sap rises, so too the Daffodils rise underfoot.





Witch Hazel


			As told through the eyes of my daughter.


November is not a time for flowers, the days short and cold. Heavy clouds drag at my mood, and sleet like a muttered curse propels me indoors—I am reluctant to venture out again. So when the sun breaks through for that rare yellow day, maybe the last before the snow falls, I have to go. Because the woods are quiet this time of year without leaves or birds, the buzz of a bee seems inordinately loud. Intrigued, I follow her path—what could bring her out in November? She makes directly for bare branches, which, when I look more closely, are strewn with yellow flowers—Witch Hazel. The flowers are a ragged affair: five long petals, each like a scrap of fading yellow cloth that snagged on the branch, torn strips that wave in the breeze. But, oh are they welcome, a spot of color when months of gray lie ahead. A last hurrah before winter that suddenly reminds me of a November long ago.

			The house had stood empty since she left. The cardboard Santas she had pasted on the tall windows were faded from shafts of summer sun and plastic poinsettias on the table were draped in cobwebs. You could smell that the mice ransacked the pantry while the Christmas ham turned to mounds of mold in the icebox after the power was shut off. Outside on the porch a wren built its nest in the lunch box again, awaiting her return. Asters bloomed in profusion under the sagging clothesline, where a gray cardigan was still pinned.

			I first met Hazel Barnett when I was walking the fields in Kentucky, looking for wild blackberries with my mother. We were bent to our picking when I heard a high voice from the hedgerow call, “Howdy-do. Howdy-do.” There at the fence stood the oldest woman I’d ever seen. Slightly afraid, I took my mother’s hand as we walked over to greet her. She supported herself by leaning against the fence among the pink and burgundy hollyhocks. Her iron-gray hair was drawn into a bun at the back of her neck with a corona of white wisps standing out like sun rays around her toothless face.

			“I like to see yer light at night,” she said. “It feels real neighborly. I seen y’all out walkin’ and come to say hi-dee.” My mother introduced herself, explained we’d moved in a few months ago. “And who is this lil’ bundle of joy?” she asked, leaning over the barbed wire to pinch my cheek. The fence pressed into the loose breast of her housedress, where pink and purple flowers like the hollyhocks were fading from many washings. She wore bedroom slippers outside in the garden, something my mother would never allow. She stuck her wrinkled old hand over the fence, veiny and crooked with a wire-thin band of gold loose on her ring finger. I’d never heard of a person named Hazel, but I’d heard of Witch Hazel and was quite certain that this must be the witch herself. I held my mother’s hand even tighter.

			I suppose, given the way she is with plants, there was a time when some might have called her “witch.” And there is something eerie about a tree that flowers so far out of season and then spits its seeds—shiny pearls as black as midnight—twenty feet into the quiet fall woods, with a sound like an elfin footfall.

			She and my mother became unlikely friends, trading recipes and garden tips. By day my mother was a professor at the college in town, sitting at her microscope, writing scientific articles. But spring twilight found her barefoot in the garden, planting beans and helping me fill my pail with earthworms that were severed by her shovel. I thought I could nurse them back to health in the worm hospital I constructed beneath the irises. She encouraged me in this, always saying, “There is no hurt that can’t be healed by love.”

			Before dark many evenings, we would wander across the pasture to the fence and meet Hazel. “I do like to see your light in the window,” she said. “There ain’t nothing better than a good neighbor.” I listened while they discussed putting stove ash at the base of tomato plants to keep off cutworms or Mama bragged on how fast I was learning to read. “Lord, she’s a quick study, ain’t you, my little honeybee?” Hazel said. Sometimes she had a wrapped peppermint in her dress pocket for me, the cellophane old and soft around it.

			The visits progressed from the fence line to the front porch. When we baked, we would take over a plate of cookies and sip lemonade on her sagging stoop. I never liked to go in the house, an overwhelming jumble of old junk, trash bags, cigarette smoke, and what I now know as the smell of poverty. Hazel lived in the little shotgun house with her son Sam and daughter Janie. Janie was, as her mother explained, “simple,” on account of she came late in life, her mother’s last child. She was kind and loving and always wanting to smother my sister and me in her deep, soft arms.

			Sam was disabled, couldn’t work but received some veteran’s benefits and pension from the coal company that they all lived on. Barely. When he was well enough to go fishing, he would bring us big catfish from the river. He coughed like crazy but had twinkling blue eyes and a world of stories, having been overseas in the war. Once he brought us a whole bucket of blackberries he’d picked along the railroad track. My mom tried to refuse that big pail as too generous a gift. “Why, don’t talk nonsense,” Hazel said. “They aren’t my berries. The Lord done made these things for us to share.”

			My mother loved to work. For her, a good time was building stone walls or clearing brush. On occasion, Hazel would come over and sit in a lawn chair under the oaks while Mama stacked stones or split kindling. They would just talk about this and that, Hazel telling about how she liked a good woodpile, especially when she used to take in washing to earn a little extra. She needed a goodly pile to fuel her washtubs. She had worked as a cook in a place down by the river and she shook her head at the number of platters she could carry at one time. Mama would tell about her students or a trip she had taken and Hazel would wonder at the very idea of flying in an airplane.

			And Hazel would tell about the time she was called out to deliver a baby in a snowstorm, or how people would come to her door for healing herbs. She said how some other lady professor had once come with a tape recorder to talk to her and was going to put her in a book, on account of all the old ways she knew. But the professor had never come back and Hazel had never seen the book. I half listened to talk about gathering hickory nuts under the big trees or carrying a lunch pail to her daddy, who worked making barrels at the distillery down by the river, but my mother was charmed by Hazel’s stories.

			I know my mother loved being a scientist, but she always said that she was born too late. Her real calling, she was sure, was to be a nineteenthcentury farmwife. She sang while she canned tomatoes, stewed peaches, punched down the dough for bread, and was insistent that I learn how, too. When I think back on her friendship with Hazel, I suppose that the deep respect they had for each other was rooted in such things: both were women with feet planted deep in the earth who took pride in a back strong enough to carry a load for others.

			Mostly I heard their talk as a drone of grown-up chatter, but one time, when my mother was coming across the yard with a big armload of wood, I saw Hazel drop her head in her hands and cry. “When I lived at home,” she said, “I could carry a load like that. Why, I could carry a bushel of peaches on one hip and a baby on the other without hardly trying. But now it’s all gone, gone with the wind.”

			Hazel was born and raised over in Jessamine County, Kentucky, just down the road. To hear her talk, though, it might have been hundreds of miles away. She couldn’t drive, nor could Janie or Sam, so her old house was as lost to her as if it lay across the Great Divide.

			She had come here to live with Sam when he had a heart attack on Christmas Eve. She loved Christmas—all the folks coming by, cooking a big dinner—but she dropped everything that Christmas, locked her door, and came to live with her son and look after him. She hadn’t been back home since, but you could see that her heart ached for the place—she would get a faraway look in her eyes when she spoke of it.

			My mother understood this, the longing for home. She was a northern girl, born in the shadow of the Adirondacks. She had lived lots of places for graduate school and research, but always thought she’d go back home. I remember the fall she cried for missing the blaze of red maple. She was transplanted to Kentucky by dint of a good job and my father’s career, but I know she missed her own folks and the woods of home. The taste of exile was as much in her mouth as it was in Hazel’s.

			As Hazel grew older, she got sadder and would talk more and more about the old times, the things she would never see again: how tall and handsome her husband, Rowley, had been, how beautiful her gardens were. My mother once offered to take her back to see her old place, but she shook her head. “That’s mighty nice of you, but I couldn’t be beholden like that. Anyway, it’s gone with the wind,” she would say, “all gone.” But one fall afternoon when the light was long and gold, she phoned up.

			“Now, honey, I know yer hands and heart are full, but if there was any way you could see fit to drive me back to the old place, I’d be right thankful. I need to see to that roof before the snow flies.” My mother and I picked her up and drove up the Nicholasville Road toward the river. It’s all four-lane now, with a big span across the Kentucky River, so high you hardly know it’s flowing, muddy, below you. At the old distillery, boarded up and empty now, we left the highway and drove down a little dirt road that angles back away from the river. Hazel began to cry in the backseat the minute we made the turn.

			“Oh, my dear old road,” she cried, and I patted her hand. I knew what to do, for I’d seen my mother cry just like this when she took me past the house where she had grown up. Hazel directed Mama past the ramshackle little houses, a few stove-in trailers, and remnants of barns. We stopped before a grassy swale under a thick grove of black locust trees. “Here it is,” she said, “my home sweet home.” She talked like that, like it was right out of a book. Before us was an old schoolhouse with long chapel windows set all around and two doors at the front, one for boys and one for girls. It was silvery gray with just a few swipes of whitewash blurred across the clapboard.

			Hazel was eager to get out and I had to hurry to get her walker to her before she stumbled in the tall grass. Pointing all the way at the spring house, the old chicken coop, she led Mama and me to the side door and up onto the porch. She fumbled in her big purse for the keys, but her hands were shaking so badly she asked me if I would unlock the door. I opened the tattered old screen door and the key slid easily into the padlock. I held the door back for her and she clumped inside and stopped. Just stopped and looked. It was quiet as a church. The air was cold inside and flowed out past me into the warm November afternoon. I started to go in, but my mother’s hand on my arm stopped me. “Just let her be,” her look said.

			The room before us was like a picture book about the olden days. A big old woodstove sat along the back wall, cast iron frying pans hung alongside. Dishtowels were neatly hung on dowels over the dry sink, and once-white curtains framed the view of the grove outside. The ceilings were high, as befits an old schoolhouse, and festooned with garlands of tinsel, blue and silver, flickering in the breeze from the open door. Christmas cards outlined the doorframes, fixed with yellowing tape. The whole kitchen was decked out for Christmas, an oilcloth of a holiday print covered the table and plastic poinsettias swathed in cobwebs sat in jam jars as a centerpiece. The table was set for six places and there was still food on the plates, the chairs pushed back just as they were when dinner had been interrupted by the call from the hospital. “What a sight,” she said. “Let’s put this all to rights.” Suddenly Hazel became as businesslike as if she’d just walked into her house after supper and found it below her housewifely standards. She set her walker aside and began gathering up the dishes from the long kitchen table and carrying them over to the sink. My mother tried to slow her down by asking for a tour of the place and saying we could get to tidying another time. Hazel took us into the parlor, where the skeleton of a Christmas tree stood with a pile of needles on the floor below. The ornaments hung like orphans on the bare branches. There was a little red drum and silver plastic birds with paint worn off and stubs where their tails should be. It had been a cozy room; there were rocking chairs and a couch, a little spindle-leg table and gas lamps. An old oak sideboard held a china pitcher and basin painted with roses. A hand-embroidered scarf, cross-stitched in pink and blue, ran the length of the sideboard. “My goodness,” she said, wiping the corner of her housedress over the thick layer of dust. “I’ve got to get after my dustin’ in here.”

			While she and Mama looked at the pretty dishes in the sideboard, I wandered off to explore. I pushed one door open to a big unmade bed heaped with blankets thrown back. Beside it was what looked like a potty chair, only grown-up size. It didn’t smell very good in there and I quickly retreated, not wanting to be caught snooping around. Another door gave way to a bedroom with a beautiful patchwork quilt and more tinsel garlands draped over the mirror above the dresser where a hurricane lamp sat, all caked in soot.

			Hazel leaned on my mother’s arm as we circled around the clearing outside, pointing out trees she had planted and flowerbeds long overgrown. At the back of the house, under the oaks, was a clump of bare gray branches erupting with a froth of stringy yellow blossoms. “Why lookee here, it’s my old medicine come to greet me,” she said and reached out to take the branch as if she was going to shake its hand. “I made me many a batch of this old witch hazel and folks would come to me for it, special. I’d cook up that bark in the fall and have it all winter to rub on aches and pains, burns and rashes—everybody wanted it. There ain’t hardly no hurt the woods don’t have medicine for.”

			“That witch hazel,” she said, “it’s not just good for you outside, but inside too. Land sakes, flowers in November. The good Lord gave us witch hazel to remind us that there’s always somethin’ good even when it seems like there ain’t. It just lightens your heavy heart, is what it does.” After that first visit, Hazel would often call on a Sunday afternoon and ask, “Would y’all like to go for a ride?” My mother thought it important that we girls go along. It was like her insistence that we learn to bake bread and plant beans—things that didn’t seem important then, but now I know differently. We got to pick hickory nuts from behind the old house, wrinkle our noses at the tilting outhouse, and root around in the barn for treasures while Mama and Hazel sat on the porch and talked. Hung on a nail right beside her door was an old, black metal lunch box, open and lined with what looked like shelf paper. There were remnants of a bird’s nest within. Hazel had brought along a small plastic bag filled with cracker crumbs, which she scattered on the porch rail.

			“This little Jenny Wren has made her home here every year since Rowley passed on. This here was his lunch pail. Now she counts on me for house and home and I cain’t let her down.” A lot of people must have counted on Hazel when she was young and strong. She took us driving down her road and we stopped at nearly every house but one. “Them are no count folks,” she said, and looked away. The others seemed overjoyed to see Hazel again. My sister and I would follow the chickens around or pet the hound dogs while Mama and Hazel would visit with the neighbors.

			These folks were very different from the ones we met at school or at parties at the college. One lady reached out to tap my teeth. “Those are mighty purty teeth you got,” she said. I’d never thought that teeth were worthy of a compliment, but then I hadn’t met people before who had so few. I mostly remember their kindness, though. They were ladies Hazel had sung with in the choir of the little white church under the pines. Ladies she had known since girlhood, and they cackled together about dances by the river and shook their heads sadly over the fate of kids who up and moved away. We’d go home in the afternoon with a basket of fresh eggs or a slice of cake for each of us and Hazel just beaming.

			When winter began, our visits were fewer and the light seemed to go out of Hazel’s eyes. She sat at our kitchen table one day and said, “I know I shouldn’t ask the good Lord for nuthin more’n what I already got, but how I wish I could have just one more Christmas in my dear old home. But those days are gone. Gone with the wind.” This was an ache for which the woods had no medicine.

			We were not going north to my grandma and grandpa’s for Christmas that year and my mother was taking it hard. It was still weeks until Christmas but already she was baking up a fury while we girls strung popcorn and cranberries for the tree. She talked about how she would miss the snow, the smell of balsam, and her family. And then she got an idea.

			It was to be a complete surprise. She got the house key from Sam and went to the old schoolhouse to see what she could do. She got on the phone to the Rural Electric Co-op and arranged to have Hazel’s power reconnected, just for those few days. As soon as the lights came on, it became clear how dirty it all was. There was no running water, so we had to bring jugs of water from home to sponge things down. The job was bigger than us, so Mama enlisted the help of some fraternity boys from her classes at the college who needed a community service project. They sure got one: cleaning out that refrigerator rivaled any microbiology experiment.

			We drove up and down Hazel’s road, where I ran in to houses with handmade invitations for all her old friends. There weren’t too many, so Mama invited the college boys and her friends, too. The house still had its Christmas decorations, but we made more, paper chains and candles, out of paper towel tubes. My dad cut a tree and set it up in the parlor with a box of lights stripped from the skeleton tree that had stood there before. We brought armloads of prickly red cedar boughs to decorate the tables and hung candy canes on the tree. The smell of cedar and peppermint filled the place where mold and mice had been only days ago. My mom and her friends baked plates of cookies.

			The morning of the party, the heat was on, the tree lights lit, and one by one people started to arrive, clumping up the steps of the front porch. My sister and I played hostess while Mama drove off to get the guest of honor. “Hey, any of y’all feel like going for a ride?” Mama said, and bundled Hazel into her warm coat. “Why, where we goin’?” Hazel asked. Her face gleamed like a candle when she stepped into her “home sweet home” filled with light and friends. My mother pinned a Christmas corsage—a plastic bell with golden glitter that she had found on the dresser—to Hazel’s dress. Hazel moved through her house like a queen that day. My father and my sister played their violins in the parlor, “Silent Night” and “Joy to the World,” while I ladled out sweet red punch. I don’t remember much more about the party, except Hazel falling asleep on the way home.

			Just a few years later, we left Kentucky to move back north. My mom was glad to be going home, to have her maples instead of oaks, but saying good-bye to Hazel was hard. She saved it for last. Hazel gave her a going-away present, a rocking chair and a little box with a couple of her old-time Christmas ornaments inside. A celluloid drum and a silver plastic bird, missing its tail feathers. My mother still hangs them on her tree every year and tells the story of that party as if it were the best Christmas she ever had. We got word that Hazel had died a couple of years after we moved.

			“Gone, all gone with the wind,” she would have said.

			There are some aches witch hazel can’t assuage; for those, we need each other. My mother and Hazel Barnett, unlikely sisters, I suppose, learned well from the plants they both loved—they made a balm for loneliness together, a strengthening tea for the pain of longing.

			Now, when the red leaves are all down and the geese are gone, I go looking for witch hazel. It never lets me down, always carrying the memory of that Christmas and how their friendship was medicine for each other. I cherish a witch hazel kind of day, a scrap of color, a light in the window when winter is closing all around.





A Mother’s Work


			I wanted to be a good mother, that’s all—like Skywoman maybe. Somehow this led me into hip waders filled with brown water. The rubber boots that were intended to keep the pond at bay now contain it. And me. And one tadpole. I feel a flutter at the back of my other knee. Make that two tadpoles.

			When I left Kentucky to go house hunting in upstate New York, my two small daughters gave me an explicit wish list for our new home: trees big enough for tree forts, one apiece; a stone walk lined with pansies like the one in Larkin’s favorite book; a red barn; a pond to swim in; a purple bedroom. The last request gave me some comfort. Their dad had just pulled up stakes, left the country—and us. He said that he no longer wanted a life with so much responsibility, so the responsibility was all mine. I was grateful that, if nothing else, I could at least paint a bedroom purple.

			All winter long I looked at house after house, none of which made sense for either my budget or my hopes. Real estate listings—“3BR, 2B, raised ranch, landscaping”—are pretty thin on vital information like trees suitable for tree houses. I confess that I was thinking more about mortgages and school districts and whether I was going to end up in a trailer park at the end of the road. But the girls’ wish list surfaced in my mind when the agent drove me to an old farmhouse surrounded by immense sugar maples, two with low, spreading branches perfect for tree houses. This was a possibility. But there was the matter of sagging shutters and a porch that hadn’t seen level in half a century. On the plus side, it sat on seven acres, including what was described as a trout pond, which was only a smooth expanse of ice surrounded by trees at the time. The house was empty, cold, and unloved, but as I opened doors to the musty rooms, wonder of wonders: the corner bedroom was the color of spring violets. It was a sign. This is where we would fall to earth.

			We moved in that spring. Not long after, the girls and I cobbled together tree forts in the maples, one apiece. Imagine our surprise when the snow melted to reveal a flagstone walk overgrown with weeds leading to the front door. We met the neighbors, explored the hilltops with picnic lunches, planted pansies, and started to put down the roots of happiness. Being the good mother, good enough for two parents, seemed within my grasp. All that remained to complete the wish list for home was a swimmable pond.

			The deed described a deep spring-fed pond, and a hundred years ago it might have been exactly that. One of my neighbors whose family has been here for generations told me that it was the favorite pond in the valley. In summer, after haying, the boys would park their wagons and hike up to the pond for a swim. “We’d throw off our clothes and jump in,” he said. “The way it sits, no girls would be able to see us, buck naked as we were. And cold! That spring kept the water icy cold and it felt so good after working hay. We’d lie in the grass afterward, just to warm up.” Our pond nestles in the hill up behind the house. The slopes rise around it on three sides and a copse of apple trees on the other side entirely shield it from view. At its back is a limestone cliff where rock was quarried to build my house more than two hundred years ago. It was hard to believe that anyone would dip even a toe in that pond today. My daughters certainly would not. It was so choked with green that you could not tell where weeds left off and water began.

			The ducks didn’t help. If anything, they were what you might politely call a major source of nutrient input. They were so cute in the feed store—just downy yellow fluff connecting outsize beaks and enormous orange feet, waddling around in a crate of wood chips. It was spring, almost Easter, and all the good reasons not to take them home evaporated with the girls’ delight. Wouldn’t a good mother adopt ducklings? Isn’t that what a pond is for?

			We kept them in a cardboard box in the garage with a heat lamp, closely watched so neither box nor ducklings would ignite. The girls accepted full responsibility for their care and dutifully fed and cleaned them. I came home from work one afternoon to see them floating in the kitchen sink, quacking and dabbling, shaking water off their backs while the girls just beamed. The condition of the sink should have given me a clue of what was to come. For the next few weeks they ate and defecated with equal enthusiasm. But within a month we carried the box of six glossy white ducks up to the pond and released them.

			They preened and splashed. All was well for the first few days, but apparently, in the absence of their own good mother to protect and teach them, they didn’t have the essential survival skills for life outside the box. Every day there was one less duck; five remained, then four, and then finally three who had the right stuff to fend off foxes and snapping turtles and the marsh hawk who had taken to cruising the shore. These three flourished. They looked so placid, so pastoral gliding over the pond. But the pond itself began to get even greener than before.

			They were perfect pets until winter came and their delinquent tendencies emerged. Despite the little hut we made for them—a floating A-frame lodge with a wraparound porch—despite the corn we showered around them like confetti, they were discontent. They developed a fondness for dog food and the warmth of my back porch. I would come out on a January morning to find the dog bowl empty and the dog cowering outside while three snowy-white ducks sat in a row on the bench, wiggling their tails in contentment.

			It gets cold where I live. Really cold. Duck turds were frozen into coiled mounds like half-finished clay pots solidly affixed to my porch floor. It took an ice pick to chip them away. I would shoo them, close the porch door, and lay a trail of corn kernels back up to the pond, and they would follow in a gabbling line. But the next morning they’d be back.

			Winter and a daily dose of duck splats must freeze up the part of the brain devoted to compassion for animals, for I began to hope for their demise. Unfortunately, I didn’t have the heart to dispatch them, and who among our rural friends would welcome the dubious gift of ducks in the dead of winter? Even with plum sauce. I secretly contemplated spraying them with fox lure. Or tying slices of roast beef to their legs in hopes of interesting the coyotes that howled at the ridgetop. But instead I was a good mother; I fed them, rasped my shovel over the crust on the porch floor, and waited for spring. One balmy day they trundled back up to the pond and within a month they were gone, leaving piles of feathers like a drift of late snow on the shore.

			The ducks were gone but their legacy lived on. By May the pond was a thick soup of green algae. A pair of Canada geese had settled in to take their place and raised a brood under the willows. One afternoon I walked up to see if the goose babies had sprouted pinfeathers yet, only to hear a distressed quacking. A fuzzy brown gosling out for a swim had gotten snared in the floating masses of algae. It was squawking and flapping its wings trying to get free. While I tried to think of how to rescue it, it gave a mighty kick and popped up to the surface, where it began to walk on the algal mat.

			That was a moment of resolve for me. You should not be able to walk on a pond. It should be an invitation to wildlife, not a snare. The likelihood of making the pond swimmable, even for geese, seemed remote at best. But I am an ecologist, so I was confident that I could at least improve the situation. The word ecology is derived from the Greek oikos, the word for home. I could use ecology to make a good home for goslings and girls.

			Like many an old farm pond, mine was the victim of eutrophication, the natural process of nutrient enrichment that comes with age. Generations of algae and lily pads and fallen leaves and autumn’s apples falling into the pond built up the sediments, layering the once clean gravel at the bottom in a sheet of muck. All those nutrients fueled the growth of new plants, which fueled the growth of more new plants, in an accelerating cycle. This is the way for many ponds—the bottom gradually fills in until the pond becomes a marsh and maybe someday a meadow and then a forest. Ponds grow old, and though I will too, I like the ecological idea of aging as progressive enrichment, rather than progressive loss.

			Sometimes the process of eutrophication is accelerated by human activities: nutrient-rich runoff from fertilized fields or septic tanks ends up in the water, where it supports exponential growth of algae. My pond was buffered from such influences—its source was a cold spring coming out of the hill, and a swath of trees on the uphill side formed a nitrogen-grabbing filter for runoff from the surrounding pastures. My battle was not with pollution, but with time. Making my pond swimmable would be an exercise in turning back time. That’s just what I wanted, to turn back time. My daughters were growing up too fast, my time as a mother slipping away, and my promise of a swimming pond yet to be fulfilled.

			Being a good mother meant fixing the pond for my kids. A highly productive food chain might be good for frogs and herons, but not for swimming. The best swimming lakes are not eutrophic, but cold, clear, and oligotrophic, or poor in nutrients.

			I carried my small solo canoe up to the pond to serve as a floating platform for algae removal. I envisioned scooping up the algae with a long-handled rake, filling the canoe as if it was a garbage scow, emptying it on the shore, and then going for a nice swim. But only the swimming part worked out—and it wasn’t nice. As I tried to skim the algae, I discovered that they hung like sheer green curtains through the water. If you reach far out of a light canoe and try to lift a heavy mat of algae at the end of a rake, physics dictates that swimming will occur.

			My attempts at skimming were useless. I was addressing only the symptoms of scum and not the cause. I read as much as I could about pond rehabilitation and weighed my options. To undo what time and ducks had accomplished I needed to remove nutrients from the pond, not just skim the foam. When I waded in the shallow end of the pond, the muck squished between my toes, but beneath it I could feel the clean gravel that was the pond’s original basin. Maybe I could dredge up the muck and cart it away in buckets. But when I brought my broadest snow shovel to scoop up the mud, by the time it reached the surface there was a brown cloud all around me and a mere handful of soil in the shovel. I stood in the water laughing out loud. Shoveling muck was like trying to catch wind in a butterfly net.

			Next I used old window screens to make a sieve that we could lift up through the sediments. But the muck was far too fine and my improvised net came up empty. This was not ordinary mud. The organic matter in the sediments occurs as tiny particles, dissolved nutrients that flocculate in specks small enough to be bite-size snacks for zooplankton. Clearly, I was powerless to haul the nutrients out of the water. Fortunately, the plants were not.

			A mat of algae is really nothing more than dissolved phosphorous and nitrogen made solid through the alchemy of photosynthesis. I couldn’t remove nutrients by shoveling, but once they are fixed into the bodies of plants they can be forked out of the water with the application of biceps and bent back and carted away by the wheelbarrowful.

			The average phosphate molecule in a farm pond has a cycling time of less than two weeks from the time it is absorbed out of the water, made into living tissue, is eaten or dies, decomposes, and is recycled back to feed yet another algal strand. My plan was to interrupt this endless recycling by capturing nutrients in plants and hauling them away before they could once again be turned into algae. I could slowly, steadily deplete the stores of nutrients circulating in the pond.

			I’m a botanist by trade, and so of course I needed to know who these algae were. There are probably as many kinds of algae as there are species of tree, and I would do a disservice to their lives and to my task if I didn’t know who they were. You wouldn’t try to restore a forest without knowing what kind of trees you were working with, so I scooped up a jarful of green slime and took it to my microscope with the top screwed tightly to contain the smell.

			I teased apart the slippery green wads into tiny wisps that would fit beneath my microscope. In this single tuft were long threads of Cladophora, shining like satin ribbons. Wound around them were translucent strands of Spirogyra, in which the chloroplasts spiral like a green staircase. The whole green field was in motion, with iridescent tumbleweeds of Volvox and pulsing euglenoids stretching their way among the strands. So much life in a single drop of water, water that previously looked like scum in a jar. Here were my partners in restoration.

			Progress was slow with pond restoration hours squeezed between years’ worth of Girl Scout meetings, bake sales, camping trips, and a more-than-full-time job. All moms have treasured ways to spend the few precious hours they have to themselves, curling up with a book or sewing, but I mostly went to the water, the birds and the wind and the quiet were what I needed. This was one place where I somehow felt as if I could make things right. At school I taught ecology, but on a Saturday afternoon when the kids were off at a friend’s, I got to do ecology.

			After the canoe debacle, I decided it was wiser to stand on the shore with a rake and stretch out as far as I could reach. The rake brought sticks draped in Cladophora like a comb matted with long green hair. Every stroke of the rake combed up another sheet from the bottom and added to a quickly growing mound, which I had to get out of the watershed by moving it downhill from the pond. If I left it to rot on the shore, the nutrients released in decay would return to the pond in short order. I flung the wads of algae onto a sled—my kids’ little red plastic toboggan—and dragged it up the steep bank to empty it into the waiting wheelbarrow.

			I really didn’t want to stand in the mucky ooze, so I worked cautiously from the edges in old sneakers. I could reach out and dredge up heaps of algae, but there was so much more just beyond my reach. Sneakers evolved to Wellingtons, extending my sphere of influence just enough for me to know that it was ineffective, and thus Wellingtons came to waders. But waders give you a false sense of security, and before long I reached just a little too far and felt the icy pond rush in over their tops. Waders are darn heavy when they fill up, and I found myself anchored in the muck. A good mother does not drown. The next time I just wore shorts.

			I simply gave myself up to the task. I remember the liberation of just walking right in to my waist the first time, the lightness of my T-shirt floating around me, the swirl of the water against my bare skin. I finally felt at home. The tickles at my legs were just wisps of Spirogyra, the nudges just curious perch. Now I could see the algael curtains stretched out before me, much more beautiful than dangling at the end of my rake. I could see the way Cladophora bloomed from old sticks and watch diving beetles swim among them.

			I developed a new relationship with mud. Instead of trying to protect myself from it, I became oblivious to it, noticing its presence only when I would go back to the house and see strands of algae caught in my hair or the water in the shower turning decidedly brown. I came to know the feel of the gravelly bottom below the muck, the sucking mud by the cattails and the cold stillness where the bottom dropped away from the shallows. Transformation is not accomplished by tentative wading at the edge.

			One spring day my rake came up draped with a mass of algae so heavy it bent the bamboo handle. I let it drip to lighten the load and then flipped it onto the shore. I was about to go for another load when I heard a wet smacking from the pile, the slap of a watery tail. A lump was wiggling in a frenzy below the surface of the heaped algae. I picked the threads apart, opening the weave to see what was struggling within. A plump brown body; a bullfrog tadpole as big as my thumb was caught there. Tadpoles can swim easily through a net that is suspended in the water, but when the net is drawn up by the rake it collapses around them like a purse seine. I picked him up, squishy and cold, between thumb and forefinger and tossed him back into the pond, where he rested, suspended for a moment in the water, and then swam off. The next rake came up in a smooth dripping sheet studded with so many tadpoles that they looked like nuts caught in a tray of peanut brittle. I bent and untangled them, every one.

			This was a problem. There was so much to rake. I could dredge the algae out, slap it into piles, and be done with it. I could work so much faster if I didn’t have to stop and pick tadpoles from the tangle of every moral dilemma. I told myself that my intention was not to hurt them; I was just trying to improve the habitat and they were the collateral damage. But my good intentions meant nothing to tadpoles if they struggled and died in a compost pile. I sighed, but I knew what I had to do. I was driven to this chore by a mothering urge, to make a swimmable pond. In the process, I could hardly sacrifice another mother’s children, who, after all, already have a pond to swim in.

			Now I was not only a pond raker, but also a tadpole plucker. It was amazing what I found in the mesh of algae: predaceous diving beetles with sharp black mandibles; small fish; dragonfly larvae. I stuck my fingers in to free a wiggle and felt a sharp pain like a bee sting. My hand flinched back with a big crayfish attached to my fingertip. A whole food web was dangling from my rake, and those were just the critters I could see, just the tip of the iceberg, the top of the food chain. Under my microscope, I had seen the web of algae teeming with invertebrates— copepods, daphnia, whirling rotifers, and creatures so much smaller: threadlike worms, globes of green algae, protozoans with cilia beating in unison. I knew they were there, but I couldn’t possibly pick them out. So I bargained with myself over the chain of responsibility and tried to convince myself that their demise served a greater good.

			Raking a pond provides you with a lot of mental free space for philosophizing. As I raked and plucked, it challenged my conviction that all lives are valuable, protozoan or not. As a theoretical matter, I hold this to be true, but on a practical level it gets murky, the spiritual and the pragmatic bumping heads. With every rake I knew that I was prioritizing. Short, single-cell lives were ended because I wanted a clear pond. I’m bigger, I have a rake, so I win. That’s not a worldview I readily endorse. But it didn’t keep me awake at night, or halt my efforts; I simply acknowledged the choices I was making. The best I could do was to be respectful and not let the small lives go to waste. I plucked out whatever wee beasties I could and the rest went into the compost pile, to start the cycle again as soil.

			At first I hauled carts of freshly raked algae, but I soon realized that trundling hundreds of pounds of water was hard work. I learned to heap the algae on the shore and watch it dribble moisture back to the pond. In the following days the algae bleached in the sun into light papery sheets, easily lifted into the wheelbarrow. Filamentous algae like Spirogyra and Cladophora have a nutrient content equivalent to that of high-quality forage grasses. I was hauling away the equivalent nutrient load of bales of good dairy hay. Load after load of algae domed up in the compost pile, on its way to making good black humus. The pond was literally feeding the garden, Cladophora reborn as carrots. I began to see a difference in the pond. A span of days would go by when the surface was clear, but the fuzzy green mats always returned.

			I began to notice other sponges for my pond’s excess nutrients in addition to the algae. All along the shore, the willows reached their feathery red roots into the shallow water to troll for nitrogen and phosphorous to pull into their root systems to become leaves and willow withes. I came along the shore with my loppers and cut the willows, stem by swaying stem. Dragging the piles of willow branches away, I was removing storehouses of nutrients they had sucked from the pond bottom. The brush pile in the field grew taller, soon to be browsed by cottontails and redistributed far and wide as rabbit droppings. Willow responds vigorously to cutting and sends up long straight shoots that can tower over my head in a single growing season. I left the thickets away from the water for rabbits and songbirds, but those right at the shore I cut and bundled for making baskets. The larger stems became the foundation for garden trellises for pole beans and morning glories. I also gathered mint and other herbs along the banks. As with the willows, the more I picked, the more it seemed to grow back. Everything I took moved the pond a step closer to clear. Every cup of mint tea struck a blow for nutrient removal.

			Cleaning the pond by cutting willows really seemed to help. I cut with renewed enthusiasm, moving in a mindless rhythm with my loppers— snick, snick, snick—clearing whole swaths of shoreline as willow stems fell at my feet. Then something, perhaps a movement glimpsed out of the corner of my eye, perhaps a silent plea, made me stop. In the last stem left standing was a beautiful little nest, a cup woven sweetly of Juncus rushes and threadlike roots around a fork in the tree, a marvel of homemaking. I peered inside and there were three eggs the size of lima beans lying in a circlet of pine needles. What a treasure I had nearly destroyed in my zeal to “improve” the habitat. Nearby, the mother, a yellow warbler, flitted in the bushes, calling in alarm. I was so quick and single-minded about what I was doing that I forgot to look. I forgot to acknowledge that creating the home that I wanted for my children jeopardized the homemaking of other mothers whose intents were no different from mine.

			It came to me once again that restoring a habitat, no matter how well intentioned, produces casualties. We set ourselves up as arbiters of what is good when often our standards of goodness are driven by narrow interests, by what we want. I piled the cut brush back up near the nest in some semblance of the protective cover I had destroyed and sat on a rock, concealed on the other side of the pond, to see if she would come back. What did she think as she watched me come closer and closer, laying waste to the home she had carefully chosen, threatening her family? There are powerful forces of destruction loose in the world, advancing inexorably toward her children and mine. The onslaught of progress, well-intentioned to improve human habitat, threatens the nest I’ve chosen for my children as surely as I threatened hers. What does a good mother do?

			I continued to clear out the algae, let the silt settle, and it looked better. But I went back a week later to a foamy green mass. It’s kind of like cleaning the kitchen: you get everything put away, wipe off the countertops, and before you know it there are drips of peanut butter and jelly everywhere and you have to do it all over again. Life adds up. It’s eutrophic. But I could see ahead to a time when my kitchen would stay too clean. I would have an oligotrophic kitchen. Without the girls to mess it up, I would be longing for leftover cereal bowls, for a eutrophic kitchen. For signs of life.

			I pull my red toboggan to the other end of the pond and start to work in the shallows. Immediately, my rake gets stalled with a heavy load of weeds that I drag slowly to the surface. This mat has a different weight and texture than the slippery sheets of Cladophora that I’ve been dredging. I lay it down on the grass for a closer look and spread the film with my fingers until it stretches into what looks like a green fishnet stocking—a fine mesh network like a drift net suspended in the water. This is Hydrodictyon.

			I stretch it between my fingers and it glistens, almost weightless after the water has drained away. As orderly as a honeycomb, Hydrodictyon is a geometric surprise in the seemingly random stew of a murky pond. It hangs in the water, a colony of tiny nets all fused together.

			Under the microscope, the fabric of Hydrodictyon is made up of tiny six-sided polygons, a mesh of linked green cells that surround the holes of the net. It multiplies quickly because of a unique means of clonal reproduction. Inside each of the net cells, daughter cells are born. They arrange themselves into hexagons, neat replicas of the mother net. In order to disperse her young, the mother cell must disintegrate, freeing the daughter cells into the water. The floating newborn hexagons fuse with others, forging new connections and weaving a new net.

			I look out at the expanse of Hydrodictyon visible just below the surface. I imagine the liberation of new cells, the daughters spinning off on their own. What does a good mother do when mothering time is done? As I stand in the water, my eyes brim and drop salt tears into the freshwater at my feet. Fortunately, my daughters are not clones of their mother, nor must I disintegrate to set them free, but I wonder how the fabric is changed when the release of daughters tears a hole. Does it heal over quickly, or does the empty space remain? And how do the daughter cells make new connections? How is the fabric rewoven?

			Hydrodictyon is a safe place, a nursery for fish and insects, a shelter from predators, a safety net for the small beings of the pond. Hydrodictyon— Latin for “the water net.” What a curious thing. A fishnet catches fish, a bug net catches bugs. But a water net catches nothing, save what cannot be held. Mothering is like that, a net of living threads to lovingly encircle what it cannot possibly hold, what will eventually move through it. But right then my job was reversing succession, turning back time to make these waters swimmable for my daughters. So I wiped my eyes and with all due respect for the lessons of Hydrodictyon, I raked it up onto the shore.

			When my sister came to visit, her kids, raised in the dry California hills, were smitten with water. They waded after frogs and splashed with abandon while I worked at the algae. My brother-in-law called out from the shade, “Hey, who is the biggest kid here?” I can’t deny it—I’ve never outgrown my desire to play in the mud. But isn’t play the way we get limbered up for the work of the world? My sister defended my pond-raking with the reminder that it was sacred play.

			Among our Potawatomi people, women are the Keepers of Water. We carry the sacred water to ceremonies and act on its behalf. “Women have a natural bond with water, because we are both life bearers,” my sister said. “We carry our babies in internal ponds and they come forth into the world on a wave of water. It is our responsibility to safeguard the water for all our relations.” Being a good mother includes the caretaking of water.


On Saturday mornings, Sunday afternoons, year after year, I would go to the solitude of the pond and get to work. I tried grass carp and barley straw, and every new change provoked a new reaction. The job is never over; it simply changes from one task to the next. What I’m looking for, I suppose, is balance, and that is a moving target. Balance is not a passive resting place—it takes work, balancing the giving and the taking, the raking out and the putting in.

			Skating in winter, peepers in the spring, summer sunbathing, autumn bonfires; swimmable or not, the pond became like another room in our house. I planted sweetgrass around the edge. The girls and their friends had campfires on the flat meadow of the shore, slumber parties in the tent, summer suppers on the picnic table, and long sun-washed afternoons sunbathing, rising on one elbow when the gust of a heron’s wings stirred the air.

			I cannot count the hours that I’ve spent here. Almost without notice the hours stretched out to years. My dog used to bound up the hill after me and race back and forth along the shore as I worked. As the pond grew clearer, he grew more feeble but would always go with me, to sleep in the sun and drink at the edge. We buried him nearby. The pond built my muscles, wove my baskets, mulched my garden, made my tea, and trellised my morning glories. Our lives became entwined in ways both material and spiritual. It’s been a balanced exchange: I worked on the pond and the pond worked on me, and together we made a good home.

			One spring Saturday, while I was raking algae, there was a rally downtown in support of the cleanup of Onondaga Lake, on whose shore our city stands. The lake is held sacred by the Onondaga Nation, the people who have fished and gathered on its shore for millennia. It was here that the great Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) Confederacy was formed.

			Today, Onondaga Lake has the dubious reputation of being one of the most polluted lakes in the country. The problem at Onondaga Lake is not too much life, but too little. As I dredge up another heavy rakeful of slime, I feel also the weight of responsibility. In one short life where does responsibility lie? I spend countless hours improving the water quality of my half-acre pond. I stand here raking algae so that my kids can swim in clear water, while standing silent on the cleanup of Onondaga, where no one can swim.

			Being a good mother means teaching your children to care for the world, and so I’ve shown the girls how to grow a garden, how to prune an apple tree. The apple tree leans out over the water and makes for a shadowy arbor. In spring a drift of pink and white blossoms send plumes of fragrance wafting down the hill and a rain of petals on the water. For years now I’ve watched her seasons, from frothy pink blossoms, to gently swelling ovaries as the petals fall away, to sour green marbles of adolescent fruit, to the ripe golden apples of September. That tree has been a good mother. Most years she nurtures a full crop of apples, gathering the energy of the world into herself and passing it on. She sends her young out into the world well provisioned for the journey, packaged in sweetness to share with the world.

			My girls, too, have grown up strong and beautiful here, rooted like the willows and flying off like their windblown seeds. And now, after twelve years, the pond is nearly swimmable, if you don’t mind the weeds that tickle your legs. My older daughter left for college long before the pond was clean. I recruited my younger daughter to help me carry buckets of pea gravel to pour ourselves a beach. Having become so intimate with muck and tadpoles, I don’t mind the occasional green strand that wraps around my arm, but the beach makes a small ramp that lets me wade in and plunge into the deep clear pool at the center without raising a cloud. On a hot day it feels wonderful to submerge in the icy spring water and watch the pollywogs flee. Emerging with a shiver, I have to pluck bits of algae from my wet skin. The girls will take a quick dip to please me, but, in truth, I’ve not succeeded in turning back time.


It is Labor Day now, the last day of summer vacation. A day to savor the mellow sunshine. This summer is my last with a child at home. Yellow apples plop into the water from an overhanging tree. I am mesmerized by the yellow apples on the dark surface of the pond, globes of light dancing and turning. The breeze off the hill sets the water in motion. In a circular current from west to east and back again, the wind is stirring the pond, so gently you wouldn’t see it but for the fruit. The apples ride the current, a procession of yellow rafts following each other along the shoreline. They move quickly from under the apple tree and follow the curve beneath the elms. As the wind carries them away, more fall from the tree so that the whole pond surface is stenciled with moving arcs of yellow, like a procession of yellow candles against a dark night. They spiral around and around in an ever widening gyre.

			Paula Gunn Allen, in her book Grandmothers of the Light, writes of the changing roles of women as they spiral through the phases of life, like the changing face of the moon. We begin our lives, she says, walking the Way of the Daughter. This is the time for learning, for gathering experiences in the shelter of our parents. We move next to self-reliance, when the necessary task of the age is to learn who you are in the world. The path brings us next to the Way of the Mother. This, Gunn relates, is a time when “her spiritual knowledge and values are all called into service of her children.” Life unfolds in a growing spiral, as children begin their own paths and mothers, rich with knowledge and experience, have a new task set before them. Allen tells us that our strengths turn now to a circle wider than our own children, to the well-being of the community. The net stretches larger and larger. The circle bends round again and grandmothers walk the Way of the Teacher, becoming models for younger women to follow. And in the fullness of age, Allen reminds us, our work is not yet done. The spiral widens farther and farther, so that the sphere of a wise woman is beyond herself, beyond her family, beyond the human community, embracing the planet, mothering the earth.

			So it is my grandchildren who will swim in this pond, and others whom the years will bring. The circle of care grows larger and caregiving for my little pond spills over to caregiving for other waters. The outlet from my pond runs downhill to my good neighbor’s pond. What I do here matters. Everybody lives downstream. My pond drains to the brook, to the creek, to a great and needful lake. The water net connects us all. I have shed tears into that flow when I thought that motherhood would end. But the pond has shown me that being a good mother doesn’t end with creating a home where just my children can flourish. A good mother grows into a richly eutrophic old woman, knowing that her work doesn’t end until she creates a home where all of life’s beings can flourish. There are grandchildren to nurture, and frog children, nestlings, goslings, seedlings, and spores, and I still want to be a good mother.





The Consolation of Water Lilies


			Before I knew it, and long before the pond was ready for swimming, they were gone. My daughter Linden chose to leave the little pond and put her feet in the ocean at a redwood college far from home. I went to visit her that first semester and we spent a lazy Sunday afternoon admiring the rocks of the agate beach at Patrick’s Point.

			Walking the shore, I spotted a smooth green pebble threaded with carnelian, just like one I’d passed by a few steps earlier. I walked back, searching the strand until I found it again. I reunited the two pebbles, letting them lie together, shining wet in the sun until the tide came back and pulled them apart, rolling their edges smoother and their bodies smaller. The whole beach was like that for me, a gallery of beautiful pebbles divided from each other and from the shore. Linden’s way on the beach was different. She too was rearranging, but her method was to place gray with black basalt and pink beside a spruce green oval. Her eye was finding new pairings; mine was searching out the old.

			I had known it would happen from the first time I held her— from that moment on, all her growing would be away from me. It is the fundamental unfairness of parenthood that if we do our jobs well, the deepest bond we are given will walk out the door with a wave over the shoulder. We get good training along the way. We learn to say “Have a great time, sweetie” while we are longing to pull them back to safety. And against all the evolutionary imperatives of protecting our gene pool, we give them car keys. And freedom. It’s our job. And I wanted to be a good mother.

			I was happy for her, of course, poised at the beginning of a new adventure, but I was sad for myself, enduring the agony of missing her. My friends who had already weathered this passage counseled me to remember the parts of having a house full of children that I wouldn’t miss a bit. I would be glad to retire from the worried nights when the roads are snowy, waiting for the sound of tires in the driveway exactly one minute before curfew. The half-done chores and the mysteriously emptying refrigerator.

			There were days when I’d get up in the morning and the animals had beaten me to the kitchen. The calico cat yelled from her perch: Feed me! The longhair stood by his bowl silently with an accusing stare. The dog threw herself against my legs with happiness and looked expectant. Feed me! And I did. I dropped handfuls of oatmeal and cranberries into one pot and stirred hot chocolate in another. The girls came downstairs sleepy-eyed and needing that homework paper from last night. Feed me, they said. And I did. I tipped the scraps into the compost bucket so when the next summer’s tomato seedlings say feed me, I can. And when I kiss the girls good-bye at the door, the horses whicker at the fence for their bucket of grain and the chickadees call from their empty seed tray: Feed me me me. Feed me me me. The fern on the windowsill droops its fronds in silent request. When I put the key in the ignition of the car it starts to ping: fill me. Which I do. I listen to public radio all the way to school and thank goodness it’s not pledge week.

			I remember my babies at the breast, the first feeding, the long deep suck that drew up from my innermost well, which was filled and filled again, by the look that passed between us, the reciprocity of mother and child. I suppose I should welcome the freedom from all that feeding and worrying, but I’ll miss it. Maybe not the laundry, but the immediacy of those looks, the presence of our reciprocal love is hard to say good-bye to.

			I understood that part of my sadness at Linden’s departure was because I did not know who I would be when I was no longer known as “Linden’s Mother.” But I had a bit of a reprieve from that crisis, as I am also justly famous for being “Larkin’s Mother.” But this, too, would pass.

			Before my younger daughter, Larkin, left, she and I had a last campfire up at the pond and watched the stars come out. “Thank you,” she whispered, “for all of this.” The next morning she had the car all packed with dorm furnishings and school supplies. The quilt that I made for her before she was born showed through one of the big plastic tubs of essentials. When everything she needed was stuffed in back, then she helped me load mine on the roof.

			After we’d unloaded and decorated the dorm room and went out to lunch as if nothing was happening, I knew it was time for my exit. My work was done and hers was beginning.

			I saw girls dismiss their parents with a waggle of fingers, but Larkin walked me out to the dorm parking lot where the herds of minivans were still disgorging their cargos. Under the gaze of deliberately cheerful dads and strained-looking moms, we hugged again and shed some smiley tears that we both thought had already been used up. As I opened the car door, she started to walk away and called out loudly, “Mom, if you break down in uncontrollable sobs on the highway, please pull over!” The entire parking lot erupted in laughter and then we were all released.

			I did not need Kleenex or the breakdown lane. After all, I wasn’t going home. I could manage leaving her at college, but I did not want to go home to an empty house. Even the horses were gone and the old family dog had died that spring. There would be no welcoming committee.

			I had planned for this with my special grief-containment system strapped on top of my car. Spending every weekend at track meets or hosting slumber parties, I rarely found time to go paddling alone. Now I was going to celebrate my freedom rather than mourn my loss. You hear about those shiny, red midlife crisis Corvettes? Well, mine was strapped on top of the car. I drove down the road to Labrador Pond and slipped my new red kayak into the water.

			Just remembering the sound of the first bow wave brings back the whole of the day. Late summer afternoon, golden sun and lapis sky between the hills that fold around the pond. Red-winged blackbirds cackling in the cattails. Not a breath of wind disturbed the glassy pond.

			Open water sparkled ahead, but first I had to traverse the marshy edges, beds of pickerelweed and water lilies so thick they covered the water. The long petioles of the spatterdock lilies, stretching six feet from the mucky bottom to the surface, tangled around my paddle as if they wanted to keep me from moving forward. Pulling away the weeds that stuck to my hull, I could see inside their broken stalks. They were packed with spongy white cells filled with air, like a pith of Styrofoam, that botanists call aerenchyma. These air cells are unique to floating water plants and give the leaves buoyancy, like a built-in life jacket. This characteristic makes them very hard to paddle through but they serve a larger purpose.

			Pond lily leaves get their light and air at the surface, but are attached at the bottom of the lake to a living rhizome as thick as your wrist and as long as your arm. The rhizome inhabits the anaerobic depths of the pond, but without oxygen it will perish. So the aerenchyma forms a convoluted chain of air-filled cells, a conduit between the surface and the depths so that oxygen can slowly diffuse to the buried rhizome. If I pushed the leaves aside I could see them resting below.

			Mired in the weeds, I rested for a bit surrounded by water shield, fragrant water lily, rushes, wild calla, and the eccentric flowers known variously as yellow pond lily, bullhead lily, Nuphar luteum, spatterdock, and brandybottle. That last name, rarely heard, is perhaps most apt, as the yellow flowers sticking up from the dark water emit a sweet alcoholic scent. It made me wish I had brought a bottle of wine.

			Once the showy brandybottle flowers have accomplished their goal of attracting pollinators, they bend below the surface for several weeks, suddenly reclusive while their ovaries swell. When the seeds are mature, the stalks straighten again and lift up above the water the fruit—a curiously flask-shaped pod with a brightly colored lid that looks like its namesake, a miniature brandy cask about the size of a shot glass. I’ve never witnessed it myself, but I’m told that the seeds pop dramatically from the pod onto the surface, earning one of their other names, spatterdock. All around me there were lilies in all stages of rising and sinking and reemerging, a waterscape of change that is hard to move through, but I bent to the task, pushing my red boat through the green.

			I paddled hard and strong out to the deep water, pulling against the weight of the restraining vegetation, eventually breaking free. When I had exhausted my shoulders so they were as empty as my heart, I rested on the water, closed my eyes, and let the sadness come, adrift.

			Maybe a little breeze came up, maybe a hidden current, or the earth tilting on its axis to slosh the pond, but whatever the invisible hand, my little boat began to rock gently, like a cradle on the water. Held by the hills and rocked by the water, the hand of the breeze against my cheek, I gave myself over to the comfort that came, unbidden.

			I don’t know how long I floated, but my little red boat drifted the length of the lake. Rustling whispers around my hull drew me from reverie and the first thing I saw upon opening my eyes were polished green leaves of water lilies and spatterdock smiling up at me again, rooted in darkness and floating in the light. I found myself surrounded by hearts on the water, luminous green hearts. The lilies seemed to pulse with light, green hearts beating with my own. There were young heart leaves below the water on their way up and old leaves on the surface, some with edges tattered by a summer of wind and waves and, no doubt, kayak paddles.

			Scientists used to think that the movement of oxygen from the surface leaves of lilies to the rhizome was merely the slow process of diffusion, an inefficient drift of molecules from a region of high concentration in the air to low concentration under water. But new inquiries revealed a flow we could have known by intuition if we had remembered the teachings of plants.

			The new leaves take up oxygen into the tightly packed air spaces of their young, developing tissues, whose density creates a pressure gradient. The older leaves, with looser air spaces created by the tatters and tears that open the leaf, create a low-pressure region where oxygen can be released into the atmosphere. This gradient exerts a pull on the air taken in by the young leaf. Since they are connected by air-filled capillary networks, the oxygen moves by mass flow from the young leaves to the old, passing through and oxygenating the rhizome in the process. The young and the old are linked in one long breath, an inhalation that calls for reciprocal exhalation, nourishing the common root from which they both arose. New leaf to old, old to new, mother to daughter—mutuality endures. I am consoled by the lesson of lilies.

			I paddled more easily back to the shore. Loading the kayak onto the car in the fading light, I was doused with the leftover pond water draining onto my head. I smiled at the illusion of my grief-containment system: there is no such thing. We spill over into the world and the world spills over into us.

			The earth, that first among good mothers, gives us the gift that we cannot provide ourselves. I hadn’t realized that I had come to the lake and said feed me, but my empty heart was fed. I had a good mother. She gives what we need without being asked. I wonder if she gets tired, old Mother Earth. Or if she too is fed by the giving. “Thanks,” I whispered, “for all of this.”

			It was nearly dark when I got home, but my plan had included leaving the porch light on because a dark house would have been one assault too many. I carried my life jacket into the porch and got out my house keys before I noticed a pile of presents, all beautifully wrapped in brightly colored tissue paper, as if a piñata had burst over my door. A bottle of wine with a single glass on the doorsill. There was a goingaway party on the porch and Larkin had missed it. “She’s one lucky girl,” I thought, “showered with love.”

			I looked through the gifts for tags or a card, but there was nothing to show who had made the late delivery. The wrapping was just tissue paper so I hunted for a clue. I smoothed the purple paper tight on one gift to read the label underneath. It was a jar of Vicks VapoRub! A little note fell from the twisted tissue paper: “Take comfort.” I recognized the handwriting immediately as my cousin’s, dear enough to be my sister, who lives hours away. My fairy godmother left eighteen notes and presents, one for every year of mothering Larkin. A compass: “To find your new path.” A packet of smoked salmon: “Because they always come home.” Pens: “Celebrate having time to write.”

			We are showered every day with gifts, but they are not meant for us to keep. Their life is in their movement, the inhale and the exhale of our shared breath. Our work and our joy is to pass along the gift and to trust that what we put out into the universe will always come back.





Allegiance to Gratitude


			There was a time, not so long ago, when my morning ritual was to rise before dawn and start the oatmeal and coffee before waking the girls. Then I would get them up to feed the horses before school. That done, I would pack lunches, find lost papers, and kiss pink cheeks as the school bus chugged up the hill, all before filling bowls for the cats and dog, finding something presentable to wear, and previewing my morning lecture as I drove to school. Reflection was not a word frequently on my mind those days.

			But on Thursdays, I didn’t have a morning class and could linger a little, so I would walk the pasture to the top of the hill to start the day properly, with birdsong and shoes soaked in dew and the clouds still pink with sunrise over the barn, a down payment on a debt of gratitude. One Thursday I was distracted from the robins and new leaves by a call I received from my sixth-grade daughter’s teacher the night before. Apparently, my daughter had begun refusing to stand with the class for the Pledge of Allegiance. The teacher assured me she wasn’t being disruptive, really, or misbehaving, but just sat quietly in her seat and wouldn’t join in. After a couple of days other students began following suit, so the teacher was calling “just because I thought you’d like to know.”

			I remember how that ritual used to begin my day, too, from kindergarten through high school. Like the tap of the conductor’s baton, it gathered our attention from the hubbub of the school bus and the jostling hallway. We would be shuffling our chairs and putting lunch boxes away in the cubbies when the loudspeaker grabbed us by the collar.

			We stood beside our desks facing the flag that hung on a stick at the corner of the blackboard, as ubiquitous as the smell of floor wax and school paste.

			Hand over heart, we recited the Pledge of Allegiance. The pledge was a puzzlement to me, as I’m sure it is to most students. I had no earthly idea what a republic even was, and was none too sure about God, either. And you didn’t have to be an eight-year-old Indian to know that “liberty and justice for all” was a questionable premise.

			But during school assemblies, when three hundred voices all joined together, all those voices, in measured cadence, from the gray-haired school nurse’s to the kindergarteners’, made me feel part of something. It was as if for a moment our minds were one. I could imagine then that if we all spoke for that elusive justice, it might be within our reach.

			From where I stand today, though, the idea of asking schoolchildren to pledge loyalty to a political system seems exceedingly curious. Especially since we know full well that the practice of recitation will largely be abandoned in adulthood, when the age of reason has presumably been attained. Apparently my daughter had reached that age and I was not about to interfere. “Mom, I’m not going to stand there and lie,” she explained. “And it’s not exactly liberty if they force you to say it, is it?”

			She knew different morning rituals, her grandfather’s pouring of coffee on the ground and the one I carried out on the hill above our house, and that was enough for me. The sunrise ceremony is our Potawatomi way of sending gratitude into the world, to recognize all that we are given and to offer our choicest thanks in return. Many Native peoples across the world, despite myriad cultural differences, have this in common—we are rooted in cultures of gratitude.

			Our old farm is within the ancestral homelands of the Onondaga Nation and their reserve lies a few ridges to the west of my hilltop. There, just like on my side of the ridge, school buses discharge a herd of kids who run even after the bus monitors bark “Walk!” But at Onondaga, the flag flying outside the entrance is purple and white, depicting the Hiawatha wampum belt, the symbol of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy. With bright backpacks too big for their little shoulders, the kids stream in through doors painted the traditional Haudenosaunee purple, under the words Nya wenhah Ska: nonh, a greeting of health and peace. Black-haired children run circles around the atrium, through sun shafts, over clan symbols etched on the slate floor.

			Here the school week begins and ends not with the Pledge of Allegiance, but with the Thanksgiving Address, a river of words as old as the people themselves, known more accurately in the Onondaga language as the Words That Come Before All Else. This ancient order of protocol sets gratitude as the highest priority. The gratitude is directed straight to the ones who share their gifts with the world.

			All the classes stand together in the atrium, and one grade each week has responsibility for the oratory. Together, in a language older than English, they begin the recitation. It is said that the people were instructed to stand and offer these words whenever they gathered, no matter how many or how few, before anything else was done. In this ritual, their teachers remind them that every day, “beginning with where our feet first touch the earth, we send greetings and thanks to all members of the natural world.”

			Today it is the third grade’s turn. There are only eleven of them and they do their best to start together, giggling a little, and nudging the ones who just stare at the floor. Their little faces are screwed up with concentration and they glance at their teacher for prompts when they stumble on the words. In their own language they say the words they’ve heard nearly every day of their lives.

			Today we have gathered and when we look upon the faces around us we see that the cycles of life continue. We have been given the duty to live in balance and harmony with each other and all living things. So now let us bring our minds together as one as we give greetings and thanks to each other as People. Now our minds are one.*

			*The actual wording of the Thanksgiving Address varies with the speaker. This text is the widely publicised version of John Stokes and Kanawahientun, 1993.

			There is a pause and the kids murmur their assent.



			We are thankful to our Mother the Earth, for she gives us everything that we need for life. She supports our feet as we walk about upon her. It gives us joy that she still continues to care for us, just as she has from the beginning of time. To our Mother, we send thanksgiving, love, and respect. Now our minds are one.

			The kids sit remarkably still, listening. You can tell they’ve been raised in the longhouse.

			The Pledge has no place here. Onondaga is sovereign territory, surrounded on every side by the Republicforwhichitstands, but outside the jurisdiction of the United States. Starting the day with the Thanksgiving Address is a statement of identity and an exercise of sovereignty, both political and cultural. And so much more.

			The Address is sometimes mistakenly viewed as a prayer, but the children’s heads are not bowed. The elders at Onondaga teach otherwise, that the Address is far more than a pledge, a prayer, or a poem alone.

			Two little girls step forward with arms linked and take up the words again:

			We give thanks to all of the waters of the world for quenching our thirst, for providing strength and nurturing life for all beings. We know its power in many forms—waterfalls and rain, mists and streams, rivers and oceans, snow and ice. We are grateful that the waters are still here and meeting their responsibility to the rest of Creation. Can we agree that water is important to our lives and bring our minds together as one to send greetings and thanks to the Water? Now our minds are one.

			I’m told that the Thanksgiving Address is at heart an invocation of gratitude, but it is also a material, scientific inventory of the natural world. Another name for the oration is Greetings and Thanks to the Natural World. As it goes forward, each element of the ecosystem is named in its turn, along with its function. It is a lesson in Native science.

			We turn our thoughts to all of the Fish life in the water. They were instructed to cleanse and purify the water. They also give themselves to us as food. We are grateful that they continue to do their duties and we send to the Fish our greetings and our thanks. Now our minds are one.

			Now we turn toward the vast fields of Plant life. As far as the eye can see, the Plants grow, working many wonders. They sustain many life forms. With our minds gathered together, we give thanks and look forward to seeing Plant life for many generations to come. Now our minds are one.

			When we look about us, we see that the berries are still here, providing us with delicious foods. The leader of the berries is the strawberry, the first to ripen in the spring. Can we agree that we are grateful that the berries are with us in the world and send our thanksgiving, love, and respect to the berries? Now our minds are one.

			I wonder if there are kids here who, like my daughter, rebel, who refuse to stand and say thank you to the earth. It seems hard to argue with gratitude for berries.

			With one mind, we honor and thank all the Food Plants we harvest from the garden, especially the Three Sisters who feed the people with such abundance. Since the beginning of time, the grains, vegetables, beans, and fruit have helped the people survive. Many other living things draw strength from them as well. We gather together in our minds all the plant foods and send them a greeting and thanks. Now our minds are one.

			The kids take note of each addition and nod in agreement. Especially for food. A little boy in a Red Hawks lacrosse shirt steps forward to speak:

			Now we turn to the Medicine Herbs of the world. From the beginning they were instructed to take away sickness. They are always waiting and ready to heal us. We are so happy that there are still among us those special few who remember how to use the plants for healing. With one mind, we send thanksgiving, love, and respect to the Medicines and the keepers of the Medicines. Now our minds are one.

			Standing around us we see all the Trees. The Earth has many families of Trees who each have their own instructions and uses. Some provide shelter and shade, others fruit and beauty and many useful gifts. The Maple is the leader of the trees, to recognize its gift of sugar when the People need it most. Many peoples of the world recognize a Tree as a symbol of peace and strength. With one mind we greet and thank the Tree life. Now our minds are one.

			The Address is, by its very nature of greetings to all who sustain us, long. But it can be done in abbreviated form or in long and loving detail. At the school, it is tailored to the language skills of the children speaking it.

			Part of its power surely rests in the length of time it takes to send greetings and thanks to so many. The listeners reciprocate the gift of the speaker’s words with their attention, and by putting their minds into the place where gathered minds meet. You could be passive and just let the words and the time flow by, but each call asks for the response: “Now our minds are one.” You have to concentrate; you have to give yourself to the listening. It takes effort, especially in a time when we are accustomed to sound bites and immediate gratification.

			When the long version is done at joint meetings with non-Native business or government officials, they often get a little fidgety— especially the lawyers. They want to get on with it, their eyes darting around the room, trying so hard not to look at their watches. My own students profess to cherish the opportunity to share this experience of the Thanksgiving Address, and yet it never fails that one or a few comment that it goes on too long. “Poor you,” I sympathize. “What a pity that we have so much to be thankful for.”

			We gather our minds together to send our greetings and thanks to all the beautiful animal life of the world, who walk about with us. They have many things to teach us as people. We are grateful that they continue to share their lives with us and hope that it will always be so. Let us put our minds together as one and send our thanks to the Animals. Now our minds are one.

			Imagine raising children in a culture in which gratitude is the first priority. Freida Jacques works at the Onondaga Nation School. She is a clan mother, the school-community liaison, and a generous teacher. She explains to me that the Thanksgiving Address embodies the Onondaga relationship with the world. Each part of Creation is thanked in turn for fulfilling its Creator-given duty to the others. “It reminds you every day that you have enough,” she says. “More than enough. Everything needed to sustain life is already here. When we do this, every day, it leads us to an outlook of contentment and respect for all of Creation.”

			You can’t listen to the Thanksgiving Address without feeling wealthy. And, while expressing gratitude seems innocent enough, it is a revolutionary idea. In a consumer society, contentment is a radical proposition. Recognizing abundance rather than scarcity undermines an economy that thrives by creating unmet desires. Gratitude cultivates an ethic of fullness, but the economy needs emptiness. The Thanksgiving Address reminds you that you already have everything you need. Gratitude doesn’t send you out shopping to find satisfaction; it comes as a gift rather than a commodity, subverting the foundation of the whole economy. That’s good medicine for land and people alike.

			We put our minds together as one and thank all the birds who move and fly about over our heads. The Creator gave them the gift of beautiful songs. Each morning they greet the day and with their songs remind us to enjoy and appreciate life. The Eagle was chosen to be their leader and to watch over the world. To all the Birds, from the smallest to the largest, we send our joyful greetings and thanks. Now our minds are one.

			The oratory is more than an economic model; it’s a civics lesson, too. Freida emphasizes that hearing the Thanksgiving Address every day lifts up models of leadership for the young people: the strawberry as leader of the berries, the eagle as leader of the birds. “It reminds them that much is expected of them eventually. It says this is what it means to be a good leader, to have vision, and to be generous, to sacrifice on behalf of the people. Like the maple, leaders are the first to offer their gifts.” It reminds the whole community that leadership is rooted not in power and authority, but in service and wisdom.

			We are all thank ful for the powers we know as the Four Winds. We hear their voices in the moving air as they refresh us and purify the air we breathe. They help to bring the change of seasons. From the four directions they come, bringing us messages and giving us strength. With one mind we send our greetings and thanks to the Four Winds. Now our minds are one.

			As Freida says, “The Thanksgiving Address is a reminder we cannot hear too often, that we human beings are not in charge of the world, but are subject to the same forces as all of the rest of life.”

			For me, the cumulative impact of the Pledge of Allegiance, from my time as a schoolgirl to my adulthood, was the cultivation of cynicism and a sense of the nation’s hypocrisy—not the pride it was meant to instill. As I grew to understand the gifts of the earth, I couldn’t understand how “love of country” could omit recognition of the actual country itself. The only promise it requires is to a flag. What of the promises to each other and to the land?

			What would it be like to be raised on gratitude, to speak to the natural world as a member of the democracy of species, to raise a pledge of interdependence? No declarations of political loyalty are required, just a response to a repeated question: “Can we agree to be grateful for all that is given?” In the Thanksgiving Address, I hear respect toward all our nonhuman relatives, not one political entity, but to all of life. What happens to nationalism, to political boundaries, when allegiance lies with winds and waters that know no boundaries, that cannot be bought or sold?

			Now we turn to the west where our grandfathers the Thunder Beings live. With lightning and thundering voices they bring with them the water that renews life. We bring our minds together as one to send greetings and thanks to our Grandfathers, the Thunderers.

			We now send greetings and thanks to our eldest brother the Sun. Each day without fail he travels the sky from east to west, bringing the light of a new day. He is the source of all the fires of life. With one mind, we send greetings and thanks to our Brother, the Sun. Now our minds are one.

			The Haudenosaunee have been recognized for centuries as masters of negotiation, for the political prowess by which they’ve survived against all odds. The Thanksgiving Address serves the people in myriad ways, including diplomacy. Most everyone knows the tension that squeezes your jaw before a difficult conversation or a meeting that is bound to be contentious. You straighten your pile of papers more than once while the arguments you have prepared stand at attention like soldiers in your throat, ready to be deployed. But then the Words That Come Before All Else begin to flow, and you start to answer. Yes, of course we can agree that we are grateful for Mother Earth. Yes, the same sun shines on each and every one of us. Yes, we are united in our respect for the trees. By the time we greet Grandmother Moon, the harsh faces have softened a bit in the gentle light of remembrance. Piece by piece, the cadence begins to eddy around the boulder of disagreement and erode the edges of the barriers between us. Yes, we can all agree that the waters are still here. Yes, we can unite our minds in gratitude for the winds. Not surprisingly, Haudenosaunee decision-making proceeds from consensus, not by a vote of the majority. A decision is made only “when our minds are one.” Those words are a brilliant political preamble to negotiation, strong medicine for soothing partisan fervor. Imagine if our government meetings began with the Thanksgiving Address. What if our leaders first found common ground before fighting over their differences?

			We put our minds together and give thanks to our oldest Grandmother, the Moon, who lights the nighttime sky. She is the leader of women all over the world and she governs the movement of the ocean tides. By her changing face we measure time and it is the Moon who watches over the arrival of children here on Earth. Let us gather our thanks for Grandmother Moon together in a pile, layer upon layer of gratitude, and then joyfully fling that pile of thanks high into the night sky that she will know. With one mind, we send greetings and thanks to our Grandmother, the Moon.

			We give thanks to the Stars who are spread across the sky like jewelry. We see them at night, helping the Moon to light the darkness and bringing dew to the gardens and growing things. When we travel at night, they guide us home. With our minds gathered as one, we send greetings and thanks to all the Stars. Now our minds are one.

			Thanksgiving also reminds us of how the world was meant to be in its original condition. We can compare the roll call of gifts bestowed on us with their current status. Are all the pieces of the ecosystem still here and doing their duty? Is the water still supporting life? Are all those birds still healthy? When we can no longer see the stars because of light pollution, the words of Thanksgiving should awaken us to our loss and spur us to restorative action. Like the stars themselves, the words can guide us back home.

			We gather our minds to greet and thank the enlightened Teachers who have come to help throughout the ages. When we forget how to live in harmony, they remind us of the way we were instructed to live as people. With one mind, we send greetings and thanks to these caring Teachers. Now our minds are one.

			While there is a clear structure and progression to the oratory, it is usually not recited verbatim or exactly the same by different speakers. Some renditions are low murmurs, barely discernible. Some are nearly songs. I love to hear elder Tom Porter hold a circle of listeners in the bowl of his hand. He lights up every face and no matter how long the delivery, you wish it was longer. Tommy says, “Let us pile up our thanks like a heap of flowers on a blanket. We will each take a corner and toss it high into the sky. And so our thanks should be as rich as the gifts of the world that shower down upon us,” and we stand there together, grateful in the rain of blessings.

			We now turn our thoughts to the Creator, or Great Spirit, and send greetings and thanks for all the gifts of Creation. Everything we need to live a good life is here on Mother Earth. For all the love that is still around us, we gather our minds together as one and send our choicest words of greetings and thanks to the Creator. Now our minds are one.

			The words are simple, but in the art of their joining, they become a statement of sovereignty, a political structure, a Bill of Responsibilities, an educational model, a family tree, and a scientific inventory of ecosystem services. It is a powerful political document, a social contract, a way of being—all in one piece. But first and foremost, it is the credo for a culture of gratitude.

			Cultures of gratitude must also be cultures of reciprocity. Each person, human or no, is bound to every other in a reciprocal relationship. Just as all beings have a duty to me, I have a duty to them. If an animal gives its life to feed me, I am in turn bound to support its life. If I receive a stream’s gift of pure water, then I am responsible for returning a gift in kind. An integral part of a human’s education is to know those duties and how to perform them.

			The Thanksgiving Address reminds us that duties and gifts are two sides of the same coin. Eagles were given the gift of far sight, so it is their duty to watch over us. Rain fulfills its duty as it falls, because it was given the gift of sustaining life. What is the duty of humans? If gifts and responsibilities are one, then asking “What is our responsibility?” is the same as asking “What is our gift?” It is said that only humans have the capacity for gratitude. This is among our gifts.

			It’s such a simple thing, but we all know the power of gratitude to incite a cycle of reciprocity. If my girls run out the door with lunch in hand without a “Thanks, Mama!” I confess I get to feeling a tad miserly with my time and energy. But when I get a hug of appreciation, I want to stay up late to bake cookies for tomorrow’s lunch bag. We know that appreciation begets abundance. Why should it not be so for Mother Earth, who packs us a lunch every single day?

			Living as a neighbor to the Haudenosaunee, I have heard the Thanksgiving Address in many forms, spoken by many different voices, and I raise my heart to it like raising my face to the rain. But I am not a Haudenosaunee citizen or scholar—just a respectful neighbor and a listener. Because I feared overstepping my boundaries in sharing what I have been told, I asked permission to write about it and how it has influenced my own thinking. Over and over, I was told that these words are a gift of the Haudenosaunee to the world. When I asked Onondaga Faithkeeper Oren Lyons about it, he gave his signature slightly bemused smile and said, “Of course you should write about it. It’s supposed to be shared, otherwise how can it work? We’ve been waiting five hundred years for people to listen. If they’d understood the Thanksgiving then, we wouldn’t be in this mess.”

			The Haudenosaunee have published the Address widely and it has now been translated into over forty languages and is heard all around the world. Why not here in this land? I’m trying to imagine how it would be if schools transformed their mornings to include something like the Thanksgiving Address. I mean no disrespect for the whitehaired veterans in my town, who stand with hand on heart as the flag goes by, whose eyes fill with tears as they recite the Pledge in raspy voices. I love my country too, and its hopes for freedom and justice. But the boundaries of what I honor are bigger than the republic. Let us pledge reciprocity with the living world. The Thanksgiving Address describes our mutual allegiance as human delegates to the democracy of species. If what we want for our people is patriotism, then let us inspire true love of country by invoking the land herself. If we want to raise good leaders, let us remind our children of the eagle and the maple. If we want to grow good citizens, then let us teach reciprocity. If what we aspire to is justice for all, then let it be justice for all of Creation.

			We have now arrived at the place where we end our words. Of all the things we have named, it is not our intention to leave anything out. If something was forgotten, we leave it to each individual to send such greetings and thanks in their own way. And now our minds are one.

			Every day, with these words, the people give thanks to the land. In the silence that falls at the end of those words I listen, longing for the day when we can hear the land give thanks for the people in return.





PICKING SWEETGRASS


			Sweetgrass is harvested in midsummer, when the leaves are long and shiny. The blades are taken one by one and dried in the shade to preserve the color. A gift is always left in return.





Epiphany in the Beans


			It came to me while picking beans, the secret of happiness.


I was hunting among the spiraling vines that envelop my teepees of pole beans, lifting the dark-green leaves to find handfuls of pods, long and green, firm and furred with tender fuzz. I snapped them off where they hung in slender twosomes, bit into one, and tasted nothing but August, distilled into pure, crisp beaniness. This summer abundance is destined for the freezer, to emerge again in deep midwinter when the air tastes only of snow. By the time I finished searching through just one trellis, my basket was full.

			To go and empty it in the kitchen, I stepped between heavy squash vines and around tomato plants fallen under the weight of their fruit. They sprawled at the feet of the sunflowers, whose heads bowed with the weight of maturing seeds. Lifting my basket over the row of potatoes, I noticed an open furrow revealing a nest of red skins where the girls left off harvesting that morning. I kicked some soil over them so the sun wouldn’t green them up.

			They complain about garden chores, as kids are supposed to do, but once they start they get caught up in the softness of the dirt and the smell of the day and it is hours later when they come back into the house. Seeds for this basket of beans were poked into the ground by their fingers back in May. Seeing them plant and harvest makes me feel like a good mother, teaching them how to provide for themselves.

			The seeds, though, we did not provide for ourselves. When Skywoman buried her beloved daughter in the earth, the plants that are special gifts to the people sprang from her body. Tobacco grew from her head. From her hair, sweetgrass. Her heart gave us the strawberry. From her breasts grew corn, from her belly the squash, and we see in her hands the long-fingered clusters of beans.

			How do I show my girls I love them on a morning in June? I pick them wild strawberries. On a February afternoon we build snowmen and then sit by the fire. In March we make maple syrup. We pick violets in May and go swimming in July. On an August night we lay out blankets and watch meteor showers. In November, that great teacher the woodpile comes into our lives. That’s just the beginning. How do we show our children our love? Each in our own way by a shower of gifts and a heavy rain of lessons.

			Maybe it was the smell of ripe tomatoes, or the oriole singing, or that certain slant of light on a yellow afternoon and the beans hanging thick around me. It just came to me in a wash of happiness that made me laugh out loud, startling the chickadees who were picking at the sunflowers, raining black and white hulls on the ground. I knew it with a certainty as warm and clear as the September sunshine. The land loves us back. She loves us with beans and tomatoes, with roasting ears and blackberries and birdsongs. By a shower of gifts and a heavy rain of lessons. She provides for us and teaches us to provide for ourselves. That’s what good mothers do.

			I looked around at the garden and could feel her delight in giving us these beautiful raspberries, squash, basil, potatoes, asparagus, lettuce, kale and beets, broccoli, peppers, brussels sprouts, carrots, dill, onions, leeks, spinach. It reminded me of my little girls’ answer to “How much do I love you?” “Thiiiiiiiis much,” with arms stretched wide, they replied. This is really why I made my daughters learn to garden—so they would always have a mother to love them, long after I am gone.

			The epiphany in the beans. I spend a lot of time thinking about our relationships with land, how we are given so much and what we might give back. I try to work through the equations of reciprocity and responsibility, the whys and wherefores of building sustainable relationships with ecosystems. All in my head. But suddenly there was no intellectualizing, no rationalizing, just the pure sensation of baskets full of mother love. The ultimate reciprocity, loving and being loved in return.

			Now, the plant scientist who sits at my desk and wears my clothes and sometimes borrows my car—she might cringe to hear me assert that a garden is a way that the land says, “I love you.” Isn’t it supposed to be just a matter of increasing net primary productivity of the artificially selected domesticated genotypes, manipulating environmental conditions through input of labor and materials to enhance yield? Adaptive cultural behaviors that produce a nutritious diet and increase individual fitness are selected for. What’s love got to do with it? If a garden thrives, it loves you? If a garden fails, do you attribute potato blight to a withdrawal of affection? Do unripe peppers signal a rift in the relationship?

			I have to explain things to her sometimes. Gardens are simultaneously a material and a spiritual undertaking. That’s hard for scientists, so fully brainwashed by Cartesian dualism, to grasp. “Well, how would you know it’s love and not just good soil?” she asks. “Where’s the evidence? What are the key elements for detecting loving behavior?”

			That’s easy. No one would doubt that I love my children, and even a quantitative social psychologist would find no fault with my list of loving behaviors:

			 			nurturing health and well-being

			protection from harm

			encouraging individual growth and development

			desire to be together

			generous sharing of resources

			working together for a common goal

			celebration of shared values

			interdependence

			sacrifice by one for the other

			creation of beauty



			If we observed these behaviors between humans, we would say, “She loves that person.” You might also observe these actions between a person and a bit of carefully tended ground and say, “She loves that garden.” Why then, seeing this list, would you not make the leap to say that the garden loves her back?

			The exchange between plants and people has shaped the evolutionary history of both. Farms, orchards, and vineyards are stocked with species we have domesticated. Our appetite for their fruits leads us to till, prune, irrigate, fertilize, and weed on their behalf. Perhaps they have domesticated us. Wild plants have changed to stand in well-behaved rows and wild humans have changed to settle alongside the fields and care for the plants—a kind of mutual taming.

			We are linked in a co-evolutionary circle. The sweeter the peach, the more frequently we disperse its seeds, nurture its young, and protect them from harm. Food plants and people act as selective forces on each other’s evolution—the thriving of one in the best interest of the other. This, to me, sounds a bit like love.

			I sat once in a graduate writing workshop on relationships to the land. The students all demonstrated a deep respect and affection for nature. They said that nature was the place where they experienced the greatest sense of belonging and well-being. They professed without reservation that they loved the earth. And then I asked them, “Do you think that the earth loves you back?” No one was willing to answer that. It was as if I had brought a two-headed porcupine into the classroom. Unexpected. Prickly. They backed slowly away. Here was a room full of writers, passionately wallowing in unrequited love of nature.

			So I made it hypothetical and asked, “What do you suppose would happen if people believed this crazy notion that the earth loved them back?” The floodgates opened. They all wanted to talk at once. We were suddenly off the deep end, heading for world peace and perfect harmony.

			One student summed it up: “You wouldn’t harm what gives you love.”

			Knowing that you love the earth changes you, activates you to defend and protect and celebrate. But when you feel that the earth loves you in return, that feeling transforms the relationship from a one-way street into a sacred bond.

			My daughter Linden grows one of my favorite gardens in the world. She brings up all kinds of good things to eat from her thin mountain soil, things I can only dream of, like tomatillos and chile. She makes compost and flowers, but the best part isn’t the plants. It’s that she phones me to chat while she weeds. We water and weed and harvest, visiting happily as we did when she was a girl despite the three thousand miles between us. Linden is immensely busy, and so I ask her why she gardens, given how much time it takes.

			She does it for the food and the satisfaction of hard work yielding something so prolific, she says. And it makes her feel at home in a place, to have her hands in the earth. I ask her, “Do you love your garden?” even though I already know the answer. But then I ask, tentatively, “Do you feel that your garden loves you back?” She’s quiet for a minute; she’s never glib about such things. “I’m certain of it,” she says. “My garden takes care of me like my own mama.” I can die happy.


I once knew and loved a man who lived most of his life in the city, but when he was dragged off to the ocean or the woods he seemed to enjoy it well enough—as long as he could find an Internet connection. He had lived in a lot of places, so I asked him where he found his greatest sense of place. He didn’t understand the expression. I explained that I wanted to know where he felt most nurtured and supported. What is the place that you understand best? That you know best and knows you in return?

			He didn’t take long to answer. “My car,” he said. “In my car. It provides me with everything I need, in just the way I like it. My favorite music. Seat position fully adjustable. Automatic mirrors. Two cup holders. I’m safe. And it always takes me where I want to go.” Years later, he tried to kill himself. In his car.

			He never grew a relationship with the land, choosing instead the splendid isolation of technology. He was like one of those little withered seeds you find in the bottom of the seed packet, the one who never touched the earth.

			I wonder if much that ails our society stems from the fact that we have allowed ourselves to be cut off from that love of, and from, the land. It is medicine for broken land and empty hearts.

			Larkin used to complain mightily about weeding. But now when she comes home, she asks if she can go dig potatoes. I see her on her knees, unearthing red skins and Yukon Golds and singing to herself. Larkin is in graduate school now, studying food systems and working with urban gardeners, growing vegetables for the food pantry on land reclaimed from empty lots. At-risk youth do the planting and hoeing and harvesting. The kids are surprised that the food they harvest is free. They’ve had to pay for everything they’ve ever gotten before. They greet fresh carrots, straight from the ground, with suspicion at first, until they eat one. She is passing on the gift, and the transformation is profound.

			Of course, much of what fills our mouths is taken forcibly from the earth. That form of taking does no honor to the farmer, to the plants, or to the disappearing soil. It’s hard to recognize food that is mummified in plastic, bought and sold, as a gift anymore. Everybody knows you can’t buy love.

			In a garden, food arises from partnership. If I don’t pick rocks and pull weeds, I’m not fulfilling my end of the bargain. I can do these things with my handy opposable thumb and capacity to use tools, to shovel manure. But I can no more create a tomato or embroider a trellis in beans than I can turn lead into gold. That is the plants’ responsibility and their gift: animating the inanimate. Now there is a gift.

			People often ask me what one thing I would recommend to restore relationship between land and people. My answer is almost always, “Plant a garden.” It’s good for the health of the earth and it’s good for the health of people. A garden is a nursery for nurturing connection, the soil for cultivation of practical reverence. And its power goes far beyond the garden gate—once you develop a relationship with a little patch of earth, it becomes a seed itself.

			Something essential happens in a vegetable garden. It’s a place where if you can’t say “I love you” out loud, you can say it in seeds. And the land will reciprocate, in beans.





The Three Sisters


			It should be them who tell this story. Corn leaves rustle with a signature sound, a papery conversation with each other and the breeze. On a hot day in July—when the corn can grow six inches in a single day—there is a squeak of internodes expanding, stretching the stem toward the light. Leaves escape their sheaths with a drawn-out creak and sometimes, when all is still, you can hear the sudden pop of ruptured pith when water-filled cells become too large and turgid for the confines of the stem. These are the sounds of being, but they are not the voice.

			The beans must make a caressing sound, a tiny hiss as a soft-haired leader twines around the scabrous stem of corn. Surfaces vibrate delicately against each other, tendrils pulse as they cinch around a stem, something only a nearby flea beetle could hear. But this is not the song of beans.

			I’ve lain among ripening pumpkins and heard creaking as the parasol leaves rock back and forth, tethered by their tendrils, wind lifting their edges and easing them down again. A microphone in the hollow of a swelling pumpkin would reveal the pop of seeds expanding and the rush of water filling succulent orange flesh. These are sounds, but not the story. Plants tell their stories not by what they say, but by what they do.

			What if you were a teacher but had no voice to speak your knowledge? What if you had no language at all and yet there was something you needed to say? Wouldn’t you dance it? Wouldn’t you act it out? Wouldn’t your every movement tell the story? In time you would become so eloquent that just to gaze upon you would reveal it all. And so it is with these silent green lives. A sculpture is just a piece of rock with topography hammered out and chiseled in, but that piece of rock can open your heart in a way that makes you different for having seen it. It brings its message without a single word. Not everyone will get it, though; the language of stone is difficult. Rock mumbles. But plants speak in a tongue that every breathing thing can understand. Plants teach in a universal language: food.

			Years ago, Awiakta, a Cherokee writer, pressed a small packet into my hand. It was a corn leaf, dry and folded into a pouch, tied with a bit of string. She smiled and warned, “Don’t open ’til spring.” In May I untie the packet and there is the gift: three seeds. One is a golden triangle, a kernel of corn with a broadly dimpled top that narrows to a hard white tip. The glossy bean is speckled brown, curved and sleek, its inner belly marked with a white eye—the hilum. It slides like a polished stone between my thumb and forefinger, but this is no stone. And there is a pumpkin seed like an oval china dish, its edge crimped shut like a piecrust bulging with filling. I hold in my hand the genius of indigenous agriculture, the Three Sisters. Together these plants— corn, beans, and squash—feed the people, feed the land, and feed our imaginations, telling us how we might live.

			For millennia, from Mexico to Montana, women have mounded up the earth and laid these three seeds in the ground, all in the same square foot of soil. When the colonists on the Massachusetts shore first saw indigenous gardens, they inferred that the savages did not know how to farm. To their minds, a garden meant straight rows of single species, not a three-dimensional sprawl of abundance. And yet they ate their fill and asked for more, and more again.

			Once planted in the May-moist earth, the corn seed takes on water quickly, its seed coat thin and its starchy contents, the endosperm, drawing water to it. The moisture triggers enzymes under the skin that cleave the starch into sugars, fueling the growth of the corn embryo that is nestled in the point of the seed. Thus corn is the first to emerge from the ground, a slender white spike that greens within hours of finding the light. A single leaf unfurls, and then another. Corn is all alone at first, while the others are getting ready.

			Drinking in soil water, the bean seed swells and bursts its speckled coat and sends a rootling down deep in the ground. Only after the root is secure does the stem bend to the shape of a hook and elbow its way above ground. Beans can take their time in finding the light because they are well provisioned: their first leaves were already packaged in the two halves of the bean seed. This pair of fleshy leaves now breaks the soil surface to join the corn, which is already six inches tall.

			Pumpkins and squash take their time—they are the slow sister. It may be weeks before the first stems poke up, still caught in their seed coat until the leaves split its seams and break free. I’m told that our ancestors would put the squash seeds in a deerskin bag with a little water or urine a week before planting to try to hurry them along. But each plant has its own pace and the sequence of their germination, their birth order, is important to their relationship and to the success of the crop.

			The corn is the firstborn and grows straight and stiff; it is a stem with a lofty goal. Laddering upward, leaf by long-ribbed leaf, it must grow tall quickly. Making a strong stem is its highest priority at first. It needs to be there for its younger sister, the bean. Beans put out a pair of heart-shaped leaves on just a stub of a stem, then another pair, and another, all low to the ground. The bean focuses on leaf growth while the corn concentrates on height. Just about the time that the corn is knee high, the bean shoot changes its mind, as middle children are wont to do. Instead of making leaves, it extends itself into a long vine, a slender green string with a mission. In this teenage phase, hormones set the shoot tip to wandering, inscribing a circle in the air, a process known as circumnutation. The tip can travel a meter in a day, pirouetting in a loopy circle dance until it finds what it’s looking for—a corn stem or some other vertical support. Touch receptors along the vine guide it to wrap itself around the corn in a graceful upward spiral. For now, it holds back on making leaves, giving itself over to embracing the corn, keeping pace with its height growth. Had the corn not started early, the bean vine would strangle it, but if the timing is right, the corn can easily carry the bean.

			Meanwhile, the squash, the late bloomer of the family, is steadily extending herself over the ground, moving away from the corn and beans, setting up broad lobed leaves like a stand of umbrellas waving at the ends of hollow petioles. The leaves and vines are distinctly bristly, giving second thoughts to nibbling caterpillars. As the leaves grow wider, they shelter the soil at the base of the corn and beans, keeping moisture in, and other plants out.

			Native people speak of this gardening style as the Three Sisters. There are many stories of how they came to be, but they all share the understanding of these plants as women, sisters. Some stories tell of a long winter when the people were dropping from hunger. Three beautiful women came to their dwellings on a snowy night. One was a tall woman dressed all in yellow, with long flowing hair. The second wore green, and the third was robed in orange. The three came inside to shelter by the fire. Food was scarce but the visiting strangers were fed generously, sharing in the little that the people had left. In gratitude for their generosity, the three sisters revealed their true identities—corn, beans, and squash—and gave themselves to the people in a bundle of seeds so that they might never go hungry again.

			At the height of the summer, when the days are long and bright, and the thunderers come to soak the ground, the lessons of reciprocity are written clearly in a Three Sisters garden. Together their stems inscribe what looks to me like a blueprint for the world, a map of balance and harmony. The corn stands eight feet tall; rippling green ribbons of leaf curl away from the stem in every direction to catch the sun. No leaf sits directly over the next, so that each can gather light without shading the others. The bean twines around the corn stalk, weaving itself between the leaves of corn, never interfering with their work. In the spaces where corn leaves are not, buds appear on the vining bean and expand into outstretched leaves and clusters of fragrant flowers. The bean leaves droop and are held close to the stem of the corn. Spread around the feet of the corn and beans is a carpet of big broad squash leaves that intercept the light that falls among the pillars of corn. Their layered spacing uses the light, a gift from the sun, efficiently, with no waste. The organic symmetry of forms belongs together; the placement of every leaf, the harmony of shapes speak their message. Respect one another, support one another, bring your gift to the world and receive the gifts of others, and there will be enough for all.

			By late summer, the beans hang in heavy clusters of smooth green pods, ears of corn angle out from the stalk, fattening in the sunshine, and pumpkins swell at your feet. Acre for acre, a Three Sisters garden yields more food than if you grew each of the sisters alone.

			You can tell they are sisters: one twines easily around the other in relaxed embrace while the sweet baby sister lolls at their feet, close, but not too close—cooperating, not competing. Seems to me I’ve seen this before in human families, in the interplay of sisters. After all, there are three girls in my family. The firstborn girl knows that she is clearly in charge; tall and direct, upright and efficient, she creates the template for everyone else to follow. That’s the corn sister. There’s not room for more than one corn woman in the same house, so the middle sister is likely to adapt in different ways. This bean girl learns to be flexible, adaptable, to find a way around the dominant structure to get the light that she needs. The sweet baby sister is free to choose a different path, as expectations have already been fulfilled. Well grounded, she has nothing to prove and finds her own way, a way that contributes to the good of the whole.

			Without the corn’s support, the beans would be an unruly tangle on the ground, vulnerable to bean-hungry predators. It might seem as if she is taking a free ride in this garden, benefiting from the corn’s height and the squash’s shade, but by the rules of reciprocity none can take more than she gives. The corn takes care of making light available; the squash reduces weeds. What about the beans? To see her gift you have to look underground.

			The sisters cooperate above ground with the placement of their leaves, carefully avoiding one another’s space. The same is true below ground. Corn is classified as a monocot, basically an overgrown grass, so its roots are fine and fibrous. With the soil shaken off, they look like a stringy mop head at the end of a cornstalk handle. They don’t go very deep at all; instead they make a shallow network, calling first dibs on incoming rain. After they’ve had their drink, the water descends out of reach of the corn roots. As the water goes deeper, the deep taproots of the bean are poised there to absorb it. The squash finds its share by moving away from the others. Wherever a squash stem touches soil, it can put out a tuft of adventitious roots, collecting water far from the corn and bean roots. They share the soil by the same techniques that they share the light, leaving enough for everyone.

			But there is one thing they all need that is always in short supply: nitrogen. That nitrogen should be the factor that limits growth is an ecological paradox: fully 78 percent of the atmosphere is nitrogen gas. The problem is that most plants simply can’t use atmospheric nitrogen. They need mineral nitrogen, nitrate or ammonium. The nitrogen in the atmosphere might as well be food locked away in full sight of a starving person. But there are ways to transform that nitrogen, and one of the best ways is named “beans.”

			Beans are members of the legume family, which has the remarkable ability to take nitrogen from the atmosphere and turn it into usable nutrients. But they don’t do it alone. My students often run to me with a handful of roots from a bean they’ve unearthed, with little white balls clinging to strands of root. “Is this a disease?” they ask. “Is something wrong with these roots?” In fact, I reply, there’s something very right.

			These glistening nodules house the Rhizobium bacteria, the nitrogen fixers. Rhizobium can only convert nitrogen under a special set of circumstances. Its catalytic enzymes will not work in the presence of oxygen. Since an average handful of soil is more than 50 percent air space, the Rhizobium needs a refuge in order to do its work. Happily, the bean obliges. When a bean root meets a microscopic rod of Rhizobium underground, chemical communications are exchanged and a deal is negotiated. The bean will grow an oxygen-free nodule to house the bacterium and, in return, the bacterium shares its nitrogen with the plant. Together, they create nitrogen fertilizer that enters the soil and fuels the growth of the corn and the squash, too. There are layers upon layers of reciprocity in this garden: between the bean and the bacterium, the bean and the corn, the corn and the squash, and, ultimately, with the people.

			It’s tempting to imagine that these three are deliberate in working together, and perhaps they are. But the beauty of the partnership is that each plant does what it does in order to increase its own growth. But as it happens, when the individuals flourish, so does the whole.

			The way of the Three Sisters reminds me of one of the basic teachings of our people. The most important thing each of us can know is our unique gift and how to use it in the world. Individuality is cherished and nurtured, because, in order for the whole to flourish, each of us has to be strong in who we are and carry our gifts with conviction, so they can be shared with others. Being among the sisters provides a visible manifestation of what a community can become when its members understand and share their gifts. In reciprocity, we fill our spirits as well as our bellies.


For years, I taught General Botany in a lecture hall with slides and diagrams and stories of plants that could not fail to inflame the enthusiasm of eighteen-year-olds for the marvels of photosynthesis. How could they be anything but elated to learn how roots find their way through the soil, sitting on the edge of their seats waiting to hear more about pollen? The sea of blank looks suggested that most of them found this as interesting as, literally, watching grass grow. When I would wax eloquent about the grace with which a bean seedling pushes its way up in the spring, the first row would eagerly nod their heads and raise their hands while the rest of the class slept.

			In a fit of frustration, I asked for a show of hands: “How many of you have ever grown anything?” Every hand in the front row went up, and there were a few half hearted waves from the back from someone whose mother had an African violet that had died a withering death. Suddenly I understood their boredom. I was teaching from memory, drawing on images of plant lives that I had witnessed over the years. The green images I thought we shared as human beings were not theirs, thanks to the supplanting of gardens by supermarkets. The front-row students had seen these things as well and wanted to know how such everyday miracles were possible. But most of the class had no experience of seeds and soil, had never watched a flower transform itself into an apple. They needed a new teacher.

			And so now each fall I begin my class in a garden, where they have the best teachers I know, three beautiful sisters. For a whole September afternoon they sit with the Three Sisters. They measure yield and growth and get to know the anatomy of the plants who feed them. I ask them first to just look. They observe and draw the way the three live in relationship. One of my students is an artist, and the more she looks the more excited she becomes. “Look at the composition,” she says. “It’s just like our art teacher described the elements of design in studio today. There is unity, balance, color. It’s perfect.” I look at the sketch in her notebook, and she’s seeing it like a painting. Long leaves, round leaves, lobed and smooth, yellow, orange, tan on a matrix of green. “See the way it works? Corn is the vertical element, squash horizontal, and it’s all tied together with these curvilinear vines, the beans. Ravishing,” she claims with a flourish.

			One of the girls is dressed for allure that might work in a dance club, but not on a botany field trip. She has avoided any contact with the dirt so far. To ease her into the work, I suggest that she take the relatively clean task of simply following a squash vine from one end to another and diagramming the flowers. Way out at the young tip of the vine are orange squash blossoms as ruffled and splashy as her skirt. I point out the swollen ovary of the flower after it has been pollinated. Such is the outcome of successful seduction. Mincing carefully in her heels, she follows the vine back toward its source; the older flowers have wilted and a tiny little squash has appeared where the flower’s pistil had been. Closer and closer to the plant, the squashes become larger, from a penny-size nub with flower still attached, to the full ripeness of a ten-inch squash. It’s like watching a pregnancy unfold. Together we pick a ripe butternut squash and slice it open so she can see the seeds in the cavity within.

			“You mean a squash comes from a flower?” she says incredulously, seeing the progression along the vine. “I love this kind of squash at Thanksgiving.”

			“Yes,” I tell her, “this is the ripened ovary of that first flower.”

			Her eyes widen in shock. “You mean all these years I’ve been eating ovaries? Blech—I’ll never eat a squash again.”

			There is an earthy sexuality to a garden, and most of the students get drawn in to the revelation of fruit. I have them carefully open an ear of corn without disturbing the corn silk that plumes from the end. First the coarse outer husks are pulled away, then layer after layer of inner leaves, each thinner than the next until the last layer is exposed, so thin and tightly pressed to the corn that the shape of the kernels show through it. As we draw aside the last layer, the sweet milky scent of corn rises from the exposed ear, rows upon rows of round yellow kernels. We look closely and follow an individual strand of corn silk. Outside the husk it is brown and curly, but inside it is colorless and crisply succulent, as if filled with water. Each little strand of silk connects a different kernel inside the husk to the world outside.

			A corncob is an ingenious sort of flower in which the silk is a greatly elongated flower pistil. One end of the silk waves in the breeze to collect pollen, while the other end attaches to the ovary. The silk is the water-filled conduit for sperm released from the pollen grains caught there. The corn sperm swim down the silken tube to the milky-white kernel—the ovary. Only when the corn kernels are so fertilized will they grow plump and yellow. A corncob is the mother of hundreds, as many children as there are kernels, each with potentially a different father. Is it any wonder she is called the Corn Mother?

			Beans too grow like babies in the womb. The students are contentedly munching fresh pole beans. I ask them to first open a slender pod, to see what they’re eating. Jed slits a pod with his thumbnail and opens it. There they are, bean babies, ten in a row. Each little beanlet is attached to the pod by a fragile green cord, the funiculus. Just a few millimeters long, it is the analog to the human umbilical cord. Through this cord, the mother plant nourishes her growing offspring. The students crowd around to look. Jed asks, “Does that mean a bean has a belly button?” Everybody laughs, but the answer is right there. Every bean has a little scar from the funiculus, a colored spot on its seed coat, the hilum. Every bean does have a belly button. These plant mothers feed us and leave their children behind as seeds, to feed us again and again.


In August, I like to have a Three Sisters potluck. I spread tablecloths on the tables beneath the maples and stuff bouquets of wildflowers in canning jars on every table. Then my friends start to arrive, each with a dish or a basket. The tables fill up with trays of golden cornbread, three-bean salad, round brown bean cakes, black bean chili, and summer squash casserole. My friend Lee brings a platter of small pumpkins stuffed with cheesy polenta. There’s a steaming pot of Three Sisters soup, all green and yellow, with slices of summer squash floating in the broth.

			As if there wasn’t enough to eat already, our ritual is to go to the garden together, once everyone arrives, and pick some more. The corn ears fill a bushel basket. The kids are delegated to shuck the corn while parents fill a bowl with new green beans and the littlest kids peek under prickly leaves looking for squash blossoms. We carefully spoon a batter of cheese and cornmeal into the orange throat of each flower, close it up, and fry it until it’s crisp. They disappear from the plate as fast as we can make them.

			The genius of the Three Sisters lies not only in the process by which they grow, but also in the complementarity of the three species on the kitchen table. They taste good together, and the Three Sisters also form a nutritional triad that can sustain a people. Corn, in all its guises, is a superb form of starch. All summer, the corn turns sunshine into carbohydrate, so that all winter, people can have food energy. But a human cannot subsist on corn alone; it is not nutritionally complete. Just as the bean complements the corn in the garden, it collaborates in the diet as well. By virtue of their nitrogen-fixing capacity, beans are high in protein and fill in the nutritional gaps left by corn. A person can live well on a diet of beans and corn; neither alone would suffice. But neither beans nor corn have the vitamins that squash provide in their carotene-rich flesh. Together, they are once again greater than alone.

			After dinner we are too full for dessert. There is a dish of Indian pudding and maple corncakes waiting for us, but we just sit and look out over the valley while the kids run around. The land below us is mostly planted to corn, the long rectangular fields butting right up against the woodlots. In the afternoon light, the rows of corn throw shadows on one another, outlining the contours of the hill. From a distance they look like lines of text on a page, long lines of green writing across the hillside. The truth of our relationship with the soil is written more clearly on the land than in any book. I read across that hill a story about people who value uniformity and the efficiency it yields, a story in which the land is shaped for the convenience of machines and the demands of a market.

			In indigenous agriculture, the practice is to modify the plants to fit the land. As a result, there are many varieties of corn domesticated by our ancestors, all adapted to grow in many different places. Modern agriculture, with its big engines and fossil fuels, took the opposite approach: modify the land to fit the plants, which are frighteningly similar clones.

			Once you know corn as a sister, it’s hard to unknow it. But the long ranks of corn in the conventional fields seem like a different being altogether. The relationships disappear and individuals are lost in anonymity. You can hardly recognize a beloved face lost in a uniformed crowd. These acres are beautiful in their own way, but after the companionship of a Three Sisters garden, I wonder if they’re lonely.

			There must be millions of corn plants out there, standing shoulder to shoulder, with no beans, no squash, and scarcely a weed in sight. These are my neighbor’s fields, and I’ve seen the many passes with the tractor that produce such a “clean” field. Tank sprayers on the tractor have delivered applications of fertilizer; you can smell it in the spring as it drifts off the fields. A dose of ammonium nitrate substitutes for the partnership of a bean. And the tractors return with herbicides to suppress weeds in lieu of squash leaves.

			There were certainly bugs and weeds back when these valleys were Three Sisters gardens, and yet they flourished without insecticides. Polycultures—fields with many species of plants—are less susceptible to pest outbreaks than monocultures. The diversity of plant forms provides habitats for a wide array of insects. Some, like corn worms and bean beetles and squash borers, are there with the intent of feeding on the crop. But the diversity of plants also creates habitat for insects who eat the crop eaters. Predatory beetles and parasitic wasps coexist with the garden and keep the crop eaters under control. More than people are fed by this garden, but there is enough to go around.

			The Three Sisters offer us a new metaphor for an emerging relationship between indigenous knowledge and Western science, both of which are rooted in the earth. I think of the corn as traditional ecological knowledge, the physical and spiritual framework that can guide the curious bean of science, which twines like a double helix. The squash creates the ethical habitat for coexistence and mutual flourishing. I envision a time when the intellectual monoculture of science will be replaced with a polyculture of complementary knowledges. And so all may be fed.

			Fran brings out a bowl of whipped cream for the Indian pudding. We spoon up the soft custard, rich with molasses and cornmeal, and watch the light fade on the fields. There’s a squash pie, too. By this feast, I want the Three Sisters to know that we’ve heard their story. Use your gift to take care of each other, work together, and all will be fed, they say.

			They’ve all brought their gifts to this table, but they’ve not done it alone. They remind us that there is another partner in the symbiosis. She is sitting here at the table and across the valley in the farmhouse, too. She’s the one who noticed the ways of each species and imagined how they might live together. Perhaps we should consider this a Four Sisters garden, for the planter is also an essential partner. It is she who turns up the soil, she who scares away the crows, and she who pushes seeds into the soil. We are the planters, the ones who clear the land, pull the weeds, and pick the bugs; we save the seeds over winter and plant them again next spring. We are midwives to their gifts. We cannot live without them, but it’s also true that they cannot live without us. Corn, beans, and squash are fully domesticated; they rely on us to create the conditions under which they can grow. We too are part of the reciprocity. They can’t meet their responsibilities unless we meet ours.

			Of all the wise teachers who have come into my life, none are more eloquent than these, who wordlessly in leaf and vine embody the knowledge of relationship. Alone, a bean is just a vine, squash an oversize leaf. Only when standing together with corn does a whole emerge which transcends the individual. The gifts of each are more fully expressed when they are nurtured together than alone. In ripe ears and swelling fruit, they counsel us that all gifts are multiplied in relationship. This is how the world keeps going.





Wisgaak Gokpenagen: A Black Ash Basket


			Doonk, doonk, doonk. Silence. Doonk, doonk, doonk.

			The back of the ax meets the log to make a hollow music. It drops three times on one spot and then John’s eyes shift a fraction down the log, where he strikes again. Doonk, doonk, doonk. As he raises the ax above his head, his hands slide apart on the upstroke, then together on the down, shoulders pulling tight under his chambray shirt, his thin braid jumping with every impact. All the way down the log he pounds triplets of crushing blows.

			Straddling the end of the log, he works his fingers under a split in the cut end and gives it a tug. Slow and steady, he peels off a strip of wood the width of the ax head in a thick ribbon. He takes up the ax and pounds another few feet. Doonk, doonk, doonk. Again he grasps the base of the strip and peels it back along the pounded line, taking the log apart strip by strip. By the time he pounds the last few feet, he has worked off an eight-foot splint of gleaming white wood. He holds it to his nose to breathe in the goodness of new wood and passes it around for us all to see. John coils it into a neat hoop, ties it fast, and hangs it on a nearby tree branch. “Your turn,” he says and hands off the ax.

			My teacher this warm summer day is John Pigeon, a member of the large, renowned Pigeon family of Potawatomi basket makers. Since that first initiation to pounding a log, I’m grateful to have sat in on black ash basket classes with several generations of the extended family of Pigeons—Steve, Kitt, Ed, Stephanie, Pearl, Angie, and more, children and grandchildren—with splints in their hands. All gifted basket makers, carriers of culture, and generous teachers. The log is a good teacher, too.

			It’s harder than it looks, making the ax repeat its pattern evenly down the log. Too much impact in one spot will break the fibers; too little and the strip won’t fully break free, leaving a thin spot. Each of us beginners works differently, some with sharp strokes from overhead, some with dull thudding as if we were hammering nails. The sound changes with the pounder: a high ringing note like the call of wild geese, a bark like a startled coyote’s, the muffled thumping of a drumming grouse.

			When John was a kid the sound of log pounding was heard all through the community. Walking home from school, he could tell who was out working by the sound of their swing. Uncle Chester was a hard, fast crack, crack, crack. From across the hedgerow he could hear Grandma Bell’s slow thuds separated by long pauses while she caught her breath. But now the village grows quieter and quieter as elders walk on and kids seem more interested in video games than in tromping through the swamp. So John Pigeon teaches any who will come, to pass on what he’s learned from his elders and the trees.

			John is both a master basket maker and a carrier of tradition. Pigeon family baskets can be found in the Smithsonian and other museums and galleries around the world. But they are also available here, at the family’s booth at the annual Potawatomi Gathering of Nations. Their table is loaded with colorful baskets, no two alike. There are fancy baskets the size of a bird’s nest, gathering baskets, potato baskets, corn-washing baskets. His whole family weaves, and no one at the Gathering wants to go home without a Pigeon basket. I save up each year for one.

			Like the rest of the family, John is also a master teacher, committed to sharing what has been passed on by generations who came before. What was given to him, he now gives back to the people. Some basket classes I’ve taken start with a neat pile of materials, all assembled on a clean table. But John doesn’t hold with teaching basket weaving where the splints come ready made—he teaches basket making, beginning with a living tree.


Black Ash (Fraxinus nigra) likes to have its feet wet. In floodplain forests and edges of swamps, black ash mingles with red maples, elms, and willows. It is never the most common tree—you only find it in scattered patches—so it can take a long day of tromping over boot-sucking ground to find the right tree. Scanning a wet forest, you can pick out the black ash by its bark. You pass by maples with bark of rigid gray plates, the braided corky ridges of elm, the deeply furrowed willows, and instead seek out the fine pattern of interlocked ridges and warty knobs of black ash. The knobs feel spongy under your fingertips when you give them a squeeze. There are other species of ash growing in the swamp, so it’s good to check the leaves overhead as well. All ashes— green, white, blue, pumpkin, and black—have compound leaves borne opposite one another on stout, corky twigs.

			And yet it’s not enough to simply find black ash; it has to be the right one—a tree ready to be a basket. An ideal basket ash has a straight, clear bole with no branches in the lower trunk. Branches make knots that interrupt the straight grain of the splint. A good tree is about a handbreadth across, the crown full and vigorous, a healthy tree. A tree that has grown directly up toward the sun will be straight and fine grained, while those that have wandered a bit to find the light show twists and turns in the grain. Some basket makers will choose only trees perched on a hummock in the swamp, while others will avoid a black ash growing next to a cedar.

			Trees are affected by their sapling days as much as people are by their childhoods. The history of a tree appears in its growth rings, of course. Good years yield a wide ring, poor years a thin one, and the pattern of rings is critical to the process of basket making.

			Growth rings are formed by the cycle of the seasons, by the waking and resting of the fragile layer of cells that lies between the bark and the newest wood, the cambium. Peel away the bark and you feel the cambium’s slippery wetness. The cells of the cambium are perpetually embryonic, always dividing to add to the girth of the tree. In the spring, when the buds detect the lengthening of the days and the sap starts to rise, the cambium grows cells made for feast days, big, wide-mouthed tubes to carry the abundant water leafward. These lines of large vessels are what you count to determine a tree’s age. They grow quickly and so their walls tend to be thin. Wood scientists call this part of the annual ring springwood or early wood. When spring turns to summer, nutrients and water become scarce and the cambium produces smaller, thicker cells for leaner times. These densely packed cells are called late wood or summerwood. When the days shorten and leaves fall, the cambium settles in for a winter’s rest and stops dividing altogether. But as soon as spring is imminent, the cambium once again bursts into action, making large springwood cells. The abrupt transition between the last year’s small-celled late wood and the early wood of spring creates the appearance of a line, a growth ring.

			John has developed a practiced eye for these things. But sometimes, just to be sure, he’ll unsheathe his knife and cut out a wedge for a look at the rings. John prefers a tree in the range of thirty to forty growth rings, each ring as wide as a nickel. When he’s found the right one, the harvest begins. Not with a saw, though, but rather with a conversation.

			Traditional harvesters recognize the individuality of each tree as a person, a nonhuman forest person. Trees are not taken, but requested. Respectfully, the cutter explains his purpose and the tree is asked permission for harvest. Sometimes the answer is no. It might be a cue in the surroundings—a vireo nest in the branches, or the bark’s adamant resistance to the questioning knife—that suggests a tree is not willing, or it might be the ineffable knowing that turns him away. If consent is granted, a prayer is made and tobacco is left as a reciprocating gift. The tree is felled with great care so as not to damage it or others in the fall. Sometimes a cutter will make a bed of spruce boughs to cushion the landing of the tree. When they finish, John and his son hoist the log to their shoulders and begin the long walk home.

			John and his extended family make a lot of baskets. His mother prefers to pound her own log, although he and the boys will often do it when her arthritis is bothering her. They’ll weave all year round, but there are certain seasons for the best harvest. It’s a good idea to pound a log soon after harvest, while it is still moist, although John says you can bury a log in a trench covered with damp earth to keep it fresh. His favorite times are spring—when “the sap is rising and the energy of the earth is flowing into the tree”—and fall, “when the energy is flowing back to the ground.”


Today, John scales away the spongy bark, which would deflect the power of the ax, and gets to work. When he pulls the edge of the first strip, you can see what’s happening: Beating the log crushes the thinwalled cells of the early wood, breaking them down and separating them from the late wood. The log fractures at the dividing line between springwood and summer, so the strip that peels off is the wood between annual rings.

			Depending on the individual history of the tree and its pattern of rings, a strip might come off carrying the wood of five years or sometimes just one. Every tree is different, but as the basket makers pound and peel, he is always moving back through time. The tree’s life is coming off in his hands, layer by layer. As the hoops of splint grow more numerous, the log itself grows smaller and within hours is a skinny pole. “See,” John shows us, “we’ve stripped all the way back to the time it was a sapling.” He gestures to the big pile of splint we’ve accumulated. “Don’t ever forget that. It’s the whole life of that tree you’ve got piled up there.”

			The long strips of wood vary in thickness, so the next step is splitting the strip into its component layers, further separating the annual rings. Thick splints are needed for a big laundry hamper or a trapper’s pack basket. The finest fancy baskets use only a ribbon of less than one year’s wood. From the back of his new white pickup, John pulls out his splitters: two pieces of wood joined with a clamp to make what looks like a giant clothespin. He sits on the edge of his chair and holds the splitter between his knees so its open legs are on the ground and the peaked end rises from his lap. He threads a full eight-foot length of splint up through the clamp and fastens it there with an inch or so protruding. He flicks open his knife and wedges the blade into the cut end of the strip, wiggling it along the growth ring to open a cut. His brown hands grasp either side of the cut and he pulls them apart in a smooth motion, yielding strips as smooth and even as two long blades of grass.

			“That’s all there is to it,” he says, but there’s laughter in his eyes as they meet mine. I thread the splint, try to balance the splitter steady between my thighs, and then make the cut that will start the split. I discover quickly that you need to grip the splitter hard between your legs—something I can barely manage. “Yup,” John laughs, “this is an old Indian invention—the thigh master!” By the time I’m through, my splint looks like a chipmunk has been gnawing on the end. John is a patient teacher, but he won’t do it for me. He just smiles, smartly severs my frayed end, and says, “Try it again.” Eventually I get two sides that I can pull, but they’re uneven and my pulling yields only a twelve-inch splinter, thin on one side, thick on the other. John circles among us, offering encouragement. He has learned everyone’s name and picked up something of what each one of us needs. Some he joshes about their weak biceps, others he pats warmly on the shoulder. With the frustrated he sits gently alongside and says, “Don’t try so hard. Be easier on yourself.” For others, he just pulls the strip and gives it to them. He’s as good a judge of people as he is of trees.

			“This tree’s a good teacher,” he says. “That’s what we’ve always been taught. The work of being a human is finding balance, and making splints will not let you forget it.”

			When you get the hang of it, the splint pulls apart evenly, the inner faces of the splint unexpectedly beautiful: glossy and warm, they catch the light like a ribbon of cream satin. The outer surface is uneven and roughened with splintered ends that leave long “hairs.”

			“You need a very sharp knife now,” he says. “I have to use the whetstone every day. And it’s awfully easy to cut yourself.” John hands each of us a “leg,” cut from worn blue jeans, and shows us how to lay the double thickness of denim over our left thighs. “Deerskin is really the best thing to use,” he says, “if you’ve got some lying around. But blue jeans work fine. Just be careful.” He sits with us individually to demonstrate, for the difference between success and bloodshed is a small degree in the angle of the knife and the pressure of the hand. He lays the strip across his thigh, rough side up, and sets the knife edge against it. With his other hand, he draws the strip out from beneath the knife in a continuous motion like a skate blade skimming over ice. The shavings gather on the knife as the strip pulls by. The result is a polished surface. This too he makes look easy. I’ve seen Kitt Pigeon pull satiny strips as if she were pulling ribbon from a spool, but my knife snags and I end up cutting gouges instead of planing it smooth. The angle of my knife is too sharp and I cut right through, rendering a long pretty strip into a scrap.

			“You’re about up to a loaf of bread,” John says, shaking his head when I ruin yet another piece. “That’s what my mother would say when we spoiled splints.” Basket making was and is the livelihood of the Pigeon family. In their grandfather’s time the lake, woods, and gardens gave them most of their food and other provisions, but at times they also needed store goods, and baskets were the cash crop that bought bread, canned peaches, and school shoes. Spoiled splints were like food thrown away. Depending on the size and design, a black ash basket can sell for good money. “People get a little mad when they see the prices,” John says. “People think it’s ‘just’ basket weaving, but 80 percent of the work comes long before you weave. With finding the tree, pounding and pulling, and all, you barely make minimum wage.”

			With splints finally prepared, we’re poised for weaving—what we had mistakenly thought was the real work of a basket. But John stops the class, his gentle voice gaining a hard edge. “You’ve missed the most important thing,” he says. “Look around you.” We look—at the forest, at the camp, at each other. “At the ground! ” he says. In a circle around each novice is a litter of scraps. “Stop and think what you’re holding. That ash tree was growing out there in that swamp for thirty years, putting out leaves, dropping them, putting out more. It got eaten by deer, hit by a freeze, but it kept working year in and year out, laying down those rings of wood. A splint fallen on the ground is a whole year of that tree’s life and you’re about to step on it, bend it, grind it into the dirt? That tree honored you with its life. There’s no shame in messing up a splint; you’re just learning. But whatever you do, you owe that tree respect and should never waste it.” And so he guides us as we sort through the debris we’ve made. Short strips go into a pile for small baskets and decoration. The miscellaneous bits and shavings get tossed into a box to be dried and used for tinder. John keeps to the tradition of the Honorable Harvest: take only what you need and use everything you take.

			His words echo what I’ve often heard from my folks. They grew up during the Depression, with the imperative not to waste, and there were certainly no scraps on the floor then. But “use it up, wear it out, make it do, or do without” is an ethic both economical and ecological. The waste of splints both dishonors the tree and diminishes the household budget.

			Just about everything we use is the result of another’s life, but that simple reality is rarely acknowledged in our society. The ash curls we make are almost paper thin. They say that the “waste stream” in this country is dominated by paper. Just as much as an ash splint, a sheet of paper is a tree’s life, along with the water and energy and toxic byproducts that went into making it. And yet we use it as if it were nothing. The short path from mailbox to waste bin tells the story. But what would happen, I wonder, to the mountain of junk mail if we could see in it the trees it once had been? If John was there to remind us of the worthiness of their lives?

			In some parts of the range, basket makers began to observe a decline in the numbers of black ash. They worried that overharvesting might be to blame, a decline caused by too much attention for the baskets in the marketplace and too little for their sources in the woods. My graduate student Tom Touchet and I decided to investigate. We began by analyzing the population structure of black ashes around us in New York State, to understand where in the trees’ life cycle the difficulty might lie. In every swamp we visited, we counted all the black ash we could find and wrapped a tape around them to get their size. Tom cored a few in every site to check their ages. In stand after stand, Tom found that there were old trees and seedlings, but hardly any trees in between. There was a big hole in the demographic census. He found plenty of seeds, plenty of young seedlings, but most of the next age class—the saplings, the future of the forest—were dead or missing.

			There were only two places where he found an abundance of adolescent trees. One was in gaps in the forest canopy, where disease or a windstorm had brought down a few old trees, letting light through. Curiously enough, he found that where Dutch elm disease had killed off elms, black ash was replacing them in a balance between loss of one species and gain of another. To make the transition from seedling to tree, the young black ash needed an opening. If they remained in full shade they would die.

			The other place where saplings were thriving was near communities of basket makers. Where the tradition of black ash basketry was alive and well, so were the trees. We hypothesized that the apparent decline in ash trees might be due not to overharvesting but to underharvesting. When communities echoed with Doonk, doonk, doonk, there were plenty of basket makers in the woods, creating gaps where the light would reach the seedlings and the young trees could shoot to the canopy and become adults. In places where the basket makers disappeared, or were few, the forest didn’t get opened up enough for black ash to flourish.

			Black ash and basket makers are partners in a symbiosis between harvesters and harvested: ash relies on people as the people rely on ash. Their fates are linked.

			The Pigeons’ teaching of this linkage is part of a growing movement to revive traditional basketry, tied to the revitalization of indigenous lands, language, culture, and philosophies. All over Turtle Island, Native peoples are leading a resurgence in traditional knowledge and lifeways that nearly disappeared under the pressures of newcomers. But just as the revival of ash basketry is gaining strength, it is being threatened by yet another invading species.

			John sends us off for a break, a cool drink, and a stretch for tired fingers. “You need a clear mind for the next part,” he says. As we mill about, shaking out the cramps in our necks and hands, John gives us each a U.S. Department of Agriculture pamphlet with a photo of a shiny green beetle on the cover. “If you care about ash trees,” he says, “you’d better pay attention. They’re under attack.”

			The emerald ash borer, introduced from China, lays its eggs in tree trunks. After the larvae hatch, they chew up the cambium until they pupate, when the beetle bores its way out of the tree and flies off to find a new nursery. But wherever it lands, it is inevitably fatal for the infested trees. Unfortunately for the people of the Great Lakes region and New England, the beetle’s favorite host is ash. Today there is a quarantine on moving logs and firewood in an effort to contain their spread, but the insect is moving faster than scientists predicted.

			“So, be on the lookout,” John says. “We have to protect our trees, that’s our job.” When he and his family are harvesting logs in the fall, they take special care to gather up fallen seeds and spread them around as they move through the wetlands. “It’s like anything else,” he reminds us. “You can’t take something without giving back. This tree takes care of us, so we have to take care of it.”

			Already, vast areas of ash in Michigan have died; beloved basket grounds are now boneyards of barkless trees. There is a rupture in the chain of relationship that stretches back through time immemorial. The swamp where the Pigeons have gathered and cared for black ash for generations is now infested. Angie Pigeon writes, “Our trees are all gone. I don’t know if there will be any more baskets.” To most people, an invasive species represents losses in a landscape, the empty spaces to be filled by something else. To those who carry the responsibility of an ancient relationship, the empty niche means empty hands and a hole in the collective heart.

			Now, when so many trees have fallen and the tradition passed on by generations is at risk, the Pigeons work to protect both trees and the tradition. They are partnering with forest scientists to resist the insect and to adapt to its aftermath. There are reweavers among us.

			John and his family are not alone in their efforts to protect the black ash. At Akwesasne, a Mohawk reserve that straddles the border between New York State and Canada, black ash has yet more guardians. Over the past three decades, Les Benedict, Richard David, and Mike Bridgen have led an effort to bring traditional ecological knowledge as well as scientific tools to bear in the protection of black ash. They have grown thousands of black ash seedlings to give away to indigenous communities throughout the region. Les even convinced the New York State Tree Nursery to grow them for planting in places ranging from school yards to Superfund sites. Thousands had already been planted in resurgent forests, in resurgent communities, just as the ash borer appeared on our shores.

			As the threat wings its way closer to their homelands every fall, Les and his colleagues gather the willing to collect the best seeds they can find, storing seed to keep faith with the future, to replant the forest after the wave of invasion has passed. Every species needs its Les Benedict, its Pigeon family, its allies and protectors. Many of our traditional teachings recognize that certain species are our helpers and guides. The Original Instructions remind us that we must return the favor. It is an honor to be the guardian of another species—an honor within each person’s reach that we too often forget. A Black Ash basket is a gift that reminds us of the gifts of other beings, gifts we can gratefully return through advocacy and care.


John calls us back to the circle for the next step: assembling the bottom of the basket. We’re doing a traditional round bottom, so the first two strips are laid out at right angles in a symmetrical cross. Easy. “Now take a look at what you’ve done,” John says. “You’ve started with the four directions in front of you. It’s the heart of your basket. Everything else is built around that.” Our people honor the four sacred directions and the powers resident there. Where the two basket strips meet, at the intersection of those four directions, is right where we stand as humans, trying to find balance among them. “See there,” John says, “everything we do in life is sacred. The four directions are what we build on. That’s why we start like that.”

			Once the eight spokes of the framework are twined into place with the thinnest possible strips, each basket begins to grow. We look to John for the next set of instructions, but there are none. He says, “You’re on your own now. The design of the basket is up to you. No one can tell you what to create.” We have thick and thin splints to work with, and John shakes out a bag full of brightly dyed splints in every color. The tangled pile looks like the singing ribbons on the men’s ribbon shirts in the evening powwows. “Just think of the tree and all its hard work before you start,” he says. “It gave its life for this basket, so you know your responsibility. Make something beautiful in return.”

			Responsibility to the tree makes everyone pause before beginning. Sometimes I have that same sense when I face a blank sheet of paper. For me, writing is an act of reciprocity with the world; it is what I can give back in return for everything that has been given to me. And now there’s another layer of responsibility, writing on a thin sheet of tree and hoping the words are worth it. Such a thought could make a person set down her pen.

			The first two rows of the basket are the hardest. On the first goround, the splint seems to have a will of its own and wants to wander from the over-under rhythm around the circle. It resists the pattern and looks all loose and wobbly. This is when John steps in to help, offering encouragement and a steady hand to anchor the escaping splints. The second row is almost as frustrating; the spacing is all wrong and you have to clamp the weaver in place to get it to stay. Even then, it comes loose and slaps you in the face with its wet end. John just laughs. It is a mess of unruly pieces, nothing like a whole. But then there’s the third row—my favorite. At this point, the tension of over is balanced by the tension of under, and the opposing forces start to come into balance. The give and take—reciprocity—begins to take hold and the parts begin to become a whole. The weaving becomes easy as splints fall snugly into place. Order and stability emerge out of chaos.

			In weaving well-being for land and people, we need to pay attention to the lessons of the three rows. Ecological well-being and the laws of nature are always the first row. Without them, there is no basket of plenty. Only if that first circle is in place can we weave the second. The second reveals material welfare, the subsistence of human needs. Economy built upon ecology. But with only two rows in place, the basket is still in jeopardy of pulling apart. It’s only when the third row comes that the first two can hold together. Here is where ecology, economics, and spirit are woven together. By using materials as if they were a gift, and returning that gift through worthy use, we find balance. I think that third row goes by many names: Respect. Reciprocity. All Our Relations. I think of it as the spirit row. Whatever the name, the three rows represent recognition that our lives depend on one another, human needs being only one row in the basket that must hold us all. In relationship, the separate splints become a whole basket, sturdy and resilient enough to carry us into the future.

			While we’re working, a gaggle of little kids comes by to watch. John is pulled in many directions to help us all, but he stops and gives his full attention to the boys. They’re too little to join in, but they want to be there, so he takes up a handful of the short strips from our debris. His hands, now deliberate and slow, bend and twist the strips until a few minutes later a little toy horse sits in the palm of his hand. He gives the boys some scraps, the model, and a few words in Potawatomi, but doesn’t tell them how to make a horse. They’re used to this kind of teaching and don’t ask questions. They look and look some more and then set to work to figure it out. Before long, a herd of horses is galloping over the table and little boys are watching baskets grow.

			Toward the end of the afternoon, in the lengthening shadows, the work table begins to fill with completed baskets. John helps us add the decorative curls that are traditional on small baskets. The black ash ribbons are so flexible that you can embroider the surface of the basket with loops and twists that show off the glossy sheen of the ash. We’ve made low round trays, tall thin vases, plump apple baskets in textures and colors of every kind. “Here’s the last step,” he says, handing out Sharpie markers. “You’ve got to sign your basket. Take pride in what you did. That basket didn’t make itself. Claim it, mistakes and all.” He makes us line up for a photograph, all holding our baskets. “This is a special occasion,” he says, beaming like a proud father. “Look what you’ve learned today. I want you to see what the baskets have shown you. Every one of them is beautiful. Every one of them is different and yet every one of them began in the same tree. They are all made of the same stuff and yet each is itself. That’s the way it is with our people, too, all made of the same thing and each their own kind of beautiful.” That night I see the powwow circle with new eyes. I notice that

			the cedar arbor sheltering the drums is supported by poles set in the four directions. The drum, the heartbeat, calls us out to dance. There is one beat, but each dancer has a distinctive step: dipping grass dancers, crouching buffalo dancers, the twirl of fancy shawl dancers, high-stepping jingle-dress girls, the dignified pace of the women’s traditional dancers. Each man, each woman, each child, all dressed in their dreamed-of colors, ribbons flying, fringes swaying, all beautiful, all dancing to the heartbeat. Around the circle we go all night, together weaving a basket.


Today, my house is full of baskets and my favorites are Pigeons. In them I can hear John’s voice, can hear the doonk, doonk, doonk, and smell the swamp. They remind me of the years of a tree’s life that I hold in my hands. What would it be like, I wondered, to live with that heightened sensitivity to the lives given for ours? To consider the tree in the Kleenex, the algae in the toothpaste, the oaks in the floor, the grapes in the wine; to follow back the thread of life in everything and pay it respect? Once you start, it’s hard to stop, and you begin to feel yourself awash in gifts.

			I open the cupboard, a likely place for gifts. I think, “I greet you, jar of jam. You glass who once was sand upon the beach, washed back and forth and bathed in foam and seagull cries, but who are formed into a glass until you once again return to the sea. And you, berries, plump in your June-ness, now in my February pantry. And you, sugar, so far from your Caribbean home—thanks for making the trip.”

			In that awareness, looking over the objects on my desk—the basket, the candle, the paper—I delight in following their origins back to the ground. I twirl a pencil—a magic wand lathed from incense cedar— between my fingers. The willow bark in the aspirin. Even the metal of my lamp asks me to consider its roots in the strata of the earth. But I notice that my eyes and my thoughts pass quickly over the plastic on my desk. I hardly give the computer a second glance. I can muster no reflective moment for plastic. It is so far removed from the natural world. I wonder if that’s a place where the disconnection began, the loss of respect, when we could no longer easily see the life within the object.

			And yet I mean no disrespect for the diatoms and marine invertebrates who two hundred million years ago lived well and fell to the bottom of an ancient sea, where under great pressure of a shifting earth they became oil that was pumped from the ground to a refinery where it was broken down and then polymerized to make the case of my laptop or the cap of the aspirin bottle—but being mindful in the vast network of hyperindustrialized goods really gives me a headache. We weren’t made for that sort of constant awareness. We’ve got work to do.

			But every once in a while, with a basket in hand, or a peach or a pencil, there is that moment when the mind and spirit open to all the connections, to all the lives and our responsibility to use them well. And just in that moment, I can hear John Pigeon say, “Slow down— it’s thirty years of a tree’s life you’ve got in your hands there. Don’t you owe it a few minutes to think about what you’ll do with it?”





Mishkos Kenomagwen: The Teachings of Grass



i. Introduction

			You can smell it before you see it, a sweetgrass meadow on a summer day. The scent flickers on the breeze, you sniff like a dog on a scent, and then it’s gone, replaced by the boggy tang of wet ground. And then it’s back, the sweet vanilla fragrance, beckoning.


ii. Literature Review

			Lena is not fooled easily, though. She wanders into the meadow with the certainty of her years, parting grasses with her slender form. A tiny, gray-haired elder, she is up to her waist in grass. She casts her gaze over all the other species and then makes a beeline to a patch that to the uninitiated looks like all the rest. She runs a ribbon of grass through the thumb and forefinger of her wrinkled brown hand. “See how glossy it is? It can hide from you among the others, but it wants to be found. That’s why it shines like this.” But she passes this patch by, letting it slide through her fingers. She obeys the teachings of her ancestors to never take the first plant that you see.

			I follow behind her as her hands trail lovingly over the boneset and the goldenrod. She spies a gleam in the sward and her step quickens. “Ah, Bozho,” she says. Hello. From the pocket of her old nylon jacket she takes her pouch, deerskin with a beaded red edge, and shakes a little tobacco into the palm of her hand. Eyes closed, murmuring, she raises a hand to the four directions and then scatters the tobacco to the ground. “You know this,” she says, her eyebrows a question mark. “To always leave a gift for the plants, to ask if we might take them? It would be rude not to ask first.” Only then does she stoop and pinch off a grass stem at its base, careful not to disturb the roots. She parts the nearby clumps, finding another and another until she has gathered a thick sheaf of shining stems. A winding path marks her progress where the meadow canopy was opened by the trail of her passage.

			She passes right by many dense patches, leaving them to sway in the breeze. “It’s our way,” she says, “to take only what we need. I’ve always been told that you never take more than half.” Sometimes she doesn’t take any at all, but just comes here to check on the meadow, to see how the plants are doing. “Our teachings,” she says, “are very strong. They wouldn’t get handed on if they weren’t useful. The most important thing to remember is what my grandmother always said: ‘If we use a plant respectfully it will stay with us and flourish. If we ignore it, it will go away. If you don’t give it respect it will leave us.’” The plants themselves have shown us this—mishkos kenomagwen. As we leave the meadow for the path back through the woods, she twists a handful of timothy into a loose knot upon itself, beside the trail. “This tells other pickers that I’ve been here,” she says, “so that they know not to take any more. This place always gives good sweetgrass since we tend to it right. But other places it’s getting hard to find. I’m thinking that they might not be picking right. Some people, they’re in a hurry and they pull up the whole plant. Even the roots come up. That’s not the way I was taught.”

			I’ve been with pickers who did that, yanking up a handful that left a little bare spot in the turf and a fuzz of broken roots on the uprooted stems. They too made offerings of tobacco and took only half, and they assured me that their method of picking was the correct one. They were defensive about the charges that their harvesting was depleting sweetgrass. I asked Lena about it and she just shrugged.


iii. Hypothesis

			In many places, sweetgrass is disappearing from its historic locales, so the basket makers had a request for the botanists: to see if the different ways of harvesting might be the cause of sweetgrass’s leaving.

			I want to help, but I’m a little wary. Sweetgrass is not an experimental unit for me; it’s a gift. There is a barrier of language and meaning between science and traditional knowledge, different ways of knowing, different ways of communicating. I’m not sure I want to force the teachings of grass into the tight uniform of scientific thinking and technical writing that is required of the academy: Introduction, Literature Review, Hypothesis, Methods, Results, Discussion, Conclusions, Acknowledgments, References Cited. But I’ve been asked on behalf of sweetgrass, and I know my responsibility.

			To be heard, you must speak the language of the one you want to listen. So, back at school, I proposed the idea as a thesis project to my graduate student Laurie. Not content with purely academic questions, she had been looking for a research project that would, as she said, “mean something to someone” instead of just sitting on the shelf.


iv. Methods

			Laurie was eager to begin, but she hadn’t met Sweetgrass before. “It’s the grass that will teach you,” I advised, “so you have to get to know it.” I took her out to our restored sweetgrass meadows and it was love at first sniff. It didn’t take her long to recognize Sweetgrass after that. It was as if the plant wanted her to find it.

			Together we designed experiments to compare the effects of the two harvesting methods the basket makers had explained. Laurie’s education so far was full of the scientific method, but I wanted her to live out a slightly different style of research. To me, an experiment is a kind of conversation with plants: I have a question for them, but since we don’t speak the same language, I can’t ask them directly and they won’t answer verbally. But plants can be eloquent in their physical responses and behaviors. Plants answer questions by the way they live, by their responses to change; you just need to learn how to ask. I smile when I hear my colleagues say “I discovered X.” That’s kind of like Columbus claiming to have discovered America. It was here all along, it’s just that he didn’t know it. Experiments are not about discovery but about listening and translating the knowledge of other beings.

			My colleagues might scoff at the notion of basket makers as scientists, but when Lena and her daughters take 50 percent of the sweetgrass, observe the result, evaluate their findings, and then create management guidelines from them, that sounds a lot like experimental science to me. Generations of data collection and validation through time builds up to well-tested theories.

			At my university, as at many others, graduate students must present their thesis ideas to a faculty committee. Laurie did a wonderful job of outlining the proposed experiment, ably describing multiple study sites, the many replicates, and intensive sampling techniques. But when she was through speaking there was an uneasy silence in the conference room. One professor shuffled through the proposal pages and pushed them aside dismissively. “I don’t see anything new here for science,” he said. “There’s not even a theoretical framework.”

			A theory, to scientists, means something rather different from its popular use, which suggests something speculative or untested. A scientific theory is a cohesive body of knowledge, an explanation that is consistent among a range of cases and can allow you to predict what might happen in unknown situations. Like this one. Our research was most definitely grounded in theory—Lena’s, primarily—in the traditional ecological knowledge of indigenous peoples: If we use a plant respectfully, it will flourish. If we ignore it, it will go away. This is a theory generated from millennia of observations of plant response to harvest, subject to peer review by generations of practitioners, from basket makers to herbalists. Despite the weight of this truth, the committee could only struggle not to roll their eyes.

			The dean looked over the glasses that had slid down his nose, fixing Laurie with a pointed stare and directing a sidelong glance toward me. “Anyone knows that harvesting a plant will damage the population. You’re wasting your time. And I’m afraid I don’t find this whole traditional knowledge thing very convincing.” Like the former schoolteacher she was, Laurie was unfailingly calm and gracious as she explained further, but her eyes were steely.

			Later, though, they were filled with tears. Mine, too. In the early years, no matter how carefully you prepared, this was nearly a rite of passage for women scientists—the condescension, the verbal smackdown from academic authorities, especially if you had the audacity to ground your work in the observations of old women who had probably not finished high school, and talked to plants to boot.

			Getting scientists to consider the validity of indigenous knowledge is like swimming upstream in cold, cold water. They’ve been so conditioned to be skeptical of even the hardest of hard data that bending their minds toward theories that are verified without the expected graphs or equations is tough. Couple that with the unblinking assumption that science has cornered the market on truth and there’s not much room for discussion.

			Undeterred, we carried on. The basket makers had given us the prerequisites of the scientific method: observation, pattern, and a testable hypothesis. That sounded like science to me. So we began by setting up experimental plots in the meadows to ask the plants the question “Do these two different harvest methods contribute to decline?” And then we tried to detect their answer. We chose dense sweetgrass stands where the population had been restored rather than compromising native stands where pickers were active.

			With incredible patience, Laurie did a census of the sweetgrass population in every plot to obtain precise measures of population density prior to harvest. She even marked individual stems of grass with colored plastic ties to keep track of them. When all had been tallied, she then began the harvest.

			The plots were subject to one of the two harvest methods the basket makers had described. Laurie took half of the stems in each plot, pinching them off one by one carefully at the base in some plots and yanking up a tuft and leaving a small ragged gap in the sod in others. Experiments must have controls, of course, so she left an equal number of plots alone and did not harvest them at all. Pink flagging festooned the meadows to mark her study areas.

			One day in the field we sat in the sun and talked about whether the method really duplicated the traditional harvest. “I know that it doesn’t,” she said, “because I’m not replicating the relationship. I don’t speak to the plants or make an offering.” She had wrestled with this but settled on excluding it: “I honor that traditional relationship, but I couldn’t ever do it as part of an experiment. It wouldn’t be right on any level—to add a variable that I don’t understand and that science can’t even attempt to measure. And besides, I’m not qualified to speak to sweetgrass.” Later, she admitted that it was hard to stay neutral in her research and avoid affection for the plants; after so many days among them, learning and listening, neutrality proved impossible. Eventually she was just careful to show them all her mindful respect, making her care a constant as well, so that she would not sway the results one way or the other. The sweetgrass she harvested was counted, weighed, and given away to basket makers.

			Every few months, Laurie counted and marked all the grass in her plots: dead shoots, living ones, and brand-new shoots just pushing up from the ground. She charted the birth, the death, and the reproduction of all her grass stems. When the next July rolled around she harvested once more, just as women were doing in the native stands. For two years she harvested and measured the response of the grass along with a team of student interns. It was a little tough at first to recruit student helpers given that their task would be watching grass grow.


v. Results

			Laurie observed carefully and filled her notebook with measurements, charting the vigor of each plot. She worried a little when the control plots were looking a little sickly. She was relying on these controls, the unharvested patches, to be the reference point for comparing the effects of harvesting in the other plots. We hoped they would perk up when spring came.

			By the second year, Laurie was expecting her first child. The grass grew and grew, as did her belly. Bending and stooping became a little more difficult, to say nothing of lying in the grass to read plant tags. But she was faithful to her plants, sitting in the dirt among them, counting and marking. She said the quiet of fieldwork, the calm of sitting in a flower-strewn meadow with the smell of sweetgrass all around, was a good beginning for a baby. I think she was right.

			As the summer wore on, it became a race to finish the research before the baby was born. Just weeks away from delivery, it became a team effort. When Laurie was done with a plot, she would call out for her field crew to help hoist her to her feet. This too was a rite of passage for women field biologists.

			As her baby grew, Laurie came to believe with increasing conviction in the knowledge of her basket-making mentors, recognizing, as Western science often does not, the quality of observations from the women who had long had close relationships with plants and their habitats. They shared many of their teachings with her, and they knit many baby hats.

			Baby Celia was born in the early fall, and a braid of sweetgrass was hung over her crib. While Celia slept nearby, Laurie put her data on the computer and began to make the comparisons between the harvesting methods. From the twist ties on every stem, Laurie could chart the births and deaths in the sample plots. Some plots were full of new young shoots that signaled a thriving population, and some were not.

			Her statistical analyses were all sound and thorough, but she hardly needed graphs to tell the story. From across the field you could see the difference: some plots gleamed shiny golden green and some were dull and brown. The committee’s criticism hovered in her mind: “Anyone knows that harvesting a plant will damage the population.”

			The surprise was that the failing plots were not the harvested ones, as predicted, but the unharvested controls. The sweetgrass that had not been picked or disturbed in any way was choked with dead stems while the harvested plots were thriving. Even though half of all stems had been harvested each year, they quickly grew back, completely replacing everything that had been gathered, in fact producing more shoots than were present before harvest. Picking sweetgrass seemed to actually stimulate growth. In the first year’s harvest, the plants that grew the very best were the ones that had been yanked up in a handful. But, whether it was pinched singly or pulled in a clump, the end result was nearly the same: it didn’t seem to matter how the grass was harvested, only that it was.

			Laurie’s graduate committee had dismissed this possibility from the outset. They had been taught that harvesting causes decline. And yet the grasses themselves unequivocally argued the opposite point. After the grilling Laurie received over her research proposal, you might imagine she was dreading the thesis defense. But she had one thing skeptical scientists value most: data. While Celia slept in her proud father’s arms, Laurie presented her graphs and tables to demonstrate that sweetgrass flourishes when it’s harvested and declines when it is not. The doubting dean was silent. The basket makers smiled.


vi. Discussion

			We are all the product of our worldviews—even scientists who claim pure objectivity. Their predictions for sweetgrass were consistent with their Western science worldview, which sets human beings outside of “nature” and judges their interactions with other species as largely negative. They had been schooled that the best way to protect a dwindling species was to leave it alone and keep people away. But the grassy meadows tell us that for sweetgrass, human beings are part of the system, a vital part. Laurie’s findings might have been surprising to academic ecologists but were consistent with the theory voiced by our ancestors. “If we use a plant respectfully it will stay with us and flourish. If we ignore it, it will go away.”

			“Your experiment seems to demonstrate a significant effect,” said the dean. “But how do you explain it? Are you implying that the grass that was unharvested had its feelings hurt by being ignored? What is the mechanism responsible for this?”

			Laurie admitted that the scientific literature held no explanations for the relationship between basket makers and sweetgrass since such questions were not generally deemed worthy of scientific attention. She turned to studies of how grasses respond to other factors, such as fire or grazing. She discovered that the stimulated growth she had observed was well known to range scientists. After all, grasses are beautifully adapted to disturbance—it’s why we plant lawns. When we mow them they multiply. Grasses carry their growing points just beneath the soil surface so that when their leaves are lost to a mower, a grazing animal, or a fire, they quickly recover.

			She explained how harvesting thinned the population, allowing the remaining shoots to respond to the extra space and light by reproducing quickly. Even the pulling method was beneficial. The underground stem that connects the shoots is dotted with buds. When it’s gently tugged, the stem breaks and all those buds produce thrifty young shoots to fill the gap.

			Many grasses undergo a physiological change known as compensatory growth in which the plant compensates for loss of foliage by quickly growing more. It seems counterintuitive, but when a herd of buffalo grazes down a sward of fresh grass, it actually grows faster in response. This helps the plant recover, but also invites the buffalo back for dinner later in the season. It’s even been discovered that there is an enzyme in the saliva of grazing buffalo that actually stimulates grass growth. To say nothing of the fertilizer produced by a passing herd. Grass gives to buffalo and buffalo give to grass.

			The system is well balanced, but only if the herd uses the grass respectfully. Free-range buffalo graze and move on, not returning to the same place for many months. Thus they obey the rule of not taking more than half, of not overgrazing. Why shouldn’t it also be true for people and sweetgrass? We are no more than the buffalo and no less, governed by the same natural laws.

			With a long, long history of cultural use, sweetgrass has apparently become dependent on humans to create the “disturbance” that stimulates its compensatory growth. Humans participate in a symbiosis in which sweetgrass provides its fragrant blades to the people and people, by harvesting, create the conditions for sweetgrass to flourish.

			It’s intriguing to wonder whether the regional decline in sweetgrass might be due not to overharvesting but rather to underharvesting. Laurie and I pored over the map of historical locations for sweetgrass created by a former student, Daniela Shebitz. There were blue dots where sweetgrass used to be found but has since disappeared. Red dots marked the few places where sweetgrass was reported historically and where it is still thriving. These red dots are not randomly scattered. They are clustered around Native communities, particularly those known for their sweetgrass basketry. Sweetgrass thrives where it is used and disappears elsewhere.

			Science and traditional knowledge may ask different questions and speak different languages, but they may converge when both truly listen to the plants. To relate the story the ancestors told us to the academics in the room, however, we needed to use scientific explanations expressed in the language of mechanism and objectification: “If we remove 50 percent of the plant biomass, the stems are released from resource competition. The stimulus of compensatory growth causes an increase in population density and plant vigor. In the absence of disturbance, resource depletion and competition result in a loss of vigor and increased mortality.”

			The scientists gave Laurie a warm round of applause. She had spoken their language and made a convincing case for the stimulatory effect of harvesters, indeed for the reciprocity between harvesters and sweetgrass. One even retracted his initial criticism that this research would “add nothing new to science.” The basket makers who sat at the table simply nodded their heads in agreement. Wasn’t this just as the elders have said?

			The question was, how do we show respect? Sweetgrass told us the answer as we experimented: sustainable harvesting can be the way we treat a plant with respect, by respectfully receiving its gift.

			Perhaps it is no coincidence that it is Sweetgrass that reveals this story. Wiingaashk was the first to be planted by Skywoman on the back of Turtle Island. The grass gives its fragrant self to us and we receive it with gratitude. In return, through the very act of accepting the gift, the pickers open some space, let the light come in, and with a gentle tug bestir the dormant buds that make new grass. Reciprocity is a matter of keeping the gift in motion through self-perpetuating cycles of giving and receiving.

			Our elders taught that the relationship between plants and humans must be one of balance. People can take too much and exceed the capacity of the plants to share again. That’s the voice of hard experience that resonates in the teachings of “never take more than half.” And yet, they also teach that we can take too little. If we allow traditions to die, relationships to fade, the land will suffer. These laws are the product of hard experience, of past mistakes. And not all plants are the same; each has its own way of regenerating. Some, unlike sweetgrass, are easily harmed by harvest. Lena would say that the key is to know them well enough to respect the difference.


vii. Conclusions

			With their tobacco and their thanks, our people say to the Sweetgrass, “I need you.” By its renewal after picking, the grass says to the people, “I need you, too.”

			Mishkos kenomagwen. Isn’t this the lesson of grass? Through reciprocity the gift is replenished. All of our flourishing is mutual.


viii. Acknowledgments

			In a field of tall grass, with only the wind for company, there is a language that transcends the differences between scientific and traditional understandings, the data or the prayer. The wind moves through and carries the grass song. It sounds to me like mishhhhkos, over and over again on ripples of moving grass. After all it has taught us, I want to say thank you.


ix. References Cited

			Wiingaashk, Buffalo, Lena, the Ancestors.





Maple Nation: A Citizenship Guide


			There’s just one gas station in my community. It’s right there at the stoplight, also the only one. You get the picture. I’m sure that it has an official name, but we just call it the Pompey Mall. Coffee, milk, ice, dog food, you can get most anything essential to life at the mall. Duct tape to hold things together and wd-40 to get them apart. There are tins of last year’s maple syrup, which I pass up, since I’m on my way to the sugar house where new syrup awaits. The clientele runs largely to pickup trucks and now and then a Prius. There aren’t any snowmobiles revving at the pumps today, because the snow is just about gone.

			Since it’s the only place to fuel up, the lines are often long and today people stand outside in the spring sunshine, leaning against the cars, waiting their turn. Conversation, like the shelves inside, tends toward essentials—the price of gas, how the sap is running, who’s got their taxes done. Sugaring season and tax season overlap around here.

			“Between the price of gas and the tax man, I’m just about bled dry,” Kerm gripes as he replaces the nozzle and wipes his hands on greasy Carhartts. “Now they want to raise taxes for a windmill down to the school? All on account of global warming. Not on my dime.” One of our town officials is ahead of me in line. She’s an ample woman, a former social studies teacher at the school, and does not hesitate to wag a finger in the banter. She probably had Kerm in class. “You don’t like it? Don’t complain if you’re not there. Show up to a damn meeting.”

			There’s still snow under the trees, a bright blanket beneath the gray trunks and the blush of reddening maple buds. Last night, a tiny sliver of moon hung in the deep-blue dark of early spring. That new moon ushers in our Anishinaabe new year—the Zizibaskwet Giizis, Maple Sugar Moon. It is when the earth starts to wake up from her well-deserved rest and renews her gifts to the people. To celebrate, I’m going sugaring.

			I received my census form today; it’s on the seat beside me as I drive out through the hills toward the sugarbush. If you took a biologically inclusive census of the people in this town, the maples would outnumber humans a hundred to one. In our Anishinaabe way, we count trees as people, “the standing people.” Even though the government only counts humans in our township, there’s no denying that we live in the nation of maples.

			There’s a beautiful map of bioregions drawn by an organization dedicated to restoring ancient food traditions. State boundaries disappear and are replaced by ecological regions, defined by the leading denizens of the region, the iconic beings who shape the landscape, influence our daily lives, and feed us—both materially and spiritually. The map shows the Salmon Nation of the Pacific Northwest and the Pinyon Nation of the Southwest, among others. We in the Northeast are in the embrace of the Maple Nation.

			I’m thinking about what it would mean to declare citizenship in Maple Nation. Kerm would probably answer with two terse words of resentment: pay taxes. And he’s right, being a citizen does mean sharing in the support of your community.

			Here it is, almost tax day, when my fellow humans are getting ready to make their contribution to the well-being of the community, but the maples have been giving all year long. Their contribution of limb wood kept my old neighbor Mr. Keller’s house warm all winter when he couldn’t pay the oil bill. The volunteer fire department and the ambulance squad as well rely on maple contributions to their monthly pancake breakfast, to raise funds for a new engine. The trees make a real dent in the energy bill for the school with their shade, and, thanks to big canopies of maples, nobody I know ever pays a bill for air-conditioning. They donate shade to the Memorial Day parade every year without even being asked. If it weren’t for the maples’ ability to break the wind, the highway department would have to plow snowdrifts off the road twice as often.

			Both of my parents have been active in their town government for years, so I’ve seen firsthand how stewardship of a community happens. “Good communities don’t make themselves,” my dad said. “We’ve got a lot to be grateful for, and we all have to do our part to keep it going.” He just retired as town supervisor. My mom is on the zoning board. From them I learned that town government is invisible to most citizens, which is perhaps as it should be—necessary services are delivered so smoothly that folks just take them for granted. The roads get plowed, the water is kept clean, the parks are kept up, and the new senior citizens center finally got built, all without much fanfare. Most people are indifferent, unless their self-interest is at stake. Then there are the chronic complainers, always on the phone to contest the tax levy, and also on the phone to object to cutbacks when the same tax levies fail.

			Fortunately, there are those in every organization, few but invaluable, who know their responsibilities and seem to thrive on meeting them. They get things done. These are the ones we all rely upon, the people who take care of the rest of us, quiet leaders.

			My Onondaga Nation neighbors call the maple the leader of the trees. Trees constitute the environmental quality committee—running air and water purification service 24-7. They’re on every task force, from the historical society picnic to the highway department, school board, and library. When it comes to civic beautification, they alone create the crimson fall with little recognition.

			We haven’t even mentioned how they create habitat for songbirds, and wildlife cover, golden leaves to shuffle through, tree forts and branches for swings. Centuries of their falling leaves have built this soil, now farmed for strawberries, apples, sweet corn, and hay. How much of the oxygen in our valley comes from our maples? How much carbon is taken from the atmosphere and stored away? These processes are what ecological scientists term ecosystem services, the structures and functions of the natural world that make life possible. We can assign an economic value to maple timber, or gallons of syrup, but ecosystem services are far more precious. And yet these services go unaccounted for in the human economy. As with the services of local government, we don’t think about them unless they are missing. There is no official tax system to pay for these services, as we pay for snowplowing and schoolbooks. We get them for free, donated continually by maples. They do their share for us. The question is: How well do we do by them?

			By the time I get to the sugar house, the guys already have the pan at full boil. A forceful plume of steam billows from the open vents, signaling to folks down the road and across the valley that they’re boiling today. While I’m there, a steady stream of people drop by for conversation and a gallon of new syrup. As they step into the shed, they all stop right at the door; their glasses fog up and the sweet aroma of boiling sap stops them in their tracks. I like to walk in and out over and over again, just for the rush of fragrance.

			The sugar house itself is a rough wood building with a characteristic vented cupola running its length to allow the steam to escape. It whooshes up to join the downy clouds in a soft spring sky.

			The fresh sap goes in at one end of the open evaporator and moves along channels under its own increasing gravity as the water is boiled away. The boil at the beginning is wild and frothy with big random bubbles and more sedate at the end as it thickens, moving from clear at the start to deep caramel at the end. You’ve got to take the syrup off at just the right time and density. Let it go too far and the whole affair could crystallize into a delicious brick.

			It’s hard work, and the two guys watching and testing have been here since early this morning. I brought along a pie so they can grab forkfuls every now and then, between tasks. As we all watch the boil, I ask them my question: What does it mean to be a good citizen of Maple Nation?

			Larry is the stoker. Every ten minutes he pulls on elbow-length gloves and dons a face shield before opening the door to the fire. The heat is intense as he adds another armload of three-foot lengths of firewood one by one. “You’ve gotta keep it boiling heavy,” he says. “We do it the old-fashioned way. Some folks have gone to fuel oil or gas burners, but I hope we always stick with wood. It feels right.”

			The woodpile is easily as big as the sugar house itself, stacked ten feet high with cord upon cord of dry split ash and birch and, of course, good hard maple. The forestry students cut and gather a fair bit of the wood from dead trees along all of our trails. “See, it works out good. To keep the sugar bush productive we thin out the competition so our sap trees can grow a nice full canopy. The trees we thin out usually end up right here, as firewood. Nothing gets wasted. That’s a kind of being a good citizen, isn’t it? You take care of the trees and they’ll take care of you.” I don’t imagine there are many colleges that run their own sugarbushes, and I’m grateful that ours does.

			Bart sits by the bottling tank and chimes in: “We should save the oil for where we’ve got to have it. Wood can do this job better—and besides, it’s carbon neutral. The carbon we release from burning wood for syrup came from the trees that took it in, in the first place. It will go right back to them, with no net increase.” He goes on to explain that these forests are part of the college’s plan to be totally carbon neutral: “We actually get a tax credit by keeping our forests intact, so they can absorb carbon dioxide.”

			I suppose that one of the features of being a member of a nation is shared currency. In Maple Nation, the currency is carbon. It is traded, exchanged, bartered among community members from atmosphere to tree to beetle to woodpecker to fungus to log to firewood to atmosphere and back to tree. No waste, shared wealth, balance, and reciprocity. What better model for a sustainable economy do we need?

			What does it mean to be a citizen of Maple Nation? I put this question to Mark, who handles the finishing with a big paddle and the hydrometer to test the sugar concentration. “That’s a good question,” he says as he pours a few drops of cream onto the boiling syrup to quell the foam. He doesn’t answer, but opens the spigot at the bottom of the finishing pan, filling a bucket with new syrup. Later, when it has cooled a bit, he pours out a little cup for each of us, golden and warm, and raises his in a toast. “I guess this is what you do,” he says. “You make syrup. You enjoy it. You take what you’re given and you treat it right.”

			Drinking maple syrup gives you quite a sugar rush. This too is what it means to be a citizen of Maple Nation, having maple in your bloodstream, maple in your bones. We are what we eat, and with every golden spoonful maple carbon becomes human carbon. Our traditional thinking had it right: maples are people, people are maples.

			Our Anishinaabe word for maple is anenemik, the man tree. “My wife makes maple cake,” says Mark, “and we always give out candy maple leaves at Christmas.” Larry’s favorite is to just pour it on vanilla ice cream. My ninety-six-year-old grandma likes to take a pure spoonful once in a while, when she’s feeling low. She calls it vitamin M. Next month, the college will hold a pancake breakfast here, where staff and faculty and families gather to celebrate sticky-fingered membership in Maple Nation, our bond to each other and to this land. Citizens also celebrate together.

			The pan is running low, so I go with Larry down the road to the sugar bush, where a tank is slowly filling with fresh sap, drip by drip. We walk around the woods for a while, ducking under the network of tubes that gurgle like a brook, carrying the sap inside to the collecting tank. It’s not the same plinking music of old-time sap buckets, but it enables two people to do the work of twenty.

			The woods are the same as countless springs before this one; the citizens of Maple Nation are starting to wake up. Snowfleas pepper the wells of deer tracks. Mosses drip with snowmelt at the base of trees, and geese race by, their V in disarray with their eagerness to be home.

			As we drive back with a brimming tank, he says, “Of course sugaring is a gamble every year. It’s not like you can control the sap flow. Some years are good and some aren’t. You take what you get and be grateful for it. It all depends on the temperature, and that’s out of our hands.” But that’s not entirely true anymore. Our addiction to fossil fuel and current energy policies accelerate carbon dioxide inputs every year, unequivocally causing a global rise in temperatures. Spring comes nearly a week earlier than it did just twenty years ago.

			I hate to leave, but I have to get back to my desk. On the drive home, I continue to think about citizenship. When my kids were in school they had to memorize the Bill of Rights, but I would venture to guess that maple seedlings would be schooled instead in a Bill of Responsibilities.

			When I get home, I look up the citizenship oaths for various human nations. They have many elements in common. Some require allegiance to a leader. Most are a pledge of loyalty, an expression of shared beliefs and an oath to obey the laws of the land. The United States rarely permits dual citizenship—you have to choose. On what basis do we select where to invest our allegiance? If I were forced, I would choose Maple Nation. If citizenship is a matter of shared beliefs, then I believe in the democracy of species. If citizenship means an oath of loyalty to a leader, then I choose the leader of the trees. If good citizens agree to uphold the laws of the nation, then I choose natural law, the law of reciprocity, of regeneration, of mutual flourishing.

			The oath of citizenship for the United States stipulates that citizens will defend the nation against all enemies and take up arms if they are called to do so. If that same oath held in Maple Nation, the trumpet call would be echoing through these wooded hills. Maples of the United States face a grave enemy. The most highly regarded models predict that the climate of New England will become hostile to sugar maples within fifty years. Rising temperatures will reduce seedling success and regeneration will thereby start to fail. It already is failing. Insects will follow, and the oaks will get the upper hand. Imagine New England without maples. Unthinkable. A brown fall instead of hills afire. Sugar houses boarded up. No more fragrant clouds of steam. Would we even recognize our homes? Is that a heartbreak we can bear?

			It’s a running threat on the left and the right: “If things don’t change, I’m moving to Canada.” It looks like the maples will have to do just that. Like the displaced farmers of Bangladesh fleeing rising sea levels, maples will become climate refugees. To survive they must migrate northward to find homes at the boreal fringe. Our energy policy is forcing them to leave. They will be exiled from their homelands for the price of cheap gas.

			We do not pay at the pump for the cost of climate change, for the loss of ecosystem services provided by maples and others. Cheap gas now or maples for the next generation? Call me crazy, but I’d welcome the tax that would resolve that question.

			Individuals far wiser than I have said that we get the government we deserve. That may be true. But the maples, our most generous of benefactors and most responsible of citizens, do not deserve our government. They deserve you and me speaking up on their behalf. To quote our town council woman, “Show up at the damn meeting.” Political action, civic engagement—these are powerful acts of reciprocity with the land. The Maple Nation Bill of Responsibilities asks us to stand up for the standing people, to lead with the wisdom of Maples.





The Honorable Harvest


			The crows see me coming across the field, a woman with a basket, and argue my provenance loudly among themselves. The soil is hard under my feet, bare except for a scattering of plow-scraped rocks and a few of last year’s corn stalks, their remnant prop roots squatting like bleached-out spider legs. Years of herbicides and continuous corn have left the field sterile. Even in rain-soaked April not a blade of green shows its face. By August it will once again be a monoculture of corn plants in straight rows of indentured servitude, but for now it’s my cross-country route to the woods.

			My entourage of crows leaves me at the stone wall, a loose windrow of glacial cobbles raked from the field to mark its boundary. On the other side the ground is soft underfoot and deep in centuries of leaf mold, the forest floor flocked with tiny pink spring beauties and clumps of yellow violets. The humus stirs with trout lilies and trillium poised to rise through the winter-brown mat of leaves. A wood thrush hangs a silvery trill on the still-bare branches of the maples. The dense patches of leeks are among the first to appear in the spring, their green so vivid that they signal like a neon sign: pick me!

			I resist the urge to answer their call immediately and instead address the plants the way I’ve been taught: introducing myself in case they’ve forgotten, even though we’ve been meeting like this for years. I explain why I’ve come and ask their permission to harvest, inquiring politely if they would be willing to share.

			Eating leeks is a spring tonic that blurs the line between food and medicine. It wakens the body from its winter lassitude and quickens the blood. But I have another need, too, that only greens from this particular woods can satisfy. Both of my daughters will be home for the weekend from the far places where they live. I ask these leeks to renew the bonds between this ground and my children, so that they will always carry the substance of home in the mineral of their bones.

			Some of the leaves are already expanded—stretching toward the sun—while others are still rolled into a spear, thrusting up through the duff. I dig my trowel in around the edge of the clump, but they’re deeply rooted and tightly packed, resisting my efforts. It’s just a small trowel and it hurts my winter-softened hand, but at last I pry out a clump and shake away the dark earth.

			I expected a cluster of fat white bulbs, but in their place I find ragged papery sheathes where the bulbs should be. Withered and flaccid, they look as if all the juice has already been sucked out of them. Which it has. If you ask permission, you have to listen to the answer. I tuck them back in the soil and go home. Along the stone wall, the elderberries have broken bud and their embryonic leaves reach out like gloved purple hands.

			On a day like this, when the fiddleheads are unfurling and the air is petal soft, I am awash in longing. I know that “thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s chloroplasts” is good advice and yet I must confess to fullblown chlorophyll envy. Sometimes I wish I could photosynthesize so that just by being, just by shimmering at the meadow’s edge or floating lazily on a pond, I could be doing the work of the world while standing silent in the sun. The shadowy hemlocks and the waving grasses are spinning out sugar molecules and passing them on to hungry mouths and mandibles all the while listening to the warblers and watching the light dance on the water.

			It would be so satisfying to provide for the well-being of others— like being a mother again, like being needed. Shade, medicine, berries, roots; there would be no end to it. As a plant I could make the campfire, hold the nest, heal the wound, fill the brimming pot.

			But this generosity is beyond my realm, as I am a mere heterotroph, a feeder on the carbon transmuted by others. In order to live, I must consume. That’s the way the world works, the exchange of a life for a life, the endless cycling between my body and the body of the world. Forced to choose, I must admit I actually like my heterotroph role. Besides, if I could photosynthesize, I couldn’t eat leeks.

			So instead I live vicariously through the photosynthesis of others. I am not the vibrant leaves on the forest floor—I am the woman with the basket, and how I fill it is a question that matters. If we are fully awake, a moral question arises as we extinguish the other lives around us on behalf of our own. Whether we are digging wild leeks or going to the mall, how do we consume in a way that does justice to the lives that we take?

			In our oldest stories, we are reminded that this was a question of profound concern for our ancestors. When we rely deeply on other lives, there is urgency to protect them. Our ancestors, who had so few material possessions, devoted a great deal of attention to this question, while we who are drowning in possessions scarcely give it a thought. The cultural landscape may have changed, but the conundrum has not—the need to resolve the inescapable tension between honoring life around us and taking it in order to live is part of being human.

			A few weeks later I take up my basket and again cross the field, still bare while the earth on the other side of the wall is drifted in snowy white trillium blossoms like a late-season snowfall. I must look like a ballet dancer tiptoeing and spinning between clumps of delicate Dutchman’s-breeches, mysterious blue shoots of cohosh, patches of bloodroot, and the green shoots of jack-in-the-pulpit and mayapple surging up through the leaves. I greet them one by one and feel as if they’re glad to see me, too.

			We are told to take only that which is given, and when I was here last the leeks had nothing to give. Bulbs hold energy saved up for the next generation like money in the bank. Last fall the bulbs were sleek and fat, but, in the first days of spring, that savings account gets depleted as the roots send their stored energy into the emerging leaves to fuel their journey from soil to sunshine. In their first few days, the leaves are consumers, taking from the root, shriveling it up and giving nothing back. But as they unfurl they become a powerful solar array that will recharge the energy of the roots, playing out the reciprocity between consuming and producing in a few short weeks.

			The leeks today are twice the size they were on my first visit and the scent of onions is strong where a deer has bruised the leaves. I pass by the first clump and kneel by the second. Once again, I quietly ask permission.

			Asking permission shows respect for the personhood of the plant, but it is also an assessment of the well-being of the population. Thus I must use both sides of my brain to listen to the answer. The analytic left reads the empirical signs to judge whether the population is large and healthy enough to sustain a harvest, whether it has enough to share. The intuitive right hemisphere is reading something else, a sense of generosity, an open-handed radiance that says take me, or sometimes a tight-lipped recalcitrance that makes me put my trowel away. I can’t explain it, but it is a kind of knowing that is for me just as compelling as a no-trespassing sign. This time, when I push my trowel deep I come up with a thick cluster of gleaming white bulbs, plump, slippery, and aromatic. I hear yes, so I make a gift from the soft old tobacco pouch in my pocket and begin to dig.

			Leeks are clonal plants that multiply by division, spreading the patch wider and wider. As a result, they tend to become crowded in the center of a patch, so I try to harvest there. In this way my taking can help the growth of the remaining plants by thinning them out. From camas bulbs to sweetgrass, blueberries to basket willow, our ancestors found ways to harvest that bring long-term benefit to plants and people.

			While a sharp shovel would make digging more efficient, the truth is that it makes the work too fast. If I could get all the leeks I needed in five minutes, I’d lose that time on my knees watching the ginger poke up and listening to the oriole that has just returned home. This is truly a choice for “slow food.” Besides, that simple shift in technology would also make it easy to slice through neighboring plants and take too much. Woods throughout the country are losing their leeks to harvesters who love them to extinction. The difficulty of digging is an important constraint. Not everything should be convenient.


The traditional ecological knowledge of indigenous harvesters is rich in prescriptions for sustainability. They are found in Native science and philosophy, in lifeways and practices, but most of all in stories, the ones that are told to help restore balance, to locate ourselves once again in the circle.

			Anishinaabe elder Basil Johnston tells of the time our teacher Nanabozho was fishing in the lake for supper, as he often did, with hook and line. Heron came striding along through the reeds on his long, bent legs, his beak like a spear. Heron is a good fisherman and a sharing friend, so he told Nanabozho about a new way to fish that would make his life much easier. Heron cautioned him to be careful not to take too many fish, but Nanabozho was already thinking of a feast. He went out early the next day and soon had a whole basketful of fish, so heavy he could barely carry it and far more than he could eat. So he cleaned all those fish and set them out to dry on the racks outside his lodge. The next day, with his belly still full, he went back to the lake and again did what Heron had showed him. “Aah,” he thought as he carried home the fish, “I will have plenty to eat this winter.”

			Day after day he stuffed himself and, as the lake grew empty, his drying racks grew full, sending out a delicious smell into the forest where Fox was licking his lips. Again he went to the lake, so proud of himself. But that day his nets came up empty and Heron looked down on him as he flew over the lake with a critical eye. When Nanabozho got home to his lodge, he learned a key rule—never take more than you need. The racks of fish were toppled in the dirt and every bite was gone.

			Cautionary stories of the consequences of taking too much are ubiquitous in Native cultures, but it’s hard to recall a single one in English. Perhaps this helps to explain why we seem to be caught in a trap of overconsumption, which is as destructive to ourselves as to those we consume.

			Collectively, the indigenous canon of principles and practices that govern the exchange of life for life is known as the Honorable Harvest. They are rules of sorts that govern our taking, shape our relationships with the natural world, and rein in our tendency to consume—that the world might be as rich for the seventh generation as it is for our own. The details are highly specific to different cultures and ecosystems, but the fundamental principles are nearly universal among peoples who live close to the land.

			I am a student of this way of thinking, not a scholar. As a human being who cannot photosynthesize, I must struggle to participate in the Honorable Harvest. So I lean in close to watch and listen to those who are far wiser than I am. What I share here, in the same way they were shared with me, are seeds gleaned from the fields of their collective wisdom, the barest surface, the moss on the mountain of their knowledge. I feel grateful for their teachings and responsible for passing them on as best I can.


My friend is the town clerk in a small Adirondack village. In the summer and fall there is a line outside her door for fishing and hunting licenses. With every laminated card, she hands out the harvesting regulations, pocket-size booklets on thin newsprint, printed in black and white except for glossy inserts with photos of the actual prey, just in case people don’t know what they’re shooting at. It happens: every year there is a story about triumphal deer hunters being stopped on the highway with a Jersey calf tied to their bumper.

			A friend of mine once worked at a hunting check station during partridge season. A guy drove up in a big white Oldsmobile and proudly opened his trunk for inspection of his take. The birds were all neatly laid out on a canvas sheet, lined up beak to back with plumage scarcely ruffled, a whole brace of yellow-shafted flickers.

			Traditional peoples who feed their families from the land have harvest guidelines too: detailed protocols designed to maintain the health and vigor of wildlife species. Like the state regulations, they too are based on sophisticated ecological knowledge and long-term monitoring of populations. They share the common goal of protecting what hunting managers call “the resource,” both for its own sake and to safeguard the sustainable supply for future generations.

			Early colonists on Turtle Island were stunned by the plenitude they found here, attributing the richness to the bounty of nature. Settlers in the Great Lakes wrote in their journals about the extraordinary abundance of wild rice harvested by Native peoples; in just a few days, they could fill their canoes with enough rice to last all year. But the settlers were puzzled by the fact that, as one of them wrote, “the savages stopped gathering long before all the rice was harvested.” She observed that “the rice harvest starts with a ceremony of thanksgiving and prayers for good weather for the next four days. They will harvest dawn till dusk for the prescribed four days and then stop, often leaving much rice to stand unreaped. This rice, they say, is not for them but for the Thunders. Nothing will compel them to continue, therefore much goes to waste.” The settlers took this as certain evidence of laziness and lack of industry on the part of the heathens. They did not understand how indigenous land-care practices might contribute to the wealth they encountered.

			I once met an engineering student visiting from Europe who told me excitedly about going ricing in Minnesota with his friend’s Ojibwe family. He was eager to experience a bit of Native American culture. They were on the lake by dawn and all day long they poled through the rice beds, knocking the ripe seed into the canoe. “It didn’t take long to collect quite a bit,” he reported, “but it’s not very efficient. At least half of the rice just falls in the water and they didn’t seem to care. It’s wasted.” As a gesture of thanks to his hosts, a traditional ricing family, he offered to design a grain capture system that could be attached to the gunwales of their canoes. He sketched it out for them, showing how his technique could get 85 percent more rice. His hosts listened respectfully, then said, “Yes, we could get more that way. But it’s got to seed itself for next year. And what we leave behind is not wasted. You know, we’re not the only ones who like rice. Do you think the ducks would stop here if we took it all?” Our teachings tell us to never take more than half.


When my basket holds enough leeks for dinner, I head home. Walking back through the flowers, I see a whole patch of snakeroot spreading its glistening leaves, which reminds me of a story told by an herbalist I know. She taught me one of the cardinal rules of gathering plants: “Never take the first plant you find, as it might be the last—and you want that first one to speak well of you to the others of her kind.” That’s not too hard to do when you come upon a whole stream bank of coltsfoot, when there’s a third and a fourth right behind the first, but it’s harder when the plants are few and the desire is great.

			“Once I dreamed of a snakeroot and that I should bring it with me on a journey the next day. There was a need but I didn’t know what it was. But it was still too early to harvest. The leaves wouldn’t be up for another week or so. There was a chance it might be up early somewhere—maybe in a sunny spot, so I went to look in the usual place I pick those medicines,” the herbalist recalled for me. The bloodroot was out and the spring beauties, too. She greeted them as she walked past, but saw none of the plant she sought. She stepped more slowly, opening her awareness, making her whole self into a halo of peripheral vision. Nestled at the base of a maple, on the southeast side, the snakeroot made itself visible, a glossy mass of dark-green leaves. She knelt, smiling, and spoke quietly. She thought of her upcoming journey, the empty bag in her pocket, and then slowly rose to her feet. Though her knees were stiff with age, she walked away, refraining from taking the first one.

			She wandered through the woods, admiring the trillium just poking their heads up. And the leeks. But there was no more snakeroot. “I just figured I’d have to do without. I was halfway home when I found I’d lost my little shovel, the one I always use for digging medicine. So I had to go back. Well, I found it all right—it’s got a red handle so it’s easy to find. And you know, it had fallen from my pocket right in a patch of root. So I talked to that plant, addressed it just like you would a person whose help you needed, and it gave me a bit of itself. When I got where I was going, sure enough, there was a woman there who needed that snakeroot medicine and I could pass on the gift. That plant reminded me that if we harvest with respect, the plants will help us.”

			The guidelines for the Honorable Harvest are not written down, or even consistently spoken of as a whole—they are reinforced in small acts of daily life. But if you were to list them, they might look something like this:

			Know the ways of the ones who take care of you, so that you may take care of them.

			Introduce yourself. Be accountable as the one who comes asking for life. Ask permission before taking. Abide by the answer.

			Never take the first. Never take the last. Take only what you need.

			Take only that which is given.

			Never take more than half. Leave some for others. Harvest in a way that minimizes harm.

			Use it respectfully. Never waste what you have taken. Share.

			Give thanks for what you have been given.

			Give a gift, in reciprocity for what you have taken.

			Sustain the ones who sustain you and the earth will last forever.

			The state guidelines on hunting and gathering are based exclusively in the biophysical realm, while the rules of the Honorable Harvest are based on accountability to both the physical and the metaphysical worlds. The taking of another life to support your own is far more significant when you recognize the beings who are harvested as persons, nonhuman persons vested with awareness, intelligence, spirit—and who have families waiting for them at home. Killing a who demands something different than killing an it. When you regard those nonhuman persons as kinfolk, another set of harvesting regulations extends beyond bag limits and legal seasons.

			The state regulations are, by and large, lists of illegal practices: “It is unlawful to keep a rainbow trout whose length from snout to posterior fin does not exceed twelve inches.” The consequences for breaking the law are clearly stipulated and involve a financial transaction after a visit with your friendly conservation officer.

			Unlike the state laws, the Honorable Harvest is not an enforced legal policy, but it is an agreement nonetheless, among people and most especially between consumers and providers. The providers have the upper hand. The deer, the sturgeon, the berries, and the leeks say, “If you follow these rules, we will continue to give our lives so that you may live.”

			Imagination is one of our most powerful tools. What we imagine, we can become. I like to imagine what it would be like if the Honorable Harvest were the law of the land today, as it was in our past. Imagine if a developer, eying open land for a shopping mall, had to ask the goldenrod, the meadowlarks, and the monarch butterflies for permission to take their homeland. What if he had to abide by the answer? Why not?

			I like to imagine a laminated card, like the one my friend the town clerk hands out with the hunting and fishing licenses, embossed with the rules of the Honorable Harvest. Everyone would be subject to the same laws, since they are, after all, the dictates of the real government: the democracy of species, the laws of Mother Nature.

			When I ask my elders about the ways our people lived in order to keep the world whole and healthy, I hear the mandate to take only what you need. But we human people, descendants of Nanabozho, struggle, as he did, with self-restraint. The dictum to take only what you need leaves a lot of room for interpretation when our needs get so tangled with our wants.

			This gray area yields then to a rule more primal than need, an old teaching nearly forgotten now in the din of industry and technology. Deeply rooted in cultures of gratitude, this ancient rule is not just to take only what you need, but to take only that which is given.

			At the level of human interactions, we already do this. It’s what we teach our kids. If you’re visiting your sweet grandma and she offers you homemade cookies on her favorite china plate, you know what to do. You accept them with many “thank yous” and cherish the relationship reinforced by cinnamon and sugar. You gratefully take what has been given. But you wouldn’t dream of breaking into her pantry and just taking all the cookies without invitation, grabbing her china plate for good measure. That would be at a minimum a breach of good manners, a betrayal of the loving relationship. What’s more, your grandma would be heartbroken, and not inclined to bake more cookies for you any time soon.

			As a culture, though, we seem unable to extend these good manners to the natural world. The dishonorable harvest has become a way of life—we take what doesn’t belong to us and destroy it beyond repair: Onondaga Lake, the Alberta tar sands, the rainforests of Malaysia, the list is endless. They are gifts from our sweet Grandmother Earth, which we take without asking. How do we find the Honorable Harvest again?

			If we’re picking berries or gathering nuts, taking only what is given makes a lot of sense. They offer themselves and by taking them we fulfill our reciprocal responsibility. After all, the plants have made these fruits with the express purpose of our taking them, to disperse and plant. By our use of their gifts, both species prosper and life is magnified. But what about when something is taken without a clear avenue for mutual benefit, when someone is going to lose?

			How can we distinguish between that which is given by the earth and that which is not? When does taking become outright theft? I think my elders would counsel that there is no one path, that each of us must find our own way. In my wandering with this question, I’ve found dead ends and clear openings. Discerning all that it might mean is like bushwhacking through dense undergrowth. Sometimes I get faint glimpses of a deer trail.


It is hunting season and we are sitting on the porch of the cookhouse at Onondaga on a hazy October day. The leaves are smoky gold and fluttering down while we listen to the men tell stories. Jake, with a red bandanna around his hair, gets everybody laughing with a story about Junior’s never-fail turkey call. With his feet on the railing and black braid hanging over the back of his chair, Kent tells about following a blood trail over new-fallen snow, bear tracking, and the one that got away. For the most part they’re young men with reputations to build, along with one elder.

			In a Seventh Generation ball cap and a thin gray ponytail, Oren gets his turn at a story and leads us along with him, through thickets and down ravines to get to his favorite hunting spot. Smiling in recollection, he says, “I must have seen ten deer that day, but I only took one shot.” He tips his chair back and looks at the hill, remembering. The young men listen, looking intently at the porch floor. “The first one came crunching through the dry leaves, but was shielded by the brush as it wove down the hill. It never saw me sitting there. Then a young buck came moving upwind toward me and then stepped behind a boulder. I could have tracked it and followed it across the crick, but I knew it wasn’t the one.” Deer by deer, he recounts the day’s encounters for which he never even raised his rifle: the doe by the water, the threepointer concealed behind a basswood with only its rump showing. “I only take one bullet with me,” he says.

			The young men in T-shirts lean forward on the bench across from him. “And then, without explanation, there’s one who walks right into the clearing and looks you in the eye. He knows full well that you’re there and what you’re doing. He turns his flank right toward you for a clear shot. I know he’s the one, and so does he. There’s a kind of nod exchanged. That’s why I only carry one shot. I wait for the one. He gave himself to me. That’s what I was taught: take only what is given, and then treat it with respect.” Oren reminds his listeners, “That’s why we thank the deer as the leader of the animals, for its generosity in feeding the people. Acknowledging the lives that support ours and living in a way that demonstrates our gratitude is a force that keeps the world in motion.”

			The Honorable Harvest does not ask us to photosynthesize. It does not say don’t take, but offers inspiration and a model for what we should take. It’s not so much a list of “do not’s” as a list of “do’s.” Do eat food that is honorably harvested, and celebrate every mouthful. Do use technologies that minimize harm; do take what is given. This philosophy guides not only our taking of food, but also any taking of the gifts of Mother Earth—air, water, and the literal body of the earth: the rocks and soil and fossil fuels.

			Taking coal buried deep in the earth, for which we must inflict irreparable damage, violates every precept of the code. By no stretch of the imagination is coal “given” to us. We have to wound the land and water to gouge it from Mother Earth. What if a coal company planning mountaintop removal in the ancient folds of the Appalachians were compelled by law to take only that which is given? Don’t you long to hand them the laminated card and announce that the rules have changed?

			It doesn’t mean that we can’t consume the energy we need, but it does mean that we honorably take only what is given. The wind blows every day, every day the sun shines, every day the waves roll against the shore, and the earth is warm below us. We can understand these renewable sources of energy as given to us, since they are the sources that have powered life on the planet for as long as there has been a planet. We need not destroy the earth to make use of them. Solar, wind, geothermal, and tidal energy—the so-called “clean energy” harvests— when they are wisely used seem to me to be consistent with the ancient rules of the Honorable Harvest.

			And the code might ask of any harvest, including energy, that our purpose be worthy of the harvest. Oren’s deer made moccasins and fed three families. What will we use our energy for?


I once gave a lecture titled “Cultures of Gratitude” at a small private college where tuition ran upwards of $40,000 a year. For the allocated f ifty-f ive minutes, I talked about the Thanksgiving Address of the Haudenosaunee, the potlatch tradition of the Pacific Northwest, and the gift economies of Polynesia. Then I told a traditional story of the years when the corn harvests were so plentiful that the caches were full. The fields had been so generous with the villagers that the people scarcely needed to work. So they didn’t. Hoes leaned against a tree, idle. The people became so lazy that they let the time for corn ceremonies go by without a single song of gratitude. They began to use the corn in ways the Three Sisters had not intended when they gave the people corn as a sacred gift of food. They burned it for fuel when they couldn’t be bothered to cut firewood. The dogs dragged it off from the untidy heaps the people made instead of storing the harvest in secure granaries. No one stopped the kids when they kicked ears around the village in their games.

			Saddened by the lack of respect, the Corn Spirit decided to leave, to go where she would be appreciated. At first the people didn’t even notice. But the next year, the cornfields were nothing but weeds. The caches were nearly empty and the grain that had been left untended was moldy and mouse-chewed. There was nothing to eat. The people sat about in despair, growing thinner and thinner. When they abandoned gratitude, the gifts abandoned them.

			One small child walked out from the village and wandered for hungry days until he found the Corn Spirit in a sunlit clearing in the woods. He begged her to return to his people. She smiled kindly at him and instructed him to teach his people the gratitude and respect that they had forgotten. Only then would she return. He did as she asked and after a hard winter without corn, to remind them of the cost, she returned to them in the spring.*

			* This story is known from the southwest to the northeast. One version is told by Joseph Bruchac, in Caduto and Bruchac’s Keepers of Life.

			Several students in my audience yawned. They could not imagine such a thing. The aisles of the grocery store were always well stocked. At a reception afterward the students filled their Styrofoam plates with the usual fare. We exchanged questions and comments while we balanced plastic cups of punch. The students grazed on cheese and crackers, a profusion of cut vegetables, and buckets of dip. There was enough food to feast a small village. The leftovers were swept into trash bins placed conveniently next to the tables.

			A beautiful young girl, dark hair tied up in a headscarf, was hanging back from the discussion, waiting her turn. When nearly everyone had left she approached me, gesturing with an apologetic smile at the wasted remains of the reception. “I don’t want you to think no one understands what you were saying,” she said. “I do. You sound like my grandmother, back in my village in Turkey. I will tell her she must have a sister here in the United States. The Honorable Harvest is her way, too. In her house, we learned that everything we put in our mouths, everything that allows us to live, is the gift of another life. I remember lying with her at night as she made us thank the rafters of her house and the wool blankets we slept in. My grandma wouldn’t let us forget that these are all gifts, which is why you take care of everything, to show respect for that life. In my grandmother’s house we were taught to kiss the rice. If a single grain fell to the ground, we learned to pick it up and kiss it, to show we meant no disrespect in wasting it.” The student told me that, when she came to the United States, the greatest culture shock she experienced was not language or food or technology, but waste.

			“I’ve never told anyone before,“ she said, “but the cafeteria made me sick, because of the way people treated their food. What people throw away here after one lunch would supply my village for days. I could not speak to anyone of this; no one else would understand to kiss the grain of rice.” I thanked her for her story and she said, “Please, take it as a gift, and give it to someone else.”

			I’ve heard it said that sometimes, in return for the gifts of the earth, gratitude is enough. It is our uniquely human gift to express thanks, because we have the awareness and the collective memory to remember that the world could well be otherwise, less generous than it is. But I think we are called to go beyond cultures of gratitude, to once again become cultures of reciprocity.

			I met Carol Crowe, an Algonquin ecologist, at a meeting on indigenous models of sustainability. She told the story of requesting funding from her tribal council to attend the conference. They asked her, “What is this all about, this notion of sustainability? What are they talking about?” She gave them a summary of the standard definitions of sustainable development, including “the management of natural resources and social institutions in such a manner as to ensure the attainment and continued satisfaction of human needs for present and future generations.” They were quiet for a while, considering. Finally one elder said, “This sustainable development sounds to me like they just want to be able to keep on taking like they always have. It’s always about taking. You go there and tell them that in our way, our first thoughts are not ‘What can we take?’ but ‘What can we give to Mother Earth?’ That’s how it’s supposed to be.”

			The Honorable Harvest asks us to give back, in reciprocity, for what we have been given. Reciprocity helps resolve the moral tension of taking a life by giving in return something of value that sustains the ones who sustain us. One of our responsibilities as human people is to find ways to enter into reciprocity with the more-than-human world. We can do it through gratitude, through ceremony, through land stewardship, science, art, and in everyday acts of practical reverence.


I have to confess that I’d shuttered my mind before I even met him. There was nothing a fur trapper could say that I wanted to hear. Berries, nuts, leeks, and, arguably, that deer who looks you in the eye, are all part of the matrix of the Honorable Harvest, but laying snares for snowy ermine and soft-footed lynx in order to adorn wealthy women is hard to justify. But I would certainly be respectful and listen.

			Lionel grew up in the north woods, hunting, fishing, guiding, making a living off the land in a remote log cabin, carrying on the tradition of the coureurs des bois. He learned trapping from his Indian grandfather who was renowned for his skills on the trapline. To catch a mink, you have to be able to think like a mink. His grandpa was a successful trapper because of his deep respect for the knowledge of the animals, where they traveled, how they hunted, where they would den up in bad weather. He could see the world through ermine eyes and so provided for his family.

			“I loved living in the bush,” Lionel says, “and I loved the animals.” Fishing and hunting gave the family their food; the trees gave them heat; and after their needs for warm hats and mittens were provided for, the furs they sold every year gave them cash for kerosene, coffee, beans, and school clothes. It was assumed that he would follow in the trade, but as a young man he refused. He wanted nothing more of trapping in the years when leg-hold traps became the norm. It was a cruel technology. He’d seen the animals who gnawed off their feet to free themselves. “Animals do have to die for us to live, but they don’t have to suffer,” he says.

			To stay in the bush he tried logging. He was practiced in the old methods for sledding out timber in the winter along an ice road, felling while the snow blanket protected the earth. But the old, low-impact practices had given way to big machines that ripped up the forest and wrecked the land his animals needed. The dark forest turned to ragged stumps, the clear streams to muddy trenches. He tried to work in the cab of the D9 Cat, and a feller-buncher, a machine designed to take it all. But he couldn’t do it.

			Then Lionel went to work in the mines at Sudbury, Ontario, left the woods to work underground, digging nickel ore from the earth to be fed into the maw of furnaces. Sulfur dioxide and heavy metals poured from the stacks, making a toxic acid rain that killed every living thing for miles, a gigantic burn mark on the land. Without vegetation, the soil all washed away, leaving a moonscape so bare that NASA used it to test lunar vehicles. The metal smelters at Sudbury held the earth in a leg-hold trap, and the forest was dying a slow and painful death. Too late, after the damage was done, Sudbury became the poster child for clean-air legislation.

			There is no shame in working the mines to feed your family—an exchange of hard labor in return for food and shelter—but you want your labor to count for something more. Driving home each night through the moonscape his labor created, he felt blood on his hands, and so he quit.

			Today Lionel spends his winter days on snowshoes on his trapline and winter nights preparing furs. Unlike the harsh chemicals of the factory, brain tanning yields the softest, most durable hide. He says with wonder in his voice and a soft moose hide on his lap, “There is just enough in each animal’s brain to tan its own hide.” His own brain and his heart led him back home to the woods.

			Lionel is of the Métis Nation; he calls himself “a blue-eyed Indian,” raised in the deep woods of northern Quebec, as his melodious accent suggests. His conversation is so delightfully sauced with “Oui, oui, madame” that I imagine he will kiss my hand at any moment. His own hands are telling: woodsman’s hands broad and strong enough to set a trap or a logging chain but sensitive enough to stroke a pelt to gauge its thickness. By the time we spoke, leg-hold traps had been banned in Canada and only body-hold traps that ensure a sudden death were permitted. He demonstrates one: it takes two strong arms to open and set, and its powerful snap would break a neck in an instant.

			Trappers spend more time on the land than anyone else these days, and they maintain detailed records of their harvest. Lionel keeps a thickly penciled notebook in his vest pocket; he takes it out and waves it, saying, “Wanna see my new BlackBerry? I just download my data to my bush computer, runs on propane, don’t you know.”

			His traplines yield beaver, lynx, coyote, fisher, mink, and ermine. He runs his hand over the pelts, explaining about the density of the winter undercoat and the long guard hairs, how you can judge the health of an animal by its fur. He pauses when he comes to martens, whose pelage is legendary in its silky-soft luxury—the American sable. It is beautifully colored and feather light.

			Martens are part of Lionel’s life here—they’re his neighbors and he is thankful that they have rebounded from near extirpation. Trappers like him are on the front line of monitoring wildlife populations and well-being. They have a responsibility to take care of the species they rely upon, and every visit to the trapline produces data that govern the trapper’s response. “If we catch only male martens, we will keep the traps open,” he says. When there is an excess of unpaired males, they are wandering and easy to trap. Too many young males can leave less food for the others. “But as soon as we get a female, we stop trapping. That means we’ve skimmed off the excess and we don’t touch the rest. That way the population doesn’t get too crowded, none will go hungry, but their population will continue to grow.”

			In late winter, when the snow is still heavy but the days are lengthening, Lionel drags down the ladder from the rafters in his garage. He straps on his snowshoes and stomps out into the bush with the ladder on his shoulder and hammer, nails, and scrap wood in his pack basket. He scouts out just the right spots: big old trees with cavities are best, as long as the size and shape of the hole dictates that only a single species can use it. He climbs to where the ladder, anchored in the snow, leans against a high branch and he constructs a platform. He makes it home before dark and rises the next day to do it again. It’s hard work lugging a ladder through the woods. When he’s done with the platforms, he pulls a white plastic pail from the freezer and sets it by the woodstove to thaw.

			All summer long Lionel serves as a fishing guide on the remote lakes and rivers of his birth. He jokes that he works for only himself now and he calls his company See More and Do Less. Not a bad business plan. When he and his “sports” clean their catch he scrapes the guts into big white pails and keeps them in his freezer. He overheard his clients whispering, “Must be he eats fish-gut stew in the winter.”

			The next day he’s off again, pulling the bucket on a sled, miles down the trapline. At every platform tree, he scrambles up the ladder, with somewhat less grace than a weasel, one-handed. (You don’t want to slop fish guts all over yourself.) He shovels out a big smelly scoop onto each platform and then hikes off to the next.

			Like many predators, martens are slow reproducers, which makes them vulnerable to decline, especially when they’re exploited. Gestation is about nine months, and they don’t give birth until they’re three years old. They’ll have from one to four young and raise only as many as the food supply allows. “I put out the gut piles in the last weeks before the little mothers give birth,” Lionel says. “If you put them where nothing else can get them, those mothers will have some extra-good meals. That will help them to nurse their babies so more will survive, especially if we get a late snow or something.” The tenderness in his voice makes me think of a neighbor delivering a warm casserole to a shut-in. It’s not how I’ve thought of trappers. “Well,” he says, blushing a little, “dose little martens take care of me and I take care of dem.”

			The teachings tell us that a harvest is made honorable by what you give in return for what you take. There is no escaping the fact that Lionel’s care will result in more martens on his trapline. There is no escaping the fact that they will also be killed. Feeding mama martens is not altruism; it is deep respect for the way the world works, for the connections between us, of life flowing into life. The more he gives, the more he can take, and he goes the extra mile to give more than he takes.

			I’m moved by Lionel’s affection and respect for these animals, for the care that flows from his intimate knowledge of their needs. He lives the tension of loving his prey and resolves it for himself by practicing the tenets of the Honorable Harvest. But there is also no escaping the fact that the marten pelts are likely to become a luxury coat for a very wealthy person, perhaps the owner of the Sudbury mine.

			These animals will die by his hand, but first they will live well, in part by his hand. His lifestyle, which I had condemned without understanding, protects the forest, protects the lakes and rivers, not just for him and the furbearers, but for all the forest beings. A harvest is made honorable when it sustains the giver as well as the taker. And today Lionel is also a gifted teacher, invited to schools far and wide to share his traditional knowledge of wildlife and conservation. He is giving back what was given to him.

			It’s hard for the guy wearing the sable in the corner office of Sudbury to imagine Lionel’s world, to even conceive of a way of living that would require him to consider taking only what he needs, to give back in reciprocity for what he takes, to nurture the world that nurtures him, to carry meals to a nursing mother in a wild treetop den. But unless we want more wastelands, he needs to learn.


These may seem like charming anachronisms, rules for hunting and gathering whose relevance vanished along with the buffalo. But remember that the buffalo are not extinct and in fact are making a resurgence under the care of those who remember. The canon of the Honorable Harvest is poised to make its comeback, too, as people remember that what’s good for the land is also good for the people.

			We need acts of restoration, not only for polluted waters and degraded lands, but also for our relationship to the world. We need to restore honor to the way we live, so that when we walk through the world we don’t have to avert our eyes with shame, so that we can hold our heads up high and receive the respectful acknowledgment of the rest of the earth’s beings.

			I feel lucky to have wild leeks, dandelion greens, marsh marigolds, and hickory nuts—if I get there before the squirrels do. But these are decorations on a diet that comes mostly from my garden and from the grocery store, like everyone else, especially now that more people live in urban centers than the countryside.

			Cities are like the mitochondria in our animal cells—they are consumers, fed by the autotrophs, the photosynthesis of a distant green landscape. We could lament that urban dwellers have little means of exercising direct reciprocity with the land. Yet while city folks may be separated from the sources of what they consume, they can exercise reciprocity through how they spend their money. While the digging of the leeks and the digging of the coal may be too far removed to see, we consumers have a potent tool of reciprocity right in our pockets. We can use our dollars as the indirect currency of reciprocity.

			Perhaps we can think of the Honorable Harvest as a mirror by which we judge our purchases. What do we see in the mirror? A purchase worthy of the lives consumed? Dollars become a surrogate, a proxy for the harvester with hands in the earth, and they can be used in support of the Honorable Harvest—or not.

			It’s easy to make this argument, and I believe that the principles of the Honorable Harvest have great resonance in an era when overconsumption threatens every dimension of our well-being. But it can be too easy to shift the burden of responsibility to the coal company or the land developers. What about me, the one who buys what they sell, who is complicit in the dishonorable harvest?

			I live in the country, where I grow a big garden, get eggs from my neighbor’s farm, buy apples from the next valley over, pick berries and greens from my few rewilding acres. A lot of what I own is secondhand, or third. The desk that I’m writing on was once a fine dining table that someone set out on the curb. But while I heat with wood, compost and recycle, and do myriad other responsible things, if I did an honest inventory of my household, most of it would probably not make the grade of the Honorable Harvest.

			I want to do the experiment, to see if one can subsist in this market economy and still practice the rules of the Honorable Harvest. So I take my shopping list and go forth.

			Actually, our local grocery store makes it pretty easy to be mindful of the choices and the mantra of mutual benefit for land and people. They’ve partnered with farmers for local organic goods at a price normal people can afford. They’re big on “green” and recycled products, too, so I can hold my toilet paper purchase up to the mirror of the Honorable Harvest without flinching. When I walk the aisles with open eyes, the source of the food is mostly evident, although Cheetos and Ding Dongs remain an ecological mystery. For the most part, I can use dollars as the currency of good ecological choices, alongside my questionable but persistent need for chocolate.

			I don’t have much patience with food proselytizers who refuse all but organic, free-range, fair-trade gerbil milk. We each do what we can; the Honorable Harvest is as much about the relationships as about the materials. A friend of mine says she buys just one green item a week— that’s all she can do, so she does it. “I want to vote with my dollar,” she says. I can make choices because I have the disposable income to choose “green” over less-expensive goods, and I hope that will drive the market in the right direction. In the food deserts of the South Side there is no such choice, and the dishonor in that inequity runs far deeper than the food supply.

			I am stopped in my tracks in the produce section. There on a Styrofoam tray, sheathed in plastic and tagged at the princely sum of $15.50 per pound, are Wild Leeks. The plastic presses down on them: they look trapped and suffocated. Alarm bells go off in my head, alarms of commoditization of what should be regarded as a gift and all the dangers that follow from that kind of thinking. Selling leeks makes them into mere objects and cheapens them, even at $15.50 per pound. Wild things should not be for sale.

			Next stop is the mall, a place I try to avoid at all costs, but today I will go into the belly of the beast in service to my experiment. I sit in the car for a few minutes trying to rouse the same attunement and outlook with which I go to the woods, receptive, observant, and grateful, but I’ll be gathering a new stock of paper and pens instead of wild leeks.

			There is a stone wall to cross here, too, the three-story edifice of the mall, bordered by another lifeless field of parking lot, with crows perched on the stanchions. As I cross the wall, the floor is hard beneath my feet and heels click on the faux-marble tile. I pause to take in the sounds. Inside, there are neither crows nor wood thrushes, but rather a soundtrack of strangely sanitized oldies set to strings, hovering above the drone of the ventilation system. The light is dim fluorescent with spotlights to dapple the floor, the better to highlight the splashes of color which identify the shops, their logos as readily identifiable as patches of bloodroot across the forest. Like in the spring woods, the air is a patchwork of scents that I walk among: coffee here, cinnamon buns there, a shop of scented candles, and beneath it all the pervasive tang of fast-food Chinese from the food court.

			At the end of the wing, I spy the habitat of my quarry. I navigate easily, as I’ve been coming here for years for my traditional harvest of writing supplies. At the store entrance is a stack of bright red plastic shopping bins with metal handles. I pick one up and again become the woman with the basket. In the paper aisle I am confronted with a great diversity of species of paper—wide ruled and narrow, copier paper, stationery, spiral bound, loose-leaf—arrayed in clonal patches by brand and purpose. I see just what I want, my favorite legal pads, as yellow as a downy violet.

			I stand before them trying to conjure the gathering mentality, to bring all the rules of the Honorable Harvest to bear, but I can’t do it without the bite of mockery. I try to sense the trees in that stack of paper and address my thoughts to them, but the taking of their lives is so far removed from this shelf that there is just a distant echo. I think about the harvesting method: were they clear-cut? I think about the stink of the paper mill, the effluent, the dioxin. Fortunately, there is a stack labeled “Recycled,” so I choose those, paying a little more for the privilege. I pause and consider whether the yellow dyed may be worse than the white bleached. I have my suspicions, but I choose the yellow as I always do. It looks so nice with green or purple ink, like a garden.

			I wander next to the pen aisle, or as they call it, “writing instruments.” The choices here are even more numerous and I have no idea at all where they came from, except some petrochemical synthesis. How can I bring honor to this purchase, use my dollars as the currency of honor when the lives behind the product are invisible? I stand there so long that an “associate” comes to ask if I’m looking for anything in particular. I guess I look like a shoplifter planning a heist of “writing instruments” with my little red basket. I’d like to ask him, “Where did these things come from? What are they made of and which one was made with a technology that inflicts minimal damage on the earth? Can I buy pens with the same mentality with which a person digs wild leeks?” But I suspect he would call security on the little earpiece attached to his jaunty store cap, so I just choose my favorite, for the feel of the nib against the paper and the purple and green ink. At the checkout I engage in reciprocity, tendering my credit card in return for writing supplies. Both the clerk and I say thank you, but not to the trees.

			I’m trying hard to make this work, but what I feel in the woods, the pulsing animacy, is simply not here. I realize why the tenets of reciprocity don’t work here, why this glittering labyrinth seems to make a mockery of the Honorable Harvest. It’s so obvious, but I didn’t see it, so intent was I on searching for the lives behind the products. I couldn’t find them because the lives aren’t here. Everything for sale here is dead.

			I get a cup of coffee and sit on a bench to watch the scene unfold, gathering evidence as best I can, notebook open in my lap. Sullen teenagers wanting to buy their self hood and sad-looking old men sitting alone at the food court. Even the plants are plastic. I’ve never been shopping like this before, with such intentional awareness of what goes on here. I suppose I’ve blocked it out in my usual hurry to get in, make my purchase, and get out. But now I scan the landscape with all senses heightened. Open to the T-shirts, the plastic earrings, and the iPods. Open to shoes that hurt, delusions that hurt, and mountains of needless stuff that hurts the chances that my grandchildren will have a good green earth to care for. It hurts me even to bring the ideas of the Honorable Harvest here; I feel protective of them. I want to cup them like a small warm animal in my hands and shelter them from the onslaught of their antithesis. But I know they are stronger than this.

			It’s not the Honorable Harvest that is the aberration, though—it is this marketplace. As leeks cannot survive in a cutover forest, the Honorable Harvest cannot survive in this habitat. We have constructed an artifice, a Potemkin village of an ecosystem where we perpetrate the illusion that the things we consume have just fallen off the back of Santa’s sleigh, not been ripped from the earth. The illusion enables us to imagine that the only choices we have are between brands.


Back home I wash away the last bits of black soil and trim the long white roots. One big handful of leeks we set aside, unwashed. The girls chop the slender bulbs and the leaves, and they all go into my favorite cast iron skillet with way more butter than a person should probably have. The aroma of sautéed leeks fills the kitchen. Just breathing it in is good medicine. The sharp pungency dissipates quickly and the fragrance that lingers is deep and savory, with a hint of leaf mold and rainwater. Potato leek soup, wild leek risotto, or just a bowl of leeks are nourishment for body and soul. When my daughters leave on Sunday, I’m happy to know that something of their childhood woods will travel with them.

			After dinner, I take the basket of unwashed leeks to the tiny patch of forest above my pond to plant them. The harvesting process now unfolds in reverse. I ask permission to bring them here, to open the earth for their arrival. I search out the rich moist hollows and tuck them into the soil, emptying my basket instead of filling it. These woods are second or third growth and sadly lost their leeks long ago. It turns out that when forests around here grow back after agricultural clearing, the trees come back readily but the understory plants do not.

			From a distance the new postagricultural woods look healthy; the trees came back thick and strong. But inside something is missing. The April showers do not bring May flowers. No trillium, no mayapple, no bloodroot. Even after a century of regrowth, the postfarming forests are impoverished, while the untilled forests just across the wall are an explosion of blossoms. The medicines are missing, for reasons ecologists do not yet understand. It might be microhabitat, it might be dispersal, but it is clear that the original habitat for these old medicines was obliterated in a cascade of unintended consequences as the land was turned to corn. The land is no longer hospitable for the medicines and we don’t know why.

			The Skywoman woods across the valley have never been plowed, so they still have their full glory, but most other woods are missing their forest floor. Leek-laden woods have become a rarity. Left to time and chance alone, my cutover woods would probably never recover their leeks or their trillium. The way I see it, it’s up to me to carry them over the wall. Over the years, this replanting on my hillside has yielded small patches of vibrant green in April and nurtures the hope that the leeks can return to their homelands and that when I’m an old lady I’ll have a celebratory spring supper close at hand. They give to me, I give to them. Reciprocity is an investment in abundance for both the eater and the eaten.

			We need the Honorable Harvest today. But like the leeks and the marten, it is an endangered species that arose in another landscape, another time, from a legacy of traditional knowledge. That ethic of reciprocity was cleared away along with the forests, the beauty of justice traded away for more stuff. We’ve created a cultural and economic landscape that is hospitable to the growth of neither leeks nor honor. If the earth is nothing more than inanimate matter, if lives are nothing more than commodities, then the way of the Honorable Harvest, too, is dead. But when you stand in the stirring spring woods, you know otherwise.

			It is an animate earth that we hear calling to us to feed the martens and kiss the rice. Wild leeks and wild ideas are in jeopardy. We have to transplant them both and nurture their return to the lands of their birth. We have to carry them across the wall, restoring the Honorable Harvest, bringing back the medicine.





BRAIDING SWEETGRASS


			Sweetgrass, as the hair of Mother Earth, is traditionally braided to show loving care for her well-being. Braids, plaited of three strands, are given away as signs of kindness and gratitude.





In the Footsteps of Nanabozho: Becoming Indigenous to Place


			Fog shrouds the land. There is just this rock in the half-darkness and the surf, rising and falling with a thunderous roar, reminding me how tenuous my perch is on this tiny island. I almost feel her feet on these cold, wet rocks instead of my own; Skywoman on a speck of land, alone in a cold dark sea, before she made our home. When she fell from Skyworld, Turtle Island was her Plymouth Rock, her Ellis Island. The Mother of the People was first an immigrant.

			I’m new here too, on this shore at the western edge of the continent, new to how land appears and disappears in this place with the tides and with the fog. No one knows my name here, and I don’t know theirs. Without this exchange of the barest recognition, I feel like I could disappear in the fog along with everything else.

			It is said that the Creator gathered together the four sacred elements and breathed life into them to give form to Original Man before setting him upon Turtle Island. The last of all beings to be created, First Man was given the name Nanabozho. The Creator called out the name to the four directions so that the others would know who was coming. Nanabozho, part man, part manido—a powerful spiritbeing—is the personification of life forces, the Anishinaabe culture hero, and our great teacher of how to be human. In Nanabozho’s form as Original Man and in our own, we humans are the newest arrivals on earth, the youngsters, just learning to find our way.

			I can imagine how it might have been for him in the beginning, before anyone knew him and he did not know them. I too was a stranger at first in this dark dripping forest perched at the edge of the sea, but I sought out an elder, my Sitka Spruce grandmother with a lap wide enough for many grandchildren. I introduced myself, told her my name and why I had come. I offered her tobacco from my pouch and asked if I might visit in her community for a time. She asked me to sit down, and there was a place right between her roots. Her canopy towers above the forest and her swaying foliage is constantly murmuring to her neighbors. I know she’ll eventually pass the word and my name on the wind.

			Nanabozho did not know his parentage or his origins—only that he was set down into a fully peopled world of plants and animals, winds, and water. He was an immigrant too. Before he arrived, the world was all here, in balance and harmony, each one fulfilling their purpose in the Creation. He understood, as some did not, that this was not the “New World,” but one that was ancient before he came.

			The ground where I sit with Sitka Grandmother is deep with needles, soft with centuries of humus; the trees are so old that my lifetime compared to theirs is just a birdsong long. I suspect that Nanabozho walked like I do, in awe, looking up into the trees so often I stumble.

			The Creator gave Nanabozho some tasks in his role as Original Man, his Original Instructions.*

	 			* This traditional teaching has been published in Eddie Benton-Banais’s The Mishomis Book.

			Anishinaabe elder Eddie Benton-Banai beautifully retells the story of Nanabozho’s first work: to walk through the world that Skywoman had danced into life. His instructions were to walk in such a way “that each step is a greeting to Mother Earth,” but he wasn’t quite sure yet what that meant. Fortunately, although his were the First Man’s prints upon the earth, there were many paths to follow, made by all those whose home this already was.

			The time when the Original Instructions were given we might call “a long time ago.” For in the popular way of thinking, history draws a time “line,” as if time marched in lockstep in only one direction. Some people say that time is a river into which we can step but once, as it flows in a straight path to the sea. But Nanabozho’s people know time as a circle. Time is not a river running inexorably to the sea, but the sea itself—its tides that appear and disappear, the fog that rises to become rain in a different river. All things that were will come again.

			In the way of linear time, you might hear Nanabozho’s stories as mythic lore of history, a recounting of the long-ago past and how things came to be. But in circular time, these stories are both history and prophecy, stories for a time yet to come. If time is a turning circle, there is a place where history and prophecy converge—the footprints of First Man lie on the path behind us and on the path ahead.

			With all the power and all the failings of a human being, Nanabozho did his best with the Original Instructions and tried to become native to his new home. His legacy is that we are still trying. But the instructions have gotten tattered along the way and many have been forgotten.


After all these generations since Columbus, some of the wisest of Native elders still puzzle over the people who came to our shores. They look at the toll on the land and say, “The problem with these new people is that they don’t have both feet on the shore. One is still on the boat. They don’t seem to know whether they’re staying or not.” This same observation is heard from some contemporary scholars who see in the social pathologies and relentlessly materialist culture the fruit of homelessness, a rootless past. America has been called the home of second chances. For the sake of the peoples and the land, the urgent work of the Second Man may be to set aside the ways of the colonist and become indigenous to place. But can Americans, as a nation of immigrants, learn to live here as if we were staying? With both feet on the shore?

			What happens when we truly become native to a place, when we finally make a home? Where are the stories that lead the way? If time does in fact eddy back on itself, maybe the journey of the First Man will provide footsteps to guide the journey of the Second.


Nanabozho’s journey first took him toward the rising sun, to the place where the day begins. As he walked, he worried how he would eat, especially as he was already hungry. How would he find his way? He considered the Original Instructions and understood that all the knowledge he needed in order to live was present in the land. His role was not to control or change the world as a human, but to learn from the world how to be human.

			Wabunong—the East—is the direction of knowledge. We send gratitude to the East for the chance to learn every day, to start anew. In the East, Nanabozho received the lesson that Mother Earth is our wisest teacher. He came to know sema, the sacred tobacco, and how to use it to carry his thoughts to the Creator.

			As he continued exploring the land, Nanabozho was given a new responsibility: to learn the names of all the beings. He watched them carefully to see how they lived and spoke with them to learn what gifts they carried in order to discern their true names. Right away he began to feel more at home and was not lonely anymore when he could call the others by name and they called out to him when he passed, “Bozho!”—still our greeting to one another today.

			Today, far from my neighbors in Maple Nation, I see some species I recognize and many I do not, so I walk as Original Man may have done, seeing them for the first time. I try to turn off my science mind and name them with a Nanabozho mind. I’ve noticed that once some folks attach a scientific label to a being, they stop exploring who it is. But with newly created names I keep looking even closer, to see if I’ve gotten it right. And so today it is not Picea sitchensis but strong arms covered in moss. Branch like a wing instead of Thuja plicata.

			Most people don’t know the names of these relatives; in fact, they hardly even see them. Names are the way we humans build relationship, not only with each other but with the living world. I’m trying to imagine what it would be like going through life not knowing the names of the plants and animals around you. Given who I am and what I do, I can’t know what that’s like, but I think it would be a little scary and disorienting—like being lost in a foreign city where you can’t read the street signs. Philosophers call this state of isolation and disconnection “species loneliness”—a deep, unnamed sadness stemming from estrangement from the rest of Creation, from the loss of relationship. As our human dominance of the world has grown, we have become more isolated, more lonely when we can no longer call out to our neighbors. It’s no wonder that naming was the first job the Creator gave Nanabozho.

			He walked the land, handing out names to all he met, an Anishinaabe Linnaeus. I like to think of the two of them walking together. Linnaeus the Swedish botanist and zoologist, in his loden jacket and woolen trousers, with felt hat cocked back on his forehead and a vasculum under his arm, and Nanabozho naked but for his breechcloth and a single feather, with a buckskin bag under his arm. They stroll along discussing the names for things. They’re both so enthusiastic, pointing out the beautiful leaf shapes, the incomparable flowers. Linnaeus explains his Systema Naturae, a scheme designed to show the ways in which all things are related. Nanabozho nods enthusiastically, “Yes, that is also our way: we say, ‘We are all related.’” He explains that there was a time when all beings spoke the same language and could understand one another, so all of Creation knew each other’s names. Linnaeus looks wistful about that. “I ended up having to translate everything into Latin,” he says of binomial nomenclature. “We lost any other common language long ago.” Linnaeus lends Nanabozho his magnifying glass so he can see the tiny floral parts. Nanabozho gives Linnaeus a song so he can see their spirits. And neither of them are lonely.

			After his eastern sojourn, Nanabozho’s footsteps took him next to the South, zhawanong, the land of birth and growth. From the South comes the green that covers the world in spring, carried on the warm winds. There, cedar, kizhig, the sacred plant of the South, shared her teachings with him. Her branches are medicine that purify and protect life within her embrace. He carried kizhig with him to remind him that to be indigenous is to protect life on earth.

			Following the Original Instructions, Benton-Banai recounts that Nanabozho also had the task to learn how to live from his elder brothers and sisters. When he needed food, he noticed what the animals were eating and copied them. Heron taught him to gather wild rice. One night by the creek, he saw a little ring-tailed animal carefully washing his food with delicate hands. He thought, “Ahh, I am supposed to put only clean food in my body.”

			Nanabozho was counseled by many plants too, who shared gifts, and learned to treat them always with the greatest respect. After all, plants were here first on the earth and have had a long time to figure things out. Together, all the beings, both plants and animals, taught him what he needed to know. The Creator had told him it would be this way.

			His elder brothers and sisters also inspired Nanabozho to make new things in order to survive. Beaver showed him how to make an ax; Whale gave him the shape for his canoe. He’d been instructed that if he could combine the lessons from nature with the strength of his own good mind, he could discover new things that would be useful for the people to come. In his mind, Grandmother Spider’s web became a fishnet. He followed the winter lessons of squirrels to create maple sugar. The lessons Nanabozho learned are the mythic roots of Native science, medicine, architecture, agriculture, and ecological knowledge.

			But true to the circle of time, science and technology are starting to catch up with Native science by adopting the Nanabozho approach— looking to nature for models of design, by the architects of biomimicry. By honoring the knowledge in the land, and caring for its keepers, we start to become indigenous to place.

			To each of the four directions Nanabozho wandered on long, strong legs. Singing loudly as he went, he didn’t hear the bird’s chirps of caution and was duly surprised when Grizzly challenged him. After that, when he came near the territories of others, he did not just blunder in as if the whole world belonged to him. He learned to sit quietly at the edge of the woods and wait to be invited. Then, Benton-Banai recounts, Nanabozho would rise and speak these words to the citizens of that place: “I wish not to mar the beauty of the earth or to disturb my brother’s purpose. I ask that I be allowed to pass.”

			He saw flowers blooming through the snow, Ravens who spoke to Wolves, and insects who lit the prairie nights. His gratitude for their abilities grew and he came to understand that to carry a gift is also to carry a responsibility. The Creator gave Wood Thrush the gift of a beautiful song, with the duty to sing the forest good-night. Late at night he was grateful that the stars were sparkling to guide his way. Breathing under water, flying to the ends of the earth and back, digging earthen dens, making medicines. Every being with a gift, every being with a responsibility. He considered his own empty hands. He had to rely on the world to take care of him.


From my high bluff on the coast I look east and the hills before me are a ragged range of clear-cut forests. To the south I see an estuary dammed and diked so that salmon may no longer pass. On the western horizon, a bottom-dragging trawler scrapes up the ocean floor. And far away to the north, the earth is torn open for oil.

			Had the new people learned what Original Man was taught at a council of animals—never damage Creation, and never interfere with the sacred purpose of another being—the eagle would look down on a different world. The salmon would be crowding up the rivers, and passenger pigeons would darken the sky. Wolves, cranes, Nehalem, cougars, Lenape, old-growth forests would still be here, each fulfilling their sacred purpose. I would be speaking Potawatomi. We would see what Nanabozho saw. It does not bear too much imagining, for in that direction lies heartbreak.

			Against the backdrop of that history, an invitation to settler society to become indigenous to place feels like a free ticket to a housebreaking party. It could be read as an open invitation to take what little is left. Can settlers be trusted to follow Nanabozho, to walk so that “each step is a greeting to Mother Earth”? Grief and fear still sit in the shadows, behind the glimmer of hope. Together they try to hold my heart closed.

			But I need to remember that the grief is the settlers’ as well. They too will never walk in a tallgrass prairie where sunflowers dance with goldfinches. Their children have also lost the chance to sing at the Maple Dance. They can’t drink the water either.


In his journey to the North, Nanabozho found the medicine teachers. They gave him Wiingaashk to teach him the ways of compassion, kindness, and healing, even for those who have made bad mistakes, for who has not? To become indigenous is to grow the circle of healing to include all of Creation. Sweetgrass, in a long braid, offers protection to a traveler, and Nanabozho put some in his bag. A path scented with sweetgrass leads to a landscape of forgiveness and healing for all who need it. She doesn’t give her gift only to some.

			When Nanabozho came to the West, he found many things that frightened him. The earth shook beneath his feet. He saw great fires consume the land. Sage, mshkodewashk, the sacred plant of the west, was there to help him, to wash away fear. Benton-Banai reminds us that Firekeeper himself came to Nanabozho. “This is the same fire that warms your lodge,” he said. “All powers have two sides, the power to create and the power to destroy. We must recognize them both, but invest our gifts on the side of creation.”

			Nanabozho learned that in the duality of all things, he had a twin brother who was as committed to making imbalance as Nanabozho was dedicated to balance. That twin had learned the interplay of creation and destruction and rocked it like a boat on a choppy sea to keep people out of balance. He found that the arrogance of power could be used to unleash unlimited growth—an unrestrained, cancerous sort of creation that would lead to destruction. Nanabozho vowed to walk with humility in order to try to balance his twin’s arrogance. That too is the task of those who would walk in his footsteps.

			I go to sit with my Sitka Spruce grandmother to think. I am not from here, just a stranger who comes with gratitude and respect and questions of how it is we come to belong to a place. And yet she makes me welcome, just as we are told the big trees of the west kindly looked after Nanabozho.

			Even as I sit in her still shadow, my thoughts are all tangled. Like my elders before me, I want to envision a way that an immigrant society could become indigenous to place, but I’m stumbling on the words. Immigrants cannot by definition be indigenous. Indigenous is a birthright word. No amount of time or caring changes history or substitutes for soul-deep fusion with the land. Following Nanabozho’s footsteps doesn’t guarantee transformation of Second Man to First. But if people do not feel “indigenous,” can they nevertheless enter into the deep reciprocity that renews the world? Is this something that can be learned? Where are the teachers? I’m remembering the words of elder Henry Lickers. “You know, they came here thinking they’d get rich by working on the land. So they dug their mines and cut down the trees. But the land is the one with the power—while they were working on the land, the land was working on them. Teaching them.”

			I sit a long time and eventually the sound of the wind in Grandmother Sitka’s branches washes words away and I lose myself in just listening—to the crisp voice of laurels, the chatter of alders, the whispers of lichens. I have to be reminded—just like Nanabozho—that the plants are our oldest teachers.

			I get up from my needle-soft nook between Grandmother’s roots and walk back to the trail, where I am stopped in my tracks. Bedazzled by my new neighbors—giant firs, sword fern, and salal—I had passed by an old friend without recognition. I’m embarrassed to not have greeted him before. From the east coast to the edge of the west, he had walked here. Our people have a name for this round-leafed plant: White Man’s Footstep.

			Just a low circle of leaves, pressed close to the ground with no stem to speak of, it arrived with the first settlers and followed them everywhere they went. It trotted along paths through the woods, along wagon roads and railroads, like a faithful dog so as to be near them. Linnaeus called it Plantago major, the common plantain. Its Latin epithet Plantago refers to the sole of a foot.

			At first the Native people were distrustful of a plant that came with so much trouble trailing behind. But Nanabozho’s people knew that all things have a purpose and that we must not interfere with its fulfillment. When it became clear that White Man’s Footstep would be staying on Turtle Island, they began to learn about its gifts. In spring it makes a good pot of greens, before summer heat turns the leaves tough. The people became glad for its constant presence when they learned that the leaves, when they are rolled or chewed to a poultice, make a fine first aid for cuts, burns, and especially insect bites. Every part of the plant is useful. Those tiny seeds are good medicine for digestion. The leaves can halt bleeding right away and heal wounds without infection.

			This wise and generous plant, faithfully following the people, became an honored member of the plant community. It’s a foreigner, an immigrant, but after five hundred years of living as a good neighbor, people forget that kind of thing.

			Our immigrant plant teachers offer a lot of different models for how not to make themselves welcome on a new continent. Garlic mustard poisons the soil so that native species will die. Tamarisk uses up all the water. Foreign invaders like loosestrife, kudzu, and cheat grass have the colonizing habit of taking over others’ homes and growing without regard to limits. But Plantain is not like that. Its strategy was to be useful, to fit into small places, to coexist with others around the dooryard, to heal wounds. Plantain is so prevalent, so well integrated, that we think of it as native. It has earned the name bestowed by botanists for plants that have become our own. Plantain is not indigenous but “naturalized.” This is the same term we use for the foreign-born when they become citizens in our country. They pledge to uphold the laws of the state. They might well uphold Nanabozho’s Original Instructions, too.

			Maybe the task assigned to Second Man is to unlearn the model of kudzu and follow the teachings of White Man’s Footstep, to strive to become naturalized to place, to throw off the mind-set of the immigrant. Being naturalized to place means to live as if this is the land that feeds you, as if these are the streams from which you drink, that build your body and fill your spirit. To become naturalized is to know that your ancestors lie in this ground. Here you will give your gifts and meet your responsibilities. To become naturalized is to live as if your children’s future matters, to take care of the land as if our lives and the lives of all our relatives depend on it. Because they do.

			As time circles around on itself again, maybe White Man’s Footstep is following in Nanabozho’s. Perhaps Plantain will line the homeward path. We could follow. White Man’s Footstep, generous and healing, grows with its leaves so close to the ground that each step is a greeting to Mother Earth.





The Sound of Silverbells


			I’d never wanted to live in the South, but when my husband’s job took us there I duly learned the flora and tried to cultivate affection for the drab oaks when I longed for fiery maples. Even if I did not feel fully at home, the least I could do was help my students develop a sense of botanical belonging.

			In pursuit of this humble goal, I had taken my premed students to a local nature reserve where the forest marched up the slope in bands of color signifying ribbons of different species from the floodplain to the ridge. I asked them to invent a hypothesis or two to explain why the striking pattern existed.

			“It’s all part of God’s plan,” said one student. “You know, the grand design?” After ten years of immersion in the primacy of materialist science as the explanation for the function of the world, I had to swallow hard. Where I’m from, an answer like that would have drawn laughter or at least rolled eyes, but in this group it simply yielded nods of assent, or at the least tolerance. “That’s an important perspective,” I said carefully, “but scientists have a different explanation for the distribution of vegetation over the landscape, maples in one place, and spruce in another.” This was a dance I was trying to get used to, teaching in the Bible Belt. I stumbled over two very left feet. “Have you ever wondered how the world got to be put together so beautifully? Why certain plants grow here and not there?” Judging by their polite blankness, this was not a burning question for them. Their total disinterest in ecology pained me. To me ecological insight was the music of the spheres, but to them it was just one more requirement in their premed education. A biological story that wasn’t about humans was of little interest. I didn’t understand how one could be a biologist without being able to see the land, to know natural history and the elegant flow of natural forces. The earth is so richly endowed that the least we can do in return is to pay attention. And so, with a little evangelical fervor of my own, I set my sights on the conversion of their scientific souls.

			All eyes were on me, waiting for failure, so I paid attention to every little detail, just to prove them wrong. Vans idled in the circle in front of the administration building while I checked my list one more time: maps prepared, campsites reserved, eighteen pairs of binoculars, six field microscopes, three days of food, first aid kits, and reams of handouts of graphs and scientific names. The dean argued that it was too expensive to take students into the field. I argued that it was too costly not to. Whether the passengers were willing or not, our little convoy of college vans was headed down the highway through the sheared-off mountaintops of coal country where the streams run red with acid. Shouldn’t students devoted to a profession in health see this firsthand?

			The hours on a dark highway gave me plenty of time to consider the wisdom of trying the dean’s patience in my very first job. The college was already struggling with finances, and I was just a part-time instructor teaching a few classes while I finished my dissertation. I’d left my baby girls at home with their dad in order to introduce other people’s children to something they cared little about. This exclusive little college had built its reputation in the South on the successful admission of its students to medical school. Accordingly, the sons and daughters of the bluegrass aristocracy were sent here for their first step toward lives of privilege.

			In keeping with this medical mission, the dean ritually donned a white coat every morning as a priest dons his vestments. His desk calendar called only for administrative meetings, budget reviews, and alumni functions, but the lab coat was a fixture. Though I never saw him in an actual lab, it was no wonder that he harbored doubts about a flannel-shirt scientist like me.

			The biologist Paul Ehrlich called ecology “the subversive science” for its power to cause us to reconsider the place of humans in the natural world. So far, these students had devoted several years to the study of a single species: themselves. I had a whole three days to be subversive, to distract them from Homo sapiens for a glimpse of the six million other species with whom we share the planet. The dean voiced his concerns about funding a “mere camping trip,” but I argued that the Great Smoky Mountains were a major reservoir of biodiversity and promised that it would be a legitimate scientific expedition. I was tempted to add that we’d wear lab coats for good measure. He sighed and signed the requisition.

			The composer Aaron Copland got it right. An Appalachian spring is music for dancing. The woods dance with the colors of wildflowers, nodding sprays of white dogwood and the pink froth of redbuds, rushing streams and the embroidered solemnity of dark mountains. But we were here to work. I got out of my tent the first morning with clipboard in hand and lessons in mind.

			The range spread out above us in our valley campsite. The Smokies in early spring are a patchwork of diffuse colors, like a map with individual nations colored: pale green for the newly-leafed poplars, gray blocks of the still-dormant oaks, and dusty rose for the maples breaking bud. Here and there, hot pink tracts of redbud and swaths of white reveal where the dogwoods bloom and lines of dark green hemlock trace the watercourses like a cartographer’s pen. Back in the classroom, hands white with chalk dust, I had diagrammed the gradients of temperature, soils, and growing season. Before us, the mountainside spread the pastel map of our field trip, the abstract translated into flowers.

			Moving up the mountainside was the ecological equivalent of walking to Canada. The warm valley floor could give us a Georgia summer, while the five-thousand-foot summits are akin to Toronto. “Bring your warm jackets,” I told them. An increase of one thousand feet is equivalent to moving a hundred miles northward and therefore many steps back into spring. The dogwoods on the lower slopes were in full bloom, creamy-white sprays against the emerging leaves. Moving upslope they reversed like a time-lapse camera running backward from open blossoms to tightly bound buds not yet awakened by heat. Midway up the slope, where the growing season is too short, the dogwoods disappear altogether, their place taken by another tree more tolerant of the lateseason frosts, silverbells.

			For three days we wandered over this ecological map, traversing elevational zones from deep cove forests of tulip poplar and cucumber magnolia to the summits. The lush coves were a garden of wildflowers, glossy patches of wild ginger and nine species of trillium. The students dutifully wrote down whatever I told them, creating a mirror image of my internal checklist of things to see without much apparent interest. They asked for the spelling of scientific names so often that I felt like I was in a woodland spelling bee. The dean would be proud.

			For three days I checked the species and ecosystems off the list to justify the trip. We mapped vegetation, soils, and temperature with the fervor of Alexander von Humboldt. At night we drew graphs around the campfire. Oak-hickory at midelevation, coarse gravelly soil—check. Reduced stature and increased wind speed at high elevation—check. Phenological patterns with elevational change—check. Endemic salamanders, niche diversification—check. I so wanted them to see the world beyond the boundaries of their own skins. I was conscientious not to waste a single teaching opportunity and filled the quiet woods with facts and figures. My jaw ached at the end of the day when I crawled into my sleeping bag.

			This was hard work. When I hike, I like to do it quietly, just looking, just being there. Here I was constantly talking, pointing things out, generating discussion questions in my head. Being the teacher.

			I only lost it once. The road became steeper as we approached the top of the range. The vans labored around sharp switchbacks and were buffeted by strong winds. No more soft maples and pink froth of redbud. At this elevation the snows had only recently melted away from beneath the firs. Looking out over the land, we could see how narrow this band of boreal forest was, a thin strip of Canadian habitat way down here in North Carolina, hundreds of miles north from the nearest spruce-fir woods, just a remnant from the day when ice covered the north. Today these high mountaintops offer a refuge that feels like home to spruce and fir, islands in a sea of southern hardwoods, perched high enough to duplicate the Canadian climate.

			These islands of northern woods felt like home to me too, and in the fresh cold air I slipped the leash of my lectures. We prowled among the trees, breathing in the scent of balsam. The soft mattress of needles, wintergreen, trailing arbutus, bunchberry—all my familiars from home carpeted the forest floor. They made me realize suddenly how displaced I felt to be teaching in someone else’s home forest, when I was so far from my own.

			I lay down on a carpet of moss and held class from a spider’s perspective. High on these summits live the world’s last populations of the endangered spruce-fir moss spider. I didn’t expect premed students to give a damn, but I had to speak up for the spiders. They have persisted here since the glaciers picked up and left, living their tiny lives spinning webs among mossy rocks. Global warming is the major threat to this habitat and these animals. As the climate warms, this island of boreal forest will melt away and with it the last of many lives, never to return. Already insects and disease from warmer elevations are claiming them. When you live on the summit, there’s no place else to go when the hot air rises. They will balloon away on strands of spider silk, but there will be no refuge.

			I ran my hand over a mossy rock, thinking of the unraveling of ecosystems and the hand that pulls the loosened thread. “We have no right to take their homes from them,” I thought. Maybe I spoke out loud or had a zealot’s look in my eye, because one student suddenly asked, “Is this like your religion or something?”

			Ever since a student had challenged my teaching of evolution, I’d learned to tread lightly on these matters. I felt all of their eyes upon me, good Christians, every one. So I hemmed and hawed about loving the woods, started to explain about indigenous environmental philosophies and kinship with the other members of Creation, but they looked at me so quizzically that I stopped and then hastened off to point out a nearby clump of sporulating ferns. At that time in my life, in that setting, I felt that I couldn’t explain the ecology of spirit, a sense that went so far from Christianity and science alike that I was sure they wouldn’t understand. And besides, we were there for Science. I should have just answered yes.

			After many miles and many lectures, at last it was Sunday afternoon. Job done, mountains climbed, data collected. My premed students were dirty and tired, their notebooks filled with more than a hundred and fifty nonhuman species and the mechanisms behind their distributions. I’d have a good report for the dean.

			We hiked back to the vans in the late golden light, through a stand filled with the pendant blooms of mountain silverbell that seemed to glow from within like pearly lanterns. The students were awfully quiet, tired, I imagined. With mission accomplished, I was happy just to watch the slant of hazy light over the mountains for which the park is justly famous. A Hermit Thrush sang out from the shadows and a little breeze brought a shower of white petals around us as we walked in that amazing place. I was suddenly so sad. In that moment, I knew that I had failed. I had failed to teach the kind of science that I had longed for as a young student seeking the secret of Asters and Goldenrod, a science deeper than data.

			I had given them so much information, all the patterns and processes laid on so thick as to obscure the most important truth. I missed my chance, leading them down every path save the one that matters most. How will people ever care for the fate of moss spiders if we don’t teach students to recognize and respond to the world as gift? I’d told them all about how it works and nothing of what it meant. We may as well have stayed home and read about the Smokies. In effect, against all my prejudices, I’d worn a white lab coat into the wilderness. Betrayal is a heavy load and I plodded along, suddenly weary.

			I turned to see the students coming down the trail behind me, a petal-strewn path in gauzy light. One person, I don’t know who, began to sing, ever so quietly, those familiar first notes. The ones that open your throat, irresistibly calling you to sing. Amazing grace, how sweet the sound. One by one they joined in, singing in the long shadows and a drift of white petals settling on our shoulders. That saved a wretch like me. I once was lost but now I’m found.

			I was humbled. Their singing said everything that my wellintentioned lectures did not. On and on they went, adding harmonies as they walked. They understood harmony in a way that I did not. I heard in their raised voices the same outpouring of love and gratitude for the Creation that Skywoman first sang on the back of Turtle Island. In their caress of that old hymn I came to know that it wasn’t naming the source of wonder that mattered, it was wonder itself. Despite my manic efforts and my checklist of scientific names, I knew now that they hadn’t missed it all. Was blind, but now I see. And they did. And so did I. If I forget every genus and species I ever knew, I’ll never forget that moment. The worst teacher in the world or the best teacher in the world—neither can be heard over the voices of Silverbells and Hermit Thrushes. The rush of waterfalls and the silence of mosses have the last word.

			As an enthusiastic young PhD, colonized by the arrogance of science, I had been fooling myself that I was the only teacher. The land is the real teacher. All we need as students is mindfulness. Paying attention is a form of reciprocity with the living world, receiving the gifts with open eyes and open heart. My job was just to lead them into the presence and ready them to hear. On that smoky afternoon, the mountains taught the students and the students taught the teacher.

			As I drove home that night, the students slept or studied by dimming flashlight. That Sunday afternoon changed forever my way of teaching. A teacher comes, they say, when you are ready. And if you ignore its presence, it will speak to you more loudly. But you have to be quiet to hear.





Sitting in a Circle


			Brad arrives at our wilderness field station for ethnobotany class in loafers and a polo shirt. I watch him wander the shoreline, looking in vain for a cell phone signal, looking like he really needs to talk to somebody. “Nature’s great and all,” he says as I show him around, but the remoteness makes him uneasy. “There’s nothing here but trees.”

			Most of our students come to the Cranberry Lake Biological Station with effervescent enthusiasm, but there are always a few who arrive with only resignation to endure five weeks away from the wired world—a graduation requirement. Over the years, the demeanor of the students has become a pretty good mirror for the changing relationships to nature. They used to arrive motivated by childhoods filled with camping or fishing or messing about in the woods. Today, while their passion for wilderness has not diminished, they now report that their inspiration comes from Animal Planet or the National Geographic channel. More and more often, the reality of nature outside the living room takes them by surprise.

			I try to reassure Brad that the woods are just about the safest place in the world. I confess that I experience the same unease when I go to the city, a slight panic of not knowing how to take care of myself, where there’s nothing but people. But I know it is a tough transition: We are seven miles across the lake with no road access, not a scrap of pavement, and completely surrounded by wilderness for a day’s walk in any direction. It’s easily an hour to medical help and three to a Walmart. “I mean, what if you need something?” he says. I guess he’s going to find out.

			After just a few days of being here, the students start to metamorphose into field biologists. Their confidence with the equipment and the insider jargon gives them a new swagger. They constantly practice learning Latin names and count coup by using them. At the evening volleyball games it’s perfectly excusable in biostation culture to miss the ball if your opponents call out “Megaceryle alcyon! ” when a kingfisher rattles along the shore. These are good things to know, to begin to discriminate the living world into individuals, to discern the threads in the weave of the woods, to attune to the body of the land.

			But I also see that when we put scientific instruments in their hands they trust their own senses less. And when they put more energy into memorizing Latin names, they spend less time looking at the beings themselves. The students come already knowing a lot about ecosystems and can identify an impressive list of plants. But when I ask how these plants take care of them, they cannot say.

			So, at the start of my ethnobotany class, we brainstorm a list of human needs, with the goal of discovering which of them the Adirondack plants might be able to meet. It’s a familiar list: food, shelter, heat, clothing. I’m glad that oxygen and water make it into the top ten. Some of the students have studied Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs and take it beyond survival into the “higher” levels of art, companionship, and spirituality. This of course elicits some dubious comedy about people whose needs for interpersonal connection are met by carrots. Putting that observation aside, we begin with shelter—by building our classroom.

			They’ve chosen the site, marked the geometry on the ground, harvested saplings and set them deep in the soil, so we have a twelve-foot circle of neatly spaced maple poles. It’s hot and sweaty work, at first done mostly as individuals. But when the circle is complete and the first pair of saplings are joined in an arch, the need for a team becomes clear: the tallest to grab the treetops, the heaviest to hold them down, the smallest to scramble up and lash them in place. The creation of one arch calls for the next and they are led by the emerging shape of the wigwam. Its inherent symmetry makes any mistakes obvious and the students tie and untie until they get it right. The woods are full of their bright voices. When the last pair of saplings is tied, quiet falls as they see what they have made. It looks like an upside-down bird’s nest, a basket of thick saplings domed like a turtle’s back. You want to be inside.

			All fifteen of us can find a comfortable seat around the perimeter. Even without a covering, it feels cozy. Few of us live in round houses anymore, where there are no walls or corners. Indigenous architecture tends to the small and round, though, following the model of nests and dens and burrows and redds and eggs and wombs—as if there were some universal pattern for home. With our backs leaning against the saplings, we consider this convergence of design. A sphere has the highest ratio of volume to surface area, minimizing the materials needed for living space. Its form sheds water and distributes the weight of a snow load. It is efficient to heat and resistant to wind. Beyond material considerations, there is cultural meaning to living within the teachings of a circle. I tell them that the doorway always faces east and they quickly assess its utility, given the prevailing westerly winds. The utility of greeting the dawn is not yet part of their thinking, but the sun will show them.

			This bare frame of a wigwam is not done teaching. It needs walls of cattail mats and a birch bark roof tied with spruce root. There’s still work to be done.


I see Brad before class and he’s still looking glum. I try to cheer him up and tell him, “We’re going shopping across the lake today!” There is a tiny shop in the town across the lake, the Emporium Marine, the kind of general store you find off the beaten track that always seems to have the very thing you need, next to the shoelaces, cat food, coffee filters, a can of Hungry-Man stew, and a bottle of Pepto-Bismol. But that’s not where we’re going. The cattail marsh has something in common with the Emporium, but I suppose a comparison to Walmart is more appropriate, as they both sprawl over acres of land. Today we will shop at the marsh.

			At one time marshes had a bad reputation for slimy beasts, disease, stink, and all manner of unpleasantness until people realized how valuable they are. Our students now sing the praises of wetland biodiversity and their ecosystem functions, but that still doesn’t mean they want to walk in them, and they eye me skeptically when I explain that gathering cattails is most efficiently accomplished in the water. I reassure them that there are no poisonous water snakes this far north, no quicksand, and that the snapping turtles generally hunker down when they hear us coming. I do not say the word leeches aloud.

			Eventually they all follow me and manage to exit their canoes without capsizing. We wade like herons through the marsh, minus the grace and poise, the students tentative among the floating islets of shrubs and grasses, feeling for solidity before committing their weight to the next step. If their young lives have not already shown them, they will learn today that solidity is an illusion. The lake bottom here lies under several feet of suspended muck, as solid as chocolate pudding.

			Chris is the most fearless, and—bless him—he leads the way. Grinning like a five-year-old, he stands nonchalantly in the channel, waist deep, elbow resting against a sedge hummock as if it were an armchair. He’s never done this before but encourages the others anyway, offering advice to those teetering on a log: “Just get it over with so you can relax and have fun.” Natalie takes the plunge as she shouts, “Become one with your inner muskrat!” Claudia steps back to avoid the muddy splash. She’s scared. Like an elegant doorman, Chris gallantly offers her a hand into the muck. Then a long trail of bubbles rises up behind him and breaks the surface in a loud burble. He blushes under his mud-streaked face and shifts his feet as everyone eyes him. Another long trill of foul-smelling bubbles erupts behind him. The class cracks up and soon everybody is smooshing through the water. Swamp walking releases a stream of fart jokes as inevitably as methane “swamp gas” is released by our footsteps. The water is about thigh deep in most places, but every now and then there is a shriek—and then laughter— when someone discovers the chest-deep holes. I hope it’s not Brad.

			To pull cattails, you reach under water to the base of the plant and tug. If the sediments are loose enough or if you’re strong enough, you can pull up the whole plant, rhizome and all. The problem is that you can’t tell whether the shoot will snap or not until you tug with all your might and it suddenly breaks free, leaving you sitting in the water with muck dripping from your ears.

			The rhizomes, essentially underground stems, are a real prize. Brown and fibrous on the outside, they are white and starchy on the inside, almost like a potato, and they taste pretty good roasted in the fire. Soak cut rhizomes in clean water and you’ll soon have a bowl of pasty white starch that can become flour or porridge. Some of the hairy rhizomes have a stiff white shoot emerging from their end, a more than vaguely phallic organ of horizontal propagation. This is the growing point that will spread the cattails through the marsh. Invoking the hierarchy of human needs, some of the guys have a little fun with them when they think I’m not looking.

			The cattail plant—Typha latifolia—is like a giant grass: no distinct stem, but rather a rolled bundle of leaves that sheathe around each other in concentric layers. No one leaf could withstand wind and wave action, but the collective is strong and the extensive underwater network of rhizomes anchors them in place. Harvested in June, they’re three feet high. Wait until August and you have leaves eight feet long, each about an inch wide and strengthened by the parallel veins running from base to softly waving leaf tip. These circular veins are themselves encircled by sturdy fibers, all working to support the plant. In turn, the plant supports the people. Cattail leaves, split and twisted, are one of the easiest sources of plant cordage, our string and twine. Back at camp, we’ll make twine for the wigwam and thread fine enough for weaving.

			Before long, the canoes are brimming with bundles of leaves and look like a flotilla of rafts on a tropical river. We tow them to shore, where we begin to sort and clean them by taking each plant apart, leaf by leaf, from the outside in. As she strips off the leaves, Natalie drops hers quickly to the ground. “Ooh, it’s all slimy,” she says, and starts to wipe her hands on her muddy pants, as if that will help. When you pull the leaf bases apart, gobs of cattail gel stretch like clear watery mucus between the leaves. At first it seems gross, but then you notice how good your hands feel. I’ve often heard herbalists say that “the cure grows near to the cause,” and, accordingly, though gathering cattails is guaranteed to get you sunburned and itchy, the antidote to discomfort is in the plants themselves. Clear and cool and clean, the gel is refreshing and antimicrobial, the swamp’s answer to aloe vera gel. The cattails make the gel as a defense against microbes and to keep the leaf bases moist when water levels drop. These same properties that protect the plant protect us too. It feels so soothing on sunburn that soon the students are smearing themselves with slime.

			Cattails have evolved other features that are perfectly adapted for a life spent standing in the marsh. The bases of the leaves are under water, but they still need oxygen for respiration. So, like scuba divers with air tanks, they equip themselves with spongy, air-filled tissue, nature’s Bubble Wrap. These white cells, called aerenchyma, are big enough to be seen with the naked eye and make a buoyant, cushiony layer at the base of each leaf. The leaves are also coated with a waxy layer, a waterproof barrier like a raincoat. But this raincoat works in reverse, keeping watersoluble nutrients inside, so that they don’t leach away into the water.

			This is all good for the plant, of course—and it’s good for people. The cattails have made a superb material for shelter in leaves that are long, water repellent, and packed with closed-cell foam for insulation. In the old times, fine mats of cattail leaves were sewn or twined to sheathe a summer wigwam. In dry weather, the leaves shrink apart from one another and let the breeze waft between them for ventilation. When the rains come, they swell and close the gap, making the mat waterproof. Cattails also make fine sleeping mats. The wax keeps away moisture from the ground and the aerenchyma provide cushioning and insulation. A couple of cattail mats—soft, dry, and smelling like fresh hay—under your sleeping bag make for a cozy night.

			Squeezing the soft leaves between her fingers, Natalie says, “It’s almost as if the plants made these things for us.” The parallels between the adaptations evolved by the plants and the needs of the people are indeed striking. In some Native languages the term for plants translates to “those who take care of us.” Through natural selection the cattails developed sophisticated adaptations that increase their survival in the marsh. The people were attentive students and borrowed solutions from the plants, which increased their likelihood of survival. The plants adapt, the people adopt.

			As we keep peeling away leaves they get thinner and thinner, like the husks of corn as you get near the cob. At the center the leaves nearly merge with the stem, a soft column of white pith as thick as your pinkie and as crisp as a summer squash. I snap the pith into bite-size pieces and pass it around. Only after I eat mine do the students venture a nibble, looking at each other sideways. Moments later they’re hungrily stripping stalks for themselves like pandas in a bamboo patch. Sometimes called Cossacks’ asparagus, the raw pith tastes like a cucumber. It can be sautéed, boiled, or simply eaten fresh on the lakeshore by hungry college students after their bag lunches are just a memory.

			Back across the marsh, you can easily see where we’ve been harvesting. It looks like big muskrats have been at work. The students wade into a heated conversation about their own impact.

			Our shopping canoes are already filled with leaves for clothing, mats, twine, and shelter. We have buckets of rhizomes for carbohydrate energy, stalks of pith for vegetables—what more could people need? The students compare our haul to their list of human needs. They note that while the cattails are impressive in their versatility, there are some gaps: protein, fire, light, music. Natalie wants pancakes added to the list. “Toilet paper!” offers Claudia. Brad has an iPod on his list of essentials.

			We wander the aisles of the supermarket of the swamp to search out additional products. The students start pretending they’re at an actual Walmart, Lance offering to be the greeter at the door of Wal-marsh so he doesn’t have to wade back in. “Pancakes, ma’am? Aisle five. Flashlights? Aisle three. Sorry—we don’t carry iPods.”

			Cattail flowers hardly look like flowers at all. The stalk is about five feet tall and ends in a plump green cylinder, neatly tucked at the waist into two halves, males above and females below. Wind pollinated, the froth of male flowers bursts open to release a cloud of sulfur-yellow pollen into the air. The pancake crew scans the marsh for these beacons. They gently slip a small paper bag over the stalk, crumple it tightly closed, and then shake. At the bottom of the bag there is about a tablespoon of bright yellow powder and perhaps an equivalent volume of bugs. Pollen (and bugs) are almost pure protein, a high-quality food to complement the starchy rhizomes back in the canoe. Once the bugs are picked out, it can be added to biscuits and pancakes, adding nutritional value and a beautiful golden color. Not all of the pollen ends up in the bag and the students emerge decorated with tie-dye splashes of yellow.

			The female half of the stalk looks like a skinny green hot dog on a stick, a nubbly sponge of tightly packed ovaries waiting for pollen. We’ll boil them in a little salt water and then drench them in butter. Holding both ends of the stalk like an ear of corn, you just nibble off the immature flowers as if the stalk were a skewer. The taste and texture are remarkably like an artichoke’s. Cattail kebabs for dinner.

			I hear shouting and see clouds of fluff drifting on the air, so I know that the students have reached Walmarsh aisle three. Each tiny flower matures to a seed attached to a plume of fluff, making up the familiar cattail, a handsome brown sausage at the end of the stalk. At this time of year, wind and winter have picked away at them until they are just wads like cotton batting. The students tear it from the stalk and stuff it into sacks, destined for pillows or bedding. Our foremothers must have been grateful for a thick marsh. One of the names for cattail in the Potawatomi language is bewiieskwinuk, meaning “we wrap the baby in it.” Soft, warm, absorbent—it was both insulation and diaper.

			Elliot calls back to us: “I found the flashlights!” The stalks with matted fuzz traditionally were dipped in fat and lit to make a serviceable torch. The stalk itself is remarkably straight and smooth, almost like a lathed dowel. Our people gathered these for many uses, including arrow shafts and drills for creating handmade friction fire. A puff of cattail fluff was usually kept in a fire-making bundle as tinder. The students gather it all and bring their bargains back to the canoes. Natalie still wades nearby; she calls out that she’s going to “Marsh-alls” next. Chris is not back yet.

			On wings of fluff, the seeds blow far and wide to establish new colonies. Cattails grow in nearly all types of wetlands, wherever there is adequate sun, plentiful nutrients, and soggy ground. Midway between land and water, freshwater marshes are among the most highly productive ecosystems on earth, rivaling the tropical rainforest. People valued the supermarket of the swamp for the cattails, but also as a rich source of fish and game. Fish spawn in the shallows; frogs and salamanders abound. Waterfowl nest here in the safety of the dense sward, and migratory birds seek out cattail marshes for sanctuary on their journeys.

			Not surprisingly, hunger for this productive land precipitated a 90 percent loss of the wetlands—as well as the Native people who depended upon them. Cattails are also soil builders. All those leaves and rhizomes return to the sediments when the cattails die back. What hasn’t been eaten lies beneath the water, only partially decomposing in the anaerobic waters, building up peat. It is rich in nutrients and has the water-holding capacity of a sponge, making it ideal for truck crops. Decried as “wastelands,” marsh draining for agriculture was carried out on a huge scale. So-called “muck farms” plow under the black soil of drained marshes, and a landscape that once supported some of the world’s highest biodiversity now supports a single crop. In some places the old wetlands are just paved over for parking. A true waste of land.

			Just as we’re tying down the load in our canoes, Chris comes walking along the shore with a secret smirk and something behind his back. “Here you go, Brad. I found your iPods.” He has two dry milkweed pods, which he fits over his eyes and holds in place with a squint: eye pods.

			By the end of the mucky, sunburned, laughing, and leech-free day, we have boats piled high with material for rope, bedding, insulation, light, food, heat, shelter, rain gear, shoes, tools, and medicine. As we’re paddling home, I wonder if Brad is still worried that we might “need something.”

			A few days later, fingers roughened by harvesting and weaving mats, we gather in the wigwam with slits of sun coming through our walls of cattail mats, sitting on cattail cushions. The top of the dome is still open to the sky. Surrounded by our woven classroom, it feels like being an apple in a basket, everyone nestled together. The roof is the last step, and rain is in the forecast. We already have a pile of birch bark sheets waiting to become our ceiling, so we head out to gather the last materials.


I used to teach just the way I was taught, but now I let someone else do all the work for me. If plants are our oldest teachers, why not let them teach?

			After the long hike from camp, our shovels clanking against rocks and the relentless torment of deerflies on sweaty skin, the shade feels like a dip into cool water. Still swatting, we drop our packs by the trail to rest for a moment in the mossy hush. The air is redolent with DEET and impatience. Maybe the students already sense the line of welts that the blackflies will leave, where that gap of unprotected skin opens between shirt and pants when you’re down on all fours, grubbing for roots. They’ll lose some blood but still I envy them the experience to come, the beginner’s mind.

			The forest floor here is all spruce needles, rusty brown, deep and soft, with the occasional pale drift of maple or black cherry leaves. Ferns, mosses, and trailing partridgeberry glow in the few sun flecks that penetrate the dense canopy. We’re here to harvest watap, the roots of white spruce, Picea glauca—a cultural keystone for indigenous peoples throughout the Great Lakes, strong enough to stitch together birch bark canoes and wigwams, flexible enough for beautiful baskets. The roots of other spruces are serviceable, but it’s worth hunting for the glaucous foliage and pungent feline odor of white spruce.

			We thread our way among the spruces, snapping off dead branches that threaten to poke out an eye as we search for just the right spot. I want them to learn how to read the forest floor, to develop the X-ray vision that helps you see the roots beneath the surface, but it’s hard to break down intuition into a formula. Choose a place between two spruces to maximize your chances, as level as possible, and avoid a spot with rocks. A well-decayed log nearby is welcome and a mossy layer is a good sign.

			In gathering roots, just plunging in will get you nothing but a hole. We have to unlearn hurrying. This is all about slowness. “First we give. Then we take.” Whether it’s cattails or birch or roots, the students have gotten used to this preharvest ritual, invoking the Honorable Harvest. Some close their eyes and join me and some realize it’s a good time to fumble through their backpacks for a missing pencil. I murmur to the Spruces who I am and why I’ve come. Using bits of Potawatomi and bits of English, I ask their kind permission for digging. I ask if they’ll share with these dear young people what only they can give, their physical bodies and their teachings. I’m asking for something more than roots and leave a little tobacco in return.

			The students gather round, leaning on their shovels. I brush away the layer of old leaves, flaky and fragrant like aged pipe tobacco. I take out my knife and make the first incision through the duff—not deep enough to sever veins or muscle, just a superficial slice through the forest skin—slide my fingers beneath the cut edge, and pull back. The top layer peels away and I set it aside for safekeeping, to replace when we’re done. A centipede runs blindly in the unaccustomed light. A beetle dives for cover. Laying open the soil is like a careful dissection and there is the same astonishment among the students at the orderly beauty of the organs, the harmony of how they rest against one another, form to function. These are the viscera of the forest.

			Against the black humus, colors stand out like neon lights on a dark wet street. Juicy school bus orange, goldthread roots crisscross the ground. A web of creamy roots, each as thick as a pencil, connects all the sarsaparillas. Chris says right away, “It looks like a map.” With roads of different colors and sizes, it really does. There are interstates of heavy red roots whose origins I do not know. We tug on one and few feet away a blueberry bush jounces in reply. White tubers of Canada mayflower are connected by translucent threads like county roads between villages. A mycelial fan of pale yellow spreads out from a clump of dark organic matter, like the small dead-end streets of a culde-sac. A great dense metropolis of fibrous brown roots emanates from a young hemlock. They all have their hands in it now, tracing the lines, trying to match the root colors to the aboveground plants, reading the map of the world.

			The students think they’ve seen soil before. They’ve dug in their gardens, planted a tree, held a handful of freshly turned earth—warm, crumbly, and ready for a seed. But that handful of tilled soil is a poor cousin to the soil of the forest, as a pound of hamburger is to the whole blooming pasture of cows and bees and clover, meadowlarks, woodchucks, and all that binds them together. Backyard soil is like ground meat: it may be nutritious but it has been homogenized beyond recognition of its origins. Humans make agricultural soils by tilling; forest soils simply make themselves through a web of reciprocal processes that few have the chance to witness.

			Carefully lift away the sod of herb roots and the soil beneath is as black as morning java before the cream—humus, moist and dense, black flour as silky as the finest coffee grounds. There is nothing “dirty” about soil. This soft black humus is so sweet and clean you could eat it by the spoonful. We have to excavate a bit of this gorgeous soil to find the tree roots and sort out which is which. The maples, birches, and cherries are too brittle—we only want spruce. The spruce roots, you can tell by feel; they’re taut and springy. You can pluck one like a guitar string and it twangs against the ground, resilient and strong. Those are the ones we’re looking for.

			Slip your fingers around it. Tug and it starts to pull up from the ground, leading you off to the north, so you clear a little channel in that direction to free it. But then its path is intersected by another coming in from the east, straight and sure, as if it knows where it’s going. So you excavate there, too. Dig some more and then there are three. Before long, it looks like a bear has been clawing up the ground. I go back to the first, cut an end free, and then duck it under the others, over, under, over, under. I’m separating a single wire in the scaffold that holds up the forest, but I find that it can’t be freed without unraveling the others. A dozen roots are exposed, and somehow you need to choose one and follow it without breaking it, so that you have one great, long continuous strand. It’s not easy.

			I send the students off gathering, to read the land and see where it says roots. They go crashing off through the woods, their laughter flashing bright in the dim coolness. For a time they continue to call to each other, loudly cursing the flies biting under the edge of their untucked shirts.

			They disperse so as not to concentrate the harvest in any one spot. The root mat is easily as big as the canopy above. Harvesting a few roots won’t cause real harm, but we’re careful to repair the damage we do. I remind them to fill in the furrows we’ve made, set the goldthread and the mosses back in place, and empty their water bottles over their wilting leaves when the harvest is done.

			I stay at my patch, working my roots and listening to the chatter slowly subside. I hear an occasional grunt of frustration nearby. A splutter when soil flies up in someone’s face. I know what their hands are doing and sense where their minds are as well. Digging spruce roots takes you someplace else. The map in the ground asks you over and over, Which root to take? Which is the scenic route, which is the dead end? The fine root you’d chosen and so carefully excavated suddenly dives deep under a rock where you can’t follow. Do you abandon that path and choose another? The roots may spread out like a map, but a map only helps if you know where you want to go. Some roots branch. Some break. I look at the students’ faces, poised midway between childhood and adulthood. I think the tangle of choices speaks clearly to them. Which route to take? Isn’t that always the question?

			Before long all the chatter ceases and a mossy hush befalls us. There is just the ssshhhh of wind in the spruce, and a calling winter wren. Time goes by. Way longer than the fifty-minute classes they’re used to. Still, no one speaks. I’m waiting for it, hoping. There is a certain energy in the air, a hum. And then I hear it, someone singing, low and contented. I feel the smile spread across my face and breathe a sigh of relief. It happens every time.

			In the Apache language, the root word for land is the same as the word for mind. Gathering roots holds up a mirror between the map in the earth and the map of our minds. This is what happens, I think, in the silence and the singing and with hands in the earth. At a certain angle of that mirror, the routes converge and we find our way back home.

			Recent research has shown that the smell of humus exerts a physiological effect on humans. Breathing in the scent of Mother Earth stimulates the release of the hormone oxytocin, the same chemical that promotes bonding between mother and child, between lovers. Held in loving arms, no wonder we sing in response.

			I remember the first time I dug roots. I came looking for raw materials, for something I could transform into a basket, but it was me who was transformed. The crisscross patterns, the interweaving of colors— the basket was already in the ground, stronger and more beautiful than any I could make. Spruce and blueberries, deerflies and winter wren, the whole forest held in a wild native basket the size of a hill. Big enough to hold me too.

			We rendezvous back at the trail and show off our coils of root, the guys bragging about whose is biggest. Elliot stretches his out on the ground and lies next to it—more than eight feet from toes to outstretched fingertips. “It went right through a rotten log,” he says, “so I went, too.” “Yeah, mine too,“ adds Claudia. “I think it was following the nutrients.” Most of their coils are shortish pieces, but the stories are longer: a sleeping toad mistaken for a rock, a lens of buried charcoal from a long-ago fire, a root that suddenly broke and showered Natalie in soil. “I loved it. I didn’t want to stop,” she says. “It’s like the roots were just waiting there for us.”

			My students are always different after root gathering. There is something tender in them, and open, as if they are emerging from the embrace of arms they did not know were there. Through them I get to remember what it is to open to the world as gift, to be flooded with the knowledge that the earth will take care of you, everything you need right there.

			We also show off our root-gathering hands: black to the elbow, black under every nail, black in every crevice like a ritual glove of henna, our nails like tea-stained china. “See?” says Claudia, pinkies raised for tea with the queen, “I got the special spruce root manicure.”

			On the way back to camp, we stop at the stream to clean the roots. Sitting on rocks, we soak them awhile, along with our bare feet. I show them how to peel the roots with a little vise made of a split sapling. The rough bark and fleshy cortex strip away like a dirty sock from a slender white leg. Beneath, the root is clean and creamy. It spools around your hand like thread, but will dry as hard as wood. It smells clean and sprucy.

			After unweaving the roots from the ground, we sit by the brook and weave our first baskets. With beginner’s hands they turn out lopsided but they hold us nonetheless. Imperfect they may be, but I believe they are a beginning of a reweaving of the bond between people and the land.

			The wigwam roof goes on easily as the students sit on each other’s shoulders to reach the top and tie the bark in place with roots. Pulling cattails and bending saplings, they remember why we need each other. In the tedium of weaving mats and with the absence of iPods, storytellers emerge to relieve the boredom and songs arise to keep the fingers flying as if they remembered this, too.

			In our time together, we’ve built our classroom, feasted on cattail kebabs, roasted rhizomes, and eaten pollen pancakes. Our bug bites were soothed by cattail gel. And there are cordage and baskets to finish, so in the roundness of the wigwam, we sit together, twining and talking.

			I tell them how Darryl Thompson, a Mohawk elder and scholar, once sat with us as we made cattail baskets. “It makes me so happy,” he said, “to see young people getting to know this plant. She gives us all that we need to live.” Cattails are a sacred plant and appear in the Mohawk Creation stories. As it turns out, the Mohawk word for cattail has much in common with the Potawatomi word. Their word also refers to cattails in the cradleboard, but with a twist so lovely that tears spring to my eyes. In Potawatomi, the word means “we wrap the baby in it”; in Mohawk, it means that the cattail wraps humans in her gifts, as if we were her babies. In that one word we are carried in the cradleboard of Mother Earth.

			How can we ever reciprocate such a wealth of care? Knowing that she carries us, could we shoulder a burden for her? I’m mulling over how to ask this when Claudia edges in with a comment that mirrors my thoughts: “I don’t mean this to sound disrespectful or anything. I think it’s great to ask the plants if we can take them, and give them tobacco, but is that enough? We’re taking an awful lot of stuff. We were pretending like we were shopping for cattails, right? But we just took all this stuff without paying for it. When you really think about it, we just shoplifted at the swamp.” And she’s right. If cattails are the Walmart of the marsh, then the security alarms at the exits would be blaring at our canoes full of stolen merchandise. In a sense, unless we find a way to enter into reciprocity, we are walking away with goods for which we have not paid.

			I remind them that the gift of tobacco is not a material one, but a spiritual gift, a means of conveying our highest regard. I’ve asked some elders about this over the years and heard a range of answers. One man said that gratitude is our only responsibility. He cautioned against the arrogance of thinking we have the capacity to give back to Mother Earth anything approaching what she gives us. I honor the edbesendowen, the humility inherent in that perspective. And yet it seems to me we humans have gifts in addition to gratitude that we might offer in return. The philosophy of reciprocity is beautiful in the abstract, but the practical is harder.

			Having your hands busy tends to free up your mind, and the students play with the idea as we twine cattail fiber between our fingers. I ask them what we can possibly offer cattail or birch or spruce. Lance snorts at the idea: “They’re just plants. It’s cool that we can use them, but it’s not like we owe them anything. They’re just there.” The others groan and then look at me, waiting for a reaction. Chris is planning to go to law school, so he takes over the conversation like a natural. He says, “If cattails are ‘free’ then they’re a gift and all we owe is gratitude. You don’t pay for a gift, you just graciously accept.“ But Natalie objects: “Just because it’s a gift, does that make you any less beholden? You should always give something back.” Whether it’s a gift or a commodity, you still have incurred an unpaid debt. One moral, the other legal. So, were we to act ethically, don’t we have to somehow compensate the plants for what we received?

			I love listening to them consider such a question. I don’t believe that average Walmart shoppers stop to consider their debt to the land that has produced their purchases. The students ramble and laugh as we work and weave, but come up with a long list of suggestions. Brad proposes a permit system in which we do pay for what we take, a fee to the state that goes to support wetland protection. A couple of kids take the route of generating appreciation for wetlands, proposing school workshops on the values of cattails. They also suggest defensive strategies: to reciprocate with protection against the things that threaten cattails, to organize pulls of invasive species like phragmites or purple loosestrife. To go to a town planning board meeting and speak up for wetland preservation. To vote. Natalie promises to get a rain barrel at her apartment, to reduce water pollution. Lance swears that he’ll boycott fertilizing the lawn next time his parents give him that chore, to stop runoff. To join Ducks Unlimited or the Nature Conservancy. Claudia vows to weave coasters of cattail and give them to everyone for Christmas, so they’ll remember to love wetlands whenever they use them. I thought they would have no answer, but I was humbled by their creativity. The gifts they might return to cattails are as diverse as those the cattails gave them. This is our work, to discover what we can give. Isn’t this the purpose of education, to learn the nature of your own gifts and how to use them for good in the world?

			As I listen to them, I hear another whisper from the swaying stand of cattails, from spruce boughs in the wind, a reminder that caring is not abstract. The circle of ecological compassion we feel is enlarged by direct experience of the living world, and shrunken by its lack. Had we not waded waist deep in the swamp, had we not followed muskrat trails and rubbed ourselves with soothing slime, had we never made a spruce root basket or eaten cattail pancakes, would they even be debating what gifts they could offer in return? In learning reciprocity, the hands can lead the heart.

			On the last night of the course, we decide to sleep in our wigwam, hauling our sleeping bags down the trail at dusk and laughing around the fire until late. Claudia says, “I’m sad to leave here tomorrow. I’m going to miss feeling so connected to the land when I’m not sleeping on cattails.” It takes real effort to remember that it’s not just in a wigwam that the earth gives us everything we need. The exchange of recognition, gratitude, and reciprocity for these gifts is just as important in a Brooklyn flat as under a birch bark roof.

			When the students start to leave the fire circle with their flashlights in twos and threes to whisper, I sense a conspiracy. Before I know it they are lined up with makeshift song sheets like a choir in the firelight. “We have a little something for you,” they say and start a marvelous anthem of their own creation, filled with crazy rhymes of spruce roots and hiking boots, human needs and marshy reeds, cattail torches on our porches. The song crescendos to a rousing chorus of “no matter where I roam, when I’m with plants I’ll be at home.” I couldn’t imagine a more perfect gift.

			With all of us packed into the wigwam like down caterpillars, the slow slide to sleep is punctuated by laughs and last scraps of conversation. Remembering the improbable rhyme of “ecotones and baked rhizomes,” I start to giggle too, sending a ripple across the sleeping bags like a wave across a pond. As we eventually drift off, I feel us all held beneath the dome of our bark roof, an echo of the starry dome above. The quiet settles in until all I can hear is their breathing and the whisper of the cattail walls. I feel like a good mother.

			When the sun pours in the eastern door, Natalie wakes first, tiptoes over the others, and steps outside. Through the slits in the cattails I watch as she raises her arms and speaks her thanks to the new day.





Burning Cascade Head


			“The dance of renewal, the dance that made the world, was always danced here at the edge of things, on the brink, on the foggy coast.”

			—URSULA K. LE GUIN

			Far out beyond the surf they felt it. Beyond the reach of any canoe, half a sea away, something stirred inside them, an ancient clock of bone and blood that said, “It’s time.” Silver-scaled body its own sort of compass needle spinning in the sea, the floating arrow turned toward home. From all directions they came, the sea a funnel of fish, narrowing their path as they gathered closer and closer, until their silver bodies lit up the water, redd-mates sent to sea, prodigal salmon coming home.

			The coastline here is scalloped with countless coves, clothed in fog banks, and cut with rainforest rivers, an easy place to lose your way, where landmarks can vanish in the fog. The spruce are heavy on the shore, their black cloaks hiding signs of home. The elders speak of lost canoes that strayed in the wind and landed on a sand spit not their own. When the boats are too long gone, their families go down to the beach to light a blaze among the driftwood, a beacon to sing them home to safety. When the canoes finally approach, laden with food from the sea, the hunters are honored in dances and songs, their dangerous journey repaid by faces alight with gratitude.

			And so it is too that the people make ready for the arrival of their brothers who bring food in the canoe of their bodies. The people watch and wait. The women sew one more row of dentalia shells upon their finest garments for the dance. They pile alder wood for the welcome feast and sharpen huckleberry skewers. While they mend nets, they practice the old songs. But still their brothers do not come. The people go down to the shore, looking out to sea for a sign. Perhaps they have forgotten. Perhaps they wander, lost at sea, uncertain of their welcome with those they left behind.

			The rains are late, the water low, the forest trails turned dusty and dry and covered in a steady rain of yellow spruce needles. The prairies up on the headland are crisp and brown, without even fog to moisten them.

			Far out, beyond the pounding surf, beyond the reach of canoes, in the inky darkness that swallows light, they move as one body, a school, turning neither east nor west until they know.

			So he walks the path at nightfall with a bundle in his hand. Into a nest of cedar bark and twisted grass he lays the coal and feeds it with his breath. It dances and then subsides. Smoke pools darkly as the grasses melt to black and then erupt into flame, climbing one stem and then another. All around the meadow, others do the same, setting in the grass a crackling ring of fire that quickens and gathers, white smoke curling upward in the fading light, breathing into itself, panting across the slope until its convective gasp sets the night alight. A beacon to bring their brothers home.

			They are burning the headland. Flames race on the wind until they are stopped by the wet green wall of the forest. Fourteen hundred feet above the surf it blazes, a tower of fire: yellow, orange, and red, a massive flare. The burning prairie billows smoke, roiling white with undersides of salmon pink in the darkness. They mean for it to say, “Come, come, flesh of my flesh. My brothers. Come back to the river where your lives began. We have made a welcome feast in your honor.” Out at sea, beyond where the canoes can go, there is a pinprick of light on a pitch-black coast, a match in the darkness, flickering, beckoning below the white plume that drifts down the coast to mingle with the fog. A spark in the vastness. The time has come. As one body they turn to the east, toward the shore and the river of home. When they can smell the water of their natal stream, they pause in their journey and rest on the slackening tide. Above them all, on the headland, the sparkling tower of fire reflects on the water, kissing the reddened wave tops and glinting off silver scales.

			By sunrise the headland is gray and white, as if dusted by an early snow. A cold drift of ash falls on the forest below and the wind carries the tang of burnt grass. But no one notices, for they are all standing along the river singing a welcome, a song of praise as the food swims up the river, fin to fin. The nets stay on the shore; the spears still hang in the houses. The hook-jawed leaders are allowed to pass, to guide the others and to carry the message to their upriver relatives that the people are grateful and full of respect.

			The fish course by the camp in great throngs, unmolested as they make their way upstream. Only after four days of fish have moved safely by is the First Salmon taken by the most honored fisher and prepared with ritual care. It is carried to the feast in great ceremony on a cedar plank in a bed of ferns. And then they feast on the sacred foods— salmon, venison, roots, and berries—in sequence for their places in the watershed. They celebrate the water that connects them all in a ritual passing of the cup. They dance in long lines, singing thanks for all that is given. The salmon bones are placed back in the river, their heads facing upstream so that their spirits might follow the others. They are destined to die as we are all destined to die, but first they have bound themselves to life in an ancient agreement to pass it on, to pass it on. In so doing, the world itself is renewed.

			Only then the nets are set out, the weirs are put in place, and the harvest begins. Everyone has a task. An elder counsels the young one with a spear, “Take only what you need and let the rest go by and the fish will last forever.” When the drying racks are full with winter food, they simply stop fishing.

			And so, at the time of dry grasses, the fall Chinook arrived in legendary numbers. The story is told that when Salmon first arrived he was greeted on the shore by Skunk Cabbage, who had been keeping the people from starvation all those years. “Thank you, brother, for taking care of my people,” said Salmon, and he gave Skunk Cabbage gifts—an elk hide blanket and a war club—and then set him in the soft, moist ground so he could rest.

			The diversity of salmon in the river—Chinook, Chum, Pink and Coho—ensured that the people would not go hungry, likewise the forests. Swimming many miles inland, they brought a much-needed resource for the trees: nitrogen. The spent carcasses of spawned-out salmon, dragged into the woods by bears and eagles and people, fertilized the trees as well as Skunk Cabbage. Using stable isotope analysis, scientists traced the source of nitrogen in the wood of ancient forests all the way back to the ocean. Salmon fed everyone.

			When spring returns, the headland becomes a beacon again, shining with the intense green light of new grass. The burnt and blackened soil heats up quickly and urges the shoots upward, fueled by the fertilizing ash, giving the elk and their calves a lush pasture in the midst of dark forests of Sitka spruce. As the season unfolds, the prairie is awash with wildflowers. The healers make the long climb to gather the medicines they need, which grow only here on the mountain they call “the place where the wind always blows.”

			The headland juts out from the shore and the sea curls around its base in white curls. It is a place for the long view. To the north, the rocky coast. To the east, ridge after ancient ridge of moss-draped rainforest. To the west, the unbroken sea. And to the south, the estuary. An enormous sand spit arcs across the mouth of the bay, enclosing it and forcing the river through a narrow path. All the forces that shape the meeting of land and sea are written there, in sand and water.

			Overhead, Eagles, bringers of vision, soar on the thermals that rise off the head. This was sacred ground, reserved for seekers of a vision who would sacrifice by fasting alone for days in this place where the grasses give themselves to fire. They would sacrifice for the Salmon, for the People, to hear the Creator’s voice, to dream.

			Only fragments of the story of the head remain with us. The people who know it were lost before their knowledge could be captured and the death was too thorough to have left many tellers behind. But the prairie kept the story of the ritual fires long after there were people here to speak of it.


A tsunami of disease swept the Oregon coast in the 1830s, the germs traveling faster than covered wagons could. Smallpox and measles came to the Native peoples, diseases for which they had no more resistance than did grass before a fire. By the time the squatters arrived around 1850, most of the villages were ghost towns. Settlers’ diaries record their surprise at finding a densely forested place with a pasture all ready for their livestock, and they eagerly set their cows out to fatten on the native grasses. In the way of all cows, these no doubt followed the paths that already lay on the land, pressing them even more decisively into the soil. Their presence did some of the work of the lost fires by preventing encroachment by forest and fertilizing the grasses.

			As more people arrived to take the remaining lands of the Nechesne, they wanted even more pasture for their Holsteins. Flat land is a hard thing to come by in these parts, so they cast a covetous eye on the salt marshes of the estuary.

			Situated at the meeting point between ecosystems, with a mix of river, ocean, forest, soil, sand, and sunlight at this edge of all edges, estuaries can have the highest biodiversity and productivity of any wetland. They are a breeding ground for invertebrates of all sorts. The dense sponge of vegetation and sediment is riddled with channels of all sizes, matching the sizes of salmon that are coming and going through its network. The estuary is a nursery for salmon, from tiny fry just days out of the redd to fattening smolt adjusting to salt water. Herons, ducks, eagles, and shellfish could make a living there, but not cows— that sea of grasses was too wet. So they built dikes to keep the water out, engineering they called “reclaiming land from the sea,” turning wetlands into pasture.

			The diking changed the river from a capillary system to a single straightened flow to hurry the river to the sea. It might have been good for cows, but it was disastrous for young salmon who were now unceremoniously flushed to the sea.

			The transition to salt water is a major assault on the body chemistry of a salmon born in freshwater. One fish biologist likens it to the rigors of a chemotherapy transfusion. The fish need a gradual transition zone, a halfway house of sorts. The brackish water of estuaries, the wetland buffer between river and ocean, plays a critical role in salmon survival.

			Drawn by the prospect of fortunes to be made from canneries, salmon fishing exploded. But there was no more honoring of the returning fish, no guarantee of safe passage upstream for the early arrivers. Adding insult to injury, construction of upstream dams created rivers of no return, and degradation by cattle grazing and industrial forestry reduced spawning to nil. The commodity mind-set drove fish that had fed the people for thousands of years close to extinction. To preserve the revenue stream, they built salmon hatcheries, turning out industrial fish. They thought they could make salmon without rivers.

			From the sea the wild salmon watched for the blaze on the headland and saw nothing for years. But they have a covenant with the People and a promise to Skunk Cabbage to care for them, and so they came, but fewer and fewer every time. The ones that made it though came home to an empty house, dark and lonely. There were no songs or fern-decked tables. No light on the shore to say welcome back.

			According to the laws of thermodynamics, everything has to go someplace. Where did the relationship of loving respect and mutual caregiving between people and fish go?


The path rises abruptly from the river in steps cut into the steep slope. My legs burn as they push up over roots of massive Sitka spruces. Moss, fern, and conifer repeat a pattern of feathery forms, a tessellation of green fronds block-printed on the walls of the forest, which draw close.

			The branches brush my shoulder and compress my view to the path and my feet. Walking this trail turns me inward, under the small dome of my own head, my busy mind clicking away over an interior landscape of lists and remembrances. I hear only the tread of my own feet, the swish of my rain pants, and my heartbeat until I arrive at a stream crossing where the water sings as it falls over the sheer drop, throwing up a fine mist. It opens my eyes to the forest: a winter wren chatters at me from the sword ferns; an orange-bellied newt crosses my path.

			The spruce shade eventually gives way to dappled light as the trail ascends to enter a skirt of white-stemmed alder below the summit. I want to walk a little quicker, knowing what is ahead, but the transition is so seductive that I force myself to step slowly and savor the anticipation, taste the change in the air and the lift in the breeze. The very last alder leans away from the thread of the trail, as if to set me free.

			Black against the golden grass and many inches deep into prairie earth, the trail follows the natural contours as if centuries of footfalls have preceded my own. It’s just me, the grass, and the sky, and two bald eagles riding the thermals. Cresting the ridge releases me into an explosion of light and space and wind. My head catches fire at the sight. I cannot tell you more of that high and holy place. Words blow away. Even thought dissipates like wisps of cloud sailing up the headland. There is only being.

			Before I knew this story, before the fire lit my dreams, I would have hiked here like everyone else, snapping photos at scenic viewpoints. I would have admired the great sickle curve of the yellow sand spit enclosing the bay and the lace-edge waves riding up the beach. I would crane around the knoll to see how the river cuts a sinuous silver line through the salt marsh far below, on its way from the dark line of the Coast Range. Like the others, I would edge toward the bluff and thrill to the vertiginous drop to the surf pounding the base of the headland a thousand feet below. Listen to the seals barking in the echo chamber of the cove. Watch the wind ripple the grass like a cougar pelt. And the sky going on and on. And the sea.

			Before I knew the story, I would have written some field notes, consulted my field guide about rare plants, and unpacked my lunch. I would not have talked on my cell phone, though, as the guy at the next overlook is doing.

			Instead I just stand there, tears running down my cheeks in nameless emotion that tastes of joy and of grief. Joy for the being of the shimmering world and grief for what we have lost. The grasses remember the nights they were consumed by fire, lighting the way back with a conflagration of love between species. Who today even knows what that means? I drop to my knees in the grass and I can hear the sadness, as if the land itself was crying for its people: Come home. Come home.

			There are often other walkers here. I suppose that’s what it means when they put down the camera and stand on the headland, straining to hear above the wind with that wistful look, the gaze out to sea. They look like they’re trying to remember what it would be like to love the world.


It is an odd dichotomy we have set for ourselves, between loving people and loving land. We know that loving a person has agency and power—we know it can change everything. Yet we act as if loving the land is an internal affair that has no energy outside the confines of our head and heart. On the high prairie at Cascade Head another truth is revealed, the active force of love for land is made visible. Here the ritual burning of the headland cemented the people’s connection to salmon, to each other, and to the spirit world, but it also created biodiversity. The ceremonial fires converted forests to fingers of seaside prairie, islands of open habitat in a matrix of fog-dark trees. Burning created the headland meadows that are home to fire-dependent species that occur nowhere else on earth.

			Likewise, the First Salmon Ceremony, in all its beauty, reverberates through all the domes of the world. The feasts of love and gratitude were not just internal emotional expressions but actually aided the upstream passage of the fish by releasing them from predation for a critical time. Laying salmon bones back in the streams returned nutrients to the system. These are ceremonies of practical reverence.

			The burning beacon is a beautiful poem, but it is a poem written physically, deeply on the land.

			People loved the salmon the way fire loves grass

			and the blaze loves the darkness of the sea.

			Today we only write it on postcards (“Terrific view from Cascade Head—wish you were here”) and grocery lists ( “Pick up salmon, 1½ pounds”).


Ceremony focuses attention so that attention becomes intention. If you stand together and profess a thing before your community, it holds you accountable.

			Ceremonies transcend the boundaries of the individual and resonate beyond the human realm. These acts of reverence are powerfully pragmatic. These are ceremonies that magnify life.

			In many indigenous communities, the hems of our ceremonial robes have been unraveled by time and history, but the fabric remains strong. In the dominant society, though, ceremony seems to have withered away. I suppose there are many reasons for that: the frenetic pace of life, dissolution of community, the sense that ceremony is an artifact of organized religion forced upon participants rather than a celebration joyfully chosen.

			The ceremonies that persist—birthdays, weddings, funerals— focus only on ourselves, marking rites of personal transition. Perhaps the most universal is high school graduation. I love graduation in my small town, with the whole community dressed up and filling the auditorium on a June evening, whether you have a kid graduating or not. There’s a sense of community in the shared emotions. Pride for the young people walking across the stage. Relief for some. A good dose of nostalgia and remembrance. We celebrate those beautiful young people who have enriched our lives; we honor their hard work and accomplishment against all odds. We tell them that they are our hope for the future. We encourage them to go off into the world and pray that they will come back home. We applaud for them. They applaud for us. Everyone cries a little. And then the parties begin.

			And, at least in our little town, we know it’s not an empty ritual. The ceremony has power. Our collective good wishes really do fuel the confidence and strength of young people about to leave home. The ceremony reminds them of where they come from and their responsibilities to the community that has supported them. We hope it inspires them. And the checks tucked into the graduation cards really do help them make their way in the world. These ceremonies too magnify life.

			We know how to carry out this rite for each other and we do it well. But imagine standing by the river, flooded with those same feelings as the Salmon march into the auditorium of their estuary. Rise in their honor, thank them for all the ways they have enriched our lives, sing to honor their hard work and accomplishments against all odds, tell them they are our hope for the future, encourage them to go off into the world to grow, and pray that they will come home. Then the feasting begins. Can we extend our bonds of celebration and support from our own species to the others who need us?

			Many indigenous traditions still recognize the place of ceremony and often focus their celebrations on other species and events in the cycle of the seasons. In a colonist society the ceremonies that endure are not about land; they’re about family and culture, values that are transportable from the old country. Ceremonies for the land no doubt existed there, but it seems they did not survive emigration in any substantial way. I think there is wisdom in regenerating them here, as a means to form bonds with this land.

			To have agency in the world, ceremonies should be reciprocal cocreations, organic in nature, in which the community creates ceremony and the ceremony creates communities. They should not be cultural appropriations from Native peoples. But generating new ceremony in today’s world is hard to do. There are towns I know that hold apple festivals and Moose Mania, but despite the wonderful food, they tend toward the commercial. Educational events like wildflower weekends and Christmas bird counts are all steps in the right direction, but they lack an active, reciprocal relationship with the more-than-human world.

			I want to stand by the river in my finest dress. I want to sing, strong and hard, and stomp my feet with a hundred others so that the waters hum with our happiness. I want to dance for the renewal of the world.


On the banks of the Salmon River estuary today, people are again waiting by the stream, watching. Their faces are alight with anticipation and sometimes furrowed with concern. Instead of their finest clothes, they wear tall rubber boots and canvas vests. Some wade in with nets, while others tend buckets. From time to time they whoop and yell with delight at what they find. It’s a First Salmon Ceremony of a different kind.

			Beginning in 1976, the U.S. Forest Service and a host of partner organizations led by Oregon State University initiated a restoration project for the estuary. Their plan was to remove the dikes and dams and tidegates and once again let the tidal waters go where they were meant to go, to fulfill their purpose. Hoping that the land remembered how to be an estuary, the teams worked to dismantle the human structures, one by one.

			The plan was guided by many cumulative lifetimes of ecological research, endless hours in the lab, scorching sunburns in the field, and shivering winter days of collecting data in the rain, as well as gorgeous summer days when new species miraculously returned. This is what we field biologists live for: the chance to be outside in the vital presence of other species, who are generally way more interesting than we are. We get to sit at their feet and listen. Potawatomi stories remember that all the plants and animals, including humans, used to speak the same language. We could share with one another what our lives were like. But that gift is gone and we are the poorer for it.

			Because we can’t speak the same language, our work as scientists is to piece the story together as best we can. We can’t ask the salmon directly what they need, so we ask them with experiments and listen carefully to their answers. We stay up half the night at the microscope looking at the annual rings in fish ear bones in order to know how the fish react to water temperature. So we can fix it. We run experiments on the effects of salinity on the growth of invasive grasses. So we can fix it. We measure and record and analyze in ways that might seem lifeless but to us are the conduits to understanding the inscrutable lives of species not our own. Doing science with awe and humility is a powerful act of reciprocity with the more-than-human world.

			I’ve never met an ecologist who came to the field for the love of data or for the wonder of a p-value. These are just ways we have of crossing the species boundary, of slipping off our human skin and wearing fins or feathers or foliage, trying to know others as fully as we can. Science can be a way of forming intimacy and respect with other species that is rivaled only by the observations of traditional knowledge holders. It can be a path to kinship.

			These too are my people. Heart-driven scientists whose notebooks, smudged with salt marsh mud and filled with columns of numbers, are love letters to salmon. In their own way, they are lighting a beacon for salmon, to call them back home.

			When the dikes and dams were removed, the land did remember how to be a salt marsh. Water remembered how it was supposed to distribute itself through tiny drainage channels in the sediment. Insects remembered where they were supposed to lay their eggs. Today the natural curvaceous flow of the river has been restored. From the headland, the river looks like an etching of a gnarled old shore pine, on a background of waving sedges. Sandbars and deep pools swirl patterns of gold and blue. And in this reborn water world, young salmon rest in every curve. The only straight lines are the old boundaries of the dikes, a reminder of how the flow was interrupted and how it was renewed.

			The First Salmon Ceremonies were not conducted for the people. They were for the Salmon themselves, and for all the glittering realms of Creation, for the renewal of the world. People understood that when lives are given on their behalf they have received something precious. Ceremonies are a way to give something precious in return.

			When the season turns and the grasses dry on the headland, preparations begin; they repair the nets and get their gear together. They come every year at this time. They gather together all the traditional foods, as there will be many mouths to feed on the crew. The data recorders are all calibrated and ready. With waders and boats, the biologists are on the river to dip nets into the restored channels of the estuary, to take its pulse. They come now every day to check, go down to the shore and gaze out to sea. And still the salmon do not come. So the waiting scientists roll out their sleeping bags and turn off the lab equipment. All but one. A single microscope light is left on.

			Out beyond the surf they gather, tasting the waters of home. They see it against the dark of the headland. Someone has left a light on, blazing a tiny beacon into the night, calling the salmon back home.





Putting Down Roots


			A summer day on the banks of the Mohawk River:

			Én:ska, tékeni, áhsen. Bend and pull, bend and pull. Kaié:ri, wísk, iá:ia’k, tsiá:ta, she calls to her granddaughter, standing waist deep in the grass. Her bundle grows thicker with every stoop of her back. She straightens up, rubs the small of her back, and tilts her head up to the blue summer sky, her black braid swinging in the arch of her back. Bank swallows twitter over the river. The breeze off the water sets the grasses waving and carries the fragrance of sweetgrass that rises from her footsteps.

			A spring morning four hundred years later:

			Én:ska, tékeni, áhsen. One, two, three; bend and dig, bend and dig. My bundle grows smaller with every stoop of my back. I drive my trowel into the soft ground and rock it back and forth. It scrapes against a buried stone and I dig my fingers in to unearth it, cast the stone aside to make an apple-sized hole big enough for the roots. From the tangled bundle wrapped in burlap, my fingers separate out a single clump of sweetgrass. I set it in the hole, scoop soil around it, speak words of welcome, and tamp it down. I straighten up and rub the small of my aching back. The sunshine pours down around us, warming the grass and releasing its scent. Red stake flags flutter in the breeze, marking the outlines of our plots.

			Kaié:ri, wísk, iá:ia’k, tsiá:ta. From time beyond memory, Mohawk people inhabited this river valley that now bears their name. Back then the river was full of fish and its spring floods brought silt to fertilize their cornfields. Sweetgrass, called wenserakon ohonte in Mohawk, flourished on the banks. That language has not been heard here for centuries. Replaced by waves of immigrants, the Mohawk people were pushed from this generous valley in upstate New York to the very margins of the country. The once dominant culture of the great Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) Confederacy was reduced to a patchwork of small reservations. The language that first gave voice to ideas like democracy, women’s equality, and the Great Law of Peace became an endangered species.

			Mohawk language and culture didn’t disappear on their own. Forced assimilation, the government policy to deal with the so-called Indian problem, shipped Mohawk children to the barracks at Carlisle, Pennsylvania, where the school’s avowed mission was “Kill the Indian to Save the Man.” Braids were cut off and Native languages forbidden. Girls were trained to cook and clean and wear white gloves on Sunday. The scent of sweetgrass was replaced by the soap smells of the barracks laundry. Boys learned sports and skills useful to a settled village life: carpentry, farming, and how to handle money in their pockets. The government’s goal of breaking the link between land, language, and Native people was nearly a success. But the Mohawk call themselves the Kanienkeha—People of the Flint—and flint does not melt easily into the great American melting pot.

			Over the top of the waving grasses I can see two other heads bent to the soil. The shiny black curls tied back with a red bandanna belong to Daniela. She pushes herself up from her knees and I watch her tally the number of plants in her plot . . . 47, 48, 49. Without looking up she makes notes on her clipboard, slings her bundle over her shoulder, and moves on. Daniela is a graduate student and for months we have been planning for this day. This work has become her thesis project and she’s anxious about getting it right. On graduate school forms it says that I’m her professor, but I’ve been telling her all along that it is the plant who will be her greatest teacher.

			On the other side of the field, Theresa looks up, swinging her braid over her shoulder. She’s rolled the sleeves of her T-shirt, which reads Iroquois Nationals Lacrosse, and her forearms are streaked with dirt. Theresa is a Mohawk basket maker and is an integral part of our research team. She’s taken the day off from work to kneel in the dirt with us and she grins from ear to ear. Sensing our flagging energy, she starts a counting chant to lift our spirits. “Kaié:ri, wísk, iá:ia’k, tsiá:ta,” she calls out, and together we count out the rows of plants. In rows of seven, for seven generations, we are putting roots in the ground welcoming the sweetgrass back home.

			Despite Carlisle, despite exile, despite a siege four hundred years long, there is something, some heart of living stone, that will not surrender. I don’t know just what sustained the people, but I believe it was carried in words. Pockets of the language survived among those who stayed rooted to place. Among those remaining, the Thanksgiving Address was spoken to greet the day: “Let us put our minds together as one and send greetings and thanks to our Mother Earth, who sustains our lives with her many gifts.” Grateful reciprocity with the world, as solid as a stone, sustained them when all else was stripped away.

			In the 1700s, the Mohawks had to flee their homelands in the Mohawk Valley and settled at Akwesasne, straddling the border with Canada. Theresa comes from a long line of Akwesasne basket makers.


The marvel of a basket is in its transformation, its journey from wholeness as a living plant to fragmented strands and back to wholeness again as a basket. A basket knows the dual powers of destruction and creation that shape the world. Strands once separated are rewoven into a new whole. The journey of a basket is also the journey of a people.

			With their roots in riverside wetlands, both black ash and sweetgrass are neighbors on the land. They are reunited as neighbors in the Mohawk baskets. Braids of sweetgrass are woven among the splints of ash. Theresa remembers many childhood hours spent making braids from individual leaves of sweetgrass, twining them tight and even to reveal their glossy shine. Also woven into the baskets are the laughter and the stories of the gathered women, where English and Mohawk blend together in the same sentence. Sweetgrass coils around the basket rim and threads the lids, so that even an empty basket contains the smell of the land, weaving the link between people and place, language and identity. Basket making also brings economic security. A woman who knows how to weave will not go hungry. Making sweetgrass baskets has become almost synonymous with being Mohawk.

			Traditional Mohawks speak the words of thanksgiving to the land, but these days the lands along the St. Lawrence River have little to be grateful for. When parts of the reserve were flooded by power dams, heavy industry moved in to take advantage of the cheap electricity and easy shipping routes. Alcoa, General Motors, and Domtar don’t view the world through the prism of the Thanksgiving Address, and Akwesasne became one of the most contaminated communities in the country. The families of fishermen can no longer eat what they catch. Mother’s milk at Akwesasne carries a heavy burden of PCBs and dioxin. Industrial pollution made following traditional lifeways unsafe, threatening the bond between people and the land. Industrial toxins were poised to finish what was started at Carlisle.

			Sakokwenionkwas, also known as Tom Porter, is a member of the Bear Clan. The Bear is known for protecting the people and as the keeper of medicine knowledge. Just so, twenty years ago, Tom and a handful of others set out with healing in mind. As a boy, he had heard his grandmother repeat the old prophecy that someday a small band of Mohawks would return to inhabit their old home along the Mohawk River. In 1993, that someday arrived when Tom and friends left Akwesasne for ancestral lands in the Mohawk Valley. Their vision was to create a new community on old lands, far from PCBs and power dams.

			They settled on four hundred acres of woods and farms at Kanatsiohareke. It’s a place name from the time when this valley was dense with longhouses. In researching the land’s history, they found that Kanatsiohareke was the site of an ancient Bear Clan village. Today the old memories are weaving among new stories. A barn and houses nestle at the foot of a bluff in a bend of the river. Silty floodplain loams run right down to the banks. The hills, once laid waste by lumbermen, have regrown with straight stands of pine and oak. A powerful artesian well pours from a cleft in the bluff with a strength that endures even the deepest drought and fills a clear mossy pool. In the still water, you can see your own face. The land speaks the language of renewal.

			When Tom and others arrived, the buildings were in a sad state of disrepair. Over the years, scores of volunteers have banded together to repair roofs and replace windows. The big kitchen once again smells of corn soup and strawberry drink on feast days. An arbor for dancing was built among the old apple trees, making a place where people can gather to relearn and celebrate Haudenosaunee culture. The goal was “Carlisle in reverse”: Kanatsiohareke would return to the people what was taken from them—their language, their culture, their spirituality, their identity. The children of the lost generation could come home.

			After rebuilding, the next step was to teach the language, Tom’s anti-Carlisle motto being “Heal the Indian, Save the Language.” Kids at Carlisle and other mission schools all over the country had their knuckles rapped—and much worse—for speaking their native language. Boarding school survivors did not teach their children the language of their birth, in order to spare them hardship. And so the language dwindled right along with the land. Only a few fluent speakers remained, most over the age of seventy. The language was teetering on extinction, like an endangered species with no habitat to rear its young.

			When a language dies, so much more than words are lost. Language is the dwelling place of ideas that do not exist anywhere else. It is a prism through which to see the world. Tom says that even words as basic as numbers are imbued with layers of meaning. The numbers we use to count plants in the sweetgrass meadow also recall the Creation Story. Én:ska—one. This word invokes the fall of Skywoman from the world above. All alone, én:ska, she fell toward the earth. But she was not alone, for in her womb a second life was growing. Tékeni—there were two. Skywoman gave birth to a daughter, who bore twin sons and so then there were three— áhsen. Every time the Haudenosaunee count to three in their own language, they reaffirm their bond to Creation.

			Plants are also integral to reweaving the connection between land and people. A place becomes a home when it sustains you, when it feeds you in body as well as spirit. To recreate a home, the plants must also return. When I heard of the homecoming at Kanatsiohareke, visions of sweetgrass rose in my mind. I began looking for a way to bring them back to their old home.

			One morning in March I stopped by Tom’s place to talk about planting sweetgrass in the spring. I was full of plans for an experimental restoration, but I’d forgotten myself. No work could be done before guests were fed, and we sat down to a big breakfast of pancakes and thick maple syrup. Tom stood at the stove in a red flannel shirt, a powerfully built man, his pitch hair streaked with gray, but his face is scarcely wrinkled despite his more than seventy years. Words flow from him as water flows from the spring at the foot of the bluff—stories, dreams, and jokes that warm the kitchen like the scent of maple syrup. He refilled my plate with a smile and a story, ancient teachings braided into his conversation as naturally as comments on the weather. Strands of spirit and matter are woven together like black ash and sweetgrass.

			“What’s a Potawatomi doing way out here?” he asks. “Aren’t you a long way from home?”

			I need only one word: Carlisle.

			We lingered over coffee and our talk turned to his dreams for Kanatsiohareke. On this land he sees a working farm where people learn again how to grow traditional foods, a place for the traditional ceremonies to honor the cycle of the seasons, where “the words that come before all else” are spoken. He spoke for a long time about the Thanksgiving Address as the core of Mohawk relationship to land. I remembered a question that had long been on my mind.

			At the end of the words that come before all else, when thanks have been given to all the beings of the land, I asked, “has the land ever been known to say thank you in reply?” Tom was quiet for a second, piled more pancakes on my plate, and set the syrup jug in front of me. That’s as good an answer as I know.

			From a drawer in the table Tom took out a bag of fringed buckskin and laid a piece of soft deerskin on the table. He poured onto it a rattling pile of smooth peach seeds, one side painted black, the other white. He drew us into the gambling game, guessing how many pits in each throw will be white and how many black. His pile of winnings mounded up while ours dwindled. While we shook the pits and threw them down he told me about the time this game was played for very high stakes.

			The twin grandsons of Skywoman had long struggled over the making and unmaking of the world. Now their struggle came down to this one game. If all the pits came up black, then all the life that had been created would be destroyed. If all the pits were white, then the beautiful earth would remain. They played and played without resolution and finally they came to the final roll. If all came up black, it would be done. The twin who made sweetness in the world sent his thoughts out to all the living beings he had made and asked them to help, to stand on the side of life. Tom told us how in the final roll, as the peach stones hung for a moment in the air, all the members of Creation joined their voices together and gave a mighty shout for life. And turned the last pit white. The choice is always there.

			Tom’s daughter came to join the game. She held a red velvet bag in her hands and poured its contents onto the deerskin. Diamonds. The sharp facets threw rainbows of color. She beamed at us as we oohed and aahed. Tom explained that these are Herkimer diamonds, beautiful quartz crystals as clear as water and harder than flint. Buried in the earth, they are washed along by the river and turn up from time to time, a blessing from the land.

			We put on our jackets and walked out over the fields. Tom paused at the paddock to offer apples to the big Belgians. All was quiet, the river slipping along the banks. With the right eyes you can almost unsee Route 5, the railroad tracks, and I-90 across the river. You can almost see fields of Iroquois white corn and riverside meadows where women are picking sweetgrass. Bend and pull, bend and pull. But the fields where we walk are neither sweetgrass nor corn.

			When Skywoman first scattered the plants, sweetgrass flourished along this river, but today it is gone. Just as the Mohawk language was replaced by English and Italian and Polish, the sweetgrass was crowded out by immigrants. Losing a plant can threaten a culture in much the same way as losing a language. Without sweetgrass, the grandmothers don’t bring the granddaughters to the meadows in July. Then what becomes of their stories? Without sweetgrass, what happens to the baskets? To the ceremony that uses these baskets?

			The history of the plants is inextricably tied up with the history of the people, with the forces of destruction and creation. At graduation ceremonies at Carlisle, the young men were required to take an oath: “I am no longer an Indian man. I will lay down the bow and arrow forever and put my hand to the plow.” Plows and cows brought tremendous changes to the vegetation. Just as Mohawk identity is tied to the plants the people use, so it was for the European immigrants who sought to make a home here. They brought along their familiar plants, and the associated weeds followed the plow to supplant the natives. Plants mirror changes in culture and ownership of land. Today this field is choked by a vigorous sward of foreign plants that the first sweetgrass pickers would not recognize: quackgrass, timothy, clover, daisies. A wave of invasive purple loosestrife threatens from along the slough. To restore sweetgrass here we’ll need to loosen the hold of the colonists, opening a way for the return of the natives.

			Tom asked me what it would take to bring sweetgrass back, to create a meadow where basket makers can once again find materials. Scientists have not devoted much effort to the study of sweetgrass, but basket makers know that it can be found in a wide array of conditions, from wetlands to dry railroad tracks. It thrives in full sun and especially favors moist, open soil. Tom bent and picked up a handful of the floodplain soil and let it sift through his fingers. Except for the dense turf of exotic species, this seems like a good place for sweetgrass. Tom glanced at the old Farmall tractor in the lane, covered with a blue tarp. “Where can we get some seeds?”

			It’s a strange thing about sweetgrass seed. The plant sends up flowering stalks in early June, but the seeds it makes are rarely viable. If you sow a hundred seeds, you might get one plant if you’re lucky. Sweetgrass has its own way of multiplying. Every shiny green shoot that pokes up above ground also produces a long, slender white rhizome, winding its way through the soil. All along its length are buds, which will sprout up and emerge into the sunshine. Sweetgrass can send its rhizomes many feet out from the parent. In this way, the plant could travel freely all along the riversides. This was a good plan when the land was whole.

			But those tender white rhizomes cannot make their way across a highway or a parking lot. When a patch of sweetgrass was lost to the plow it could not be replenished by seed from outside. Daniela has revisited many places where historical records show sweetgrass once lived, more than half of which no longer carry its fragrance. The major cause of decline seems to be development, native populations eliminated by wetland draining, converting wild places to agriculture and pavement. As nonnative species come in, they may also crowd out the sweetgrass—plants repeating the history of their people.

			In nursery beds back at the university, I’ve been growing up a stock of sweetgrass, waiting for this day. I had searched far and wide for a grower who could sell us plants to begin the nursery and finally located an operation in California that had some. This seemed odd, since Hierochloe odorata does not occur naturally in California. When I asked about where their planting stock came from, I got a surprising answer: Akwesasne. It was a sign. I bought it all.

			Under irrigation and fertilizer, the beds have grown thick. But cultivation is miles removed from restoration. The science of restoration ecology depends upon myriad other factors—soil, insects, pathogens, herbivores, competition. Plants are seemingly equipped with their own sense about where they will live, defying the predictions of science, for there is yet another dimension to sweetgrass’ requirements. The most vigorous stands are the ones tended by basket makers. Reciprocity is a key to success. When the sweetgrass is cared for and treated with respect, it will flourish, but if the relationship fails, so does the plant.

			What we contemplate here is more than ecological restoration; it is the restoration of relationship between plants and people. Scientists have made a dent in understanding how to put ecosystems back together, but our experiments focus on soil pH and hydrology—matter, to the exclusion of spirit. We might look to the Thanksgiving Address for guidance on weaving the two. We are dreaming of a time when the land might give thanks for the people.


We walked back up to the house, imagining basket classes in years to come. Maybe Theresa would be the teacher, leading her granddaughter into the field that she herself has helped to plant. Kanatsiohareke runs a gift shop to raise funds for the work of the community. The shop is filled with books and beautiful artwork, beaded moccasins, antler carvings, and, of course, baskets. Tom unlocked the door and we stepped inside. The still air smelled of sweetgrass hanging from the rafters. What words can capture that smell? The fragrance of your mother’s newly washed hair as she holds you close, the melancholy smell of summer slipping into fall, the smell of memory that makes you close your eyes for a moment, and then a moment longer.

			When I was young, I had no one to tell me that, like the Mohawks, Potawatomi people revere sweetgrass as one of the four sacred plants. No one to say that it was the first plant to grow on Mother Earth and so we braid it, as if it were our mother’s hair, to show our loving care for her. The runners of the story could not find their way through a fragmented cultural landscape to me. The story was stolen at Carlisle.

			Tom walks over to the bookshelf and chooses a thick red volume to lay on the counter. The Indian Industrial School, Carlisle Pennsylvania. 1879–1918. In the back of the book is a list of names, pages and pages of them: Charlotte Bigtree (Mohawk), Stephen Silver Heels (Oneida), Thomas Medicine Horse (Sioux). Tom points to show me his uncle’s name. “That’s why we’re doing this,” he says, “undoing Carlisle.”

			My grandfather is in this book too, I know. I run my finger down the long columns of names and stop at Asa Wall (Potawatomi). A pecan-picking Oklahoma boy just nine years old sent on the train across the prairies to Carlisle. His brother’s name comes next, Uncle Oliver, who ran away back home. But Asa did not. He was one of the lost generation, one who never could go home again. He tried, but after Carlisle he didn’t fit anywhere, so he joined the army. Instead of returning to a life among his family in Indian Territory he settled in upstate New York, not far from this riverbank, and raised his children in the immigrant world. At a time when cars were novel he became a superb mechanic. He was always fixing broken cars, always mending, seeking to make things whole. I think that same need, the need to make things whole, propels my work in ecological restoration. I imagine his knife-nose profile leaning over the hood of a car, his brown hands wiped on a greasy rag. During the Depression people flocked to his garage. Payment, if there was any, was often in eggs or turnips from the garden. But there were some things he couldn’t make whole.

			He didn’t talk much about those days, but I wonder if he thought of the pecan grove in Shawnee where his family lived without him, the lost boy. The aunties would send boxes for us grandchildren: moccasins, a pipe, a buckskin doll. They were boxed away in the attic until our nana would lovingly take them out to show us, to whisper, “Remember who you are.”

			I suppose he achieved what he had been taught to want, a better life for his children and grandchildren, the American life he was taught to honor. My mind thanks him for his sacrifice, but my heart grieves for the one who could have told me stories of sweetgrass. All my life I have felt that loss. What was stolen at Carlisle has been a knot of sorrow I’ve carried like a stone buried in my heart. I am not alone. That grief lives on in all the families of those whose names appear on the pages of that big red book. The broken link between land and people, between the past and the present, aches like a badly broken bone still unknit.

			The city of Carlisle, Pennsylvania, is proud of its history and wears its age well. To celebrate its tricentennial, people looked hard and honestly at the scope of its history. The city began as the Carlisle Barracks, a mustering ground for soldiers of the Revolutionary War. Back when Federal Indian Affairs was still a branch of the War Department, the same buildings became the Carlisle Indian School, the fire beneath the great melting pot. Today the spartan barracks that once held rows of iron cots for Lakota, Nez Perce, Potawatomi, and Mohawk children are genteel officer’s quarters, with blooming dogwoods at the doorstep.

			In honor of the anniversary, the descendants of all those lost children were invited back to Carlisle for what were called “ceremonies of remembrance and reconciliation.” Three generations of my family traveled together to be there. With hundreds of other children and grandchildren, we converged on Carlisle. This was the first time most laid eyes on a place only hinted of in family stories, or not spoken of at all.

			The town was decked out in star-spangled bunting draped from every window; a banner on the main street announced the upcoming tricentennial parade. It was lovely, a postcard-perfect town of narrow brick streets and buildings of rosy brick restored to colonial charm. Wrought iron fences and brass plaques with dates celebrate its antiquity. How surreal it seems that Carlisle has earned a reputation in America for fervent preservation of its heritage, while in Indian Country the name is a chilling emblem of a heritage killer. I walked silently among the barracks. Forgiveness was hard to find.

			We gathered at the cemetery, a small-fenced rectangle beside the parade ground, with four rows of stones. Not all of the kids who came to Carlisle left. There lay the dust that was born a child in Oklahoma, in Arizona, at Akwesasne. Drums sounded in the rain-washed air. The scent of burning sage and sweetgrass wrapped the small crowd in prayer. Sweetgrass is a healing medicine, a smudge that invokes kindness and compassion, coming as it does from our first Mother. The sacred words of healing rose up around us.

			Stolen children. Lost bonds. The burden of loss hangs in the air and mingles with the scent of the sweetgrass, reminding us that there was a time when all the peach stones threatened to turn black side up. One could choose to assuage the grief of that loss by anger and the forces of self-destruction. But all things come in twos, white peach stones and black, destruction and creation. If the people give a mighty shout for life, the peach stone game can have a different ending. For grief can also be comforted by creation, by rebuilding the homeland that was taken. The fragments, like ash splints, can be rewoven into a new whole. And so we are here along the river, kneeling in the earth with the smell of sweetgrass on our hands.


Here on my knees in the dirt, I find my own ceremony of reconciliation. Bend and dig, bend and dig. By now my hands are earth colored as I settle the last of the plants, whisper words of welcome, and tamp them down. I look over at Theresa. She is intent, finishing up her last bundle of transplants. Daniela is making her final notes.

			The light is growing golden at the end of the day over our newly planted field of spindly sweetgrass. If I look at it just right, I can almost see the women walking a few years ahead. Bend and pull, bend and pull, their bundles growing thicker. Feeling blessed for this day by the river, I murmur to myself the words of thanksgiving.

			The many paths from Carlisle—Tom’s, Theresa’s, and mine— converge here. In putting roots in the ground, we can join the mighty shout that turned the peach pit from black to white. I can take the buried stone from my heart and plant it here, restoring land, restoring culture, restoring myself.

			My trowel digs deep into the soil and strikes against a rock. I scrape away the earth and pry it up to make room for the roots. I almost cast it aside, but it is strangely light in my hand. I pause for a closer look. It is nearly the size of an egg. With muddy thumb I rub away the dirt and a glassy surface is revealed, then another and another. Even beneath the dirt it gleams as clear as water. One face is rough and cloudy, abraded by time and history, but the rest is brilliant. There is light shining through. It is a prism and the fading light refracts, throwing rainbows from within the buried stone.

			I dip it in the river to wash it clean and call Daniela and Theresa to come see. We are all struck with wonder as I cradle it in my hand. I wonder if it’s right to keep it, but I’m torn by thoughts of laying it back in its home. Having found it, I find I cannot let it go. We pack up our tools and head up to the house to say our good-byes for the day. I open my hand to show the stone to Tom, to ask the question. “This is the way the world works,” he says, “in reciprocity.” We gave sweetgrass and the land gave a diamond. A smile lights his face and he closes my fingers over the stone. “This is for you,” he says.





Umbilicaria: The Belly Button of the World


			Glacial erratics stud the Adirondack landscape, granite boulders dropped in place when the glaciers got tired of rolling them and melted their way back home to the north. The granite in these parts is anorthosite, among the oldest rocks on earth and resistant to weathering. Most of the boulders have been rounded by their journey, but some still stand tall and sharp-edged, like this one, which is as big as a dump truck. I run my fingers over its surface. Veined with quartz, its top is a knife edge and its sides too steep to climb.

			This elder has sat silently in these lakeshore woods for ten thousand years as forests have come and gone, lake levels ebbed and flowed. And after all that time, it is still a microcosm of the postglacial era when the world was a cold desert of rubble and scraped earth. Alternately baking in the summer sun and snow-blasted in the long winter, without soil in a world still treeless, the glacial till provided a forbidding home for pioneers.

			Undaunted, lichens volunteered to put down roots and homestead stone—metaphorically, of course, since they have no roots. This is an asset when there is no soil. Lichens have no roots, no leaves, no flowers. They are life at its most basic. From a dusting of propagules that lodged in tiny pits and fissures just a pinprick deep, they settled the bare granite. This microtopography gave protection from the wind and offered concavities where water might rest after a rain in a microscopic puddle. It wasn’t much, but it was enough.

			In the span of centuries the rock became glazed with a gray-green crust of lichen almost indistinguishable from the rock itself, a bare coating of life. The steep faces and exposure to the winds off the lake have prevented any accumulation of soil, its surface a last relic of the Ice Age.

			I come here sometimes just to be in the presence of such ancient beings. The sides of the boulder are festooned with Umbilicaria americana in raggedy ruffles of brown and green, the most magnificent of northeastern lichens. Unlike those of its tiny crustose forebearers, the Umbilicaria’s thallus—its body—can span an outstretched hand. The largest one recorded was measured at just over two feet. Tiny ones cluster like baby chicks around a mother hen. So charismatic a being has accumulated many names; it is most frequently known as the rock tripe and sometimes as the oakleaf lichen.

			Rain cannot linger on the vertical faces, so most of the time this boulder is dry and the lichens shrink and get crisp, making the rock look scabby. Without leaves or stem, Umbilicaria is simply a thallus, roughly circular in shape, like a tattered scrap of brown suede. Its upper surface when dry is a mousy shade of taupe. The thallus edges curl up in a chaotic sort of ruffle, exposing the black underside, which is crisp and grainy like a charred potato chip. It is anchored tightly to the rock at its center by a short stalk, like a very short-handled umbrella. The stalk, or umbilicus, cements the thallus to the rock from underneath.

			The forest the lichens inhabit is a richly textured plantscape, but they are not plants. They blur the definition of what it means to be an individual, as a lichen is not one being, but two: a fungus and an alga. These partners are as different as could be and yet are joined in a symbiosis so close that their union becomes a wholly new organism.

			I once heard a Navajo herbalist explain how she understands certain kinds of plants to be “married,” due to their enduring partnership and unquestioning reliance on one another. Lichens are a couple in which the whole is more than the sum of its parts. My parents will celebrate their sixtieth wedding anniversary this year and seem to have just that kind of symbiosis, a marriage in which the balance of giving and taking is dynamic, the roles of giver and receiver shifting from moment to moment. They are committed to an “us” that emerges from the shared strengths and weaknesses of the partners, an “us” that extends beyond the boundaries of coupledom and into their family and community. Some lichens are like that too; their shared lives benefit the whole ecosystem.

			All lichens, from the tiny crusts to the stately Umbilicaria, are a mutualistic symbiosis, a partnership in which both members benefit from their association. In many Native American wedding traditions, the bride and the groom present each other with baskets of gifts, traditionally representing what each promises to bring to the marriage. Often, the woman’s basket contains plants from the garden or meadows to show her agreement to provide food for her husband. The man’s basket may contain meat, or animal hides, a promise to provide for the family by hunting. Plant food and animal food, autotroph and heterotroph—the alga and the fungus also bring their particular gifts to their union as a lichen.

			The algal partner is a collection of single cells, gleaming like emeralds and bearing the gift of photosynthesis, the precious alchemy of turning light and air to sugar. The alga is an autotroph, or one that makes its own food and will be the cook of the family, the producer. The alga can make all the sugar it needs for energy, but it’s not very good at finding the minerals it needs. It can only photosynthesize when it’s moist, but it has no ability to protect itself from drying.

			The fungus partner is the heterotroph, or “other feeder,” since it can’t make its own food but must subsist on the carbon harvested by others. The fungus is brilliant at the art of dissolving things and liberating their minerals for its use, but it can’t make sugar. The fungal wedding basket would be filled with specialized compounds like acids and enzymes that digest complex materials into their simpler components. The body of the fungus, a network of delicate threads, goes out hunting for minerals and then absorbs those molecules through its huge surface area. Symbiosis enables the alga and the fungus to engage in a reciprocal exchange of sugar and minerals. The resulting organism behaves as if it were a single entity, with a single name. In a traditional human marriage, the partners may change their names to or an alga. We name it as if it were one new being, an interspecies family, as it were: rock tripe, Umbilicaria americana.

			In Umbilicaria, the algal partner is almost always a genus that would be called Trebouxia if it lived alone or was not “lichenized.” The fungal partner is always a type of ascomycete but not always the same species. Depending on how you look at it, the fungi are quite loyal. They always choose Trebouxia as their algal partner. The alga, however, is a bit more promiscuous, willing to hook up with a wider array of fungi. I guess we’ve all seen marriages like that, too.

			In their shared architecture, the algal cells are embedded like green beads in fabric woven of fungal hyphae. If you sliced a cross section of the thallus it would be like a cake with four layers. The upper surface, the cortex, feels like the top of a mushroom, smooth and leathery. It is tightly woven of fungal filaments, or hyphae, to hold in moisture. The dusky brown coloration acts like a natural sunscreen that shields the algal layer, which lies just below, from intense sunlight.

			Below the shelter of the fungal roof, the algae form a distinct medulla layer where the hyphae wrap themselves around the algal cells, like an arm draped over a shoulder or a loving embrace. Some fungal threads actually penetrate the green cells, as if they were long slender fingers reaching into a piggy bank. These fungal pickpockets help themselves to the sugars made by the alga and distribute them throughout the lichen. It has been estimated that the fungi take as much as half of the sugars the alga produces, maybe more. I’ve seen marriages like that, too, one partner siphoning off way more than he or she gives. Rather than thinking of lichens as a happy marriage, some researchers view them more as reciprocal parasitism. Lichens have been described as “fungi who discovered agriculture” by capturing photosynthetic beings within their fences of hyphae.

			Below the medulla, the next layer is a loose tangle of fungal hyphae designed to hold water and thus keep the algae productive for longer. The bottommost layer is coal black and prickly with rhizines, microscopic hairlike extensions that help attach the lichen to the rock.

			The fungal/algal symbiosis so blurs the distinction between individual and community that it has attracted a great deal of research attention. Some pairs are so specialized that they cannot live apart from one another. Nearly twenty thousand species of fungus are known to occur only as obligate members of a lichen symbiosis. Others have the capacity to live freely yet choose to join an alga to become a lichen.

			Scientists are interested in how the marriage of alga and fungus occurs and so they’ve tried to identify the factors that induce two species to live as one. But when researchers put the two together in the laboratory and provide them with ideal conditions for both alga and fungus, they gave each other the cold shoulder and proceeded to live separate lives, in the same culture dish, like the most platonic of roommates. The scientists were puzzled and began to tinker with the habitat, altering one factor and then another, but still no lichen. It was only when they severely curtailed the resources, when they created harsh and stressful conditions, that the two would turn toward each other and begin to cooperate. Only with severe need did the hyphae curl around the alga; only when the alga was stressed did it welcome the advances.

			When times are easy and there’s plenty to go around, individual species can go it alone. But when conditions are harsh and life is tenuous, it takes a team sworn to reciprocity to keep life going forward. In a world of scarcity, interconnection and mutual aid become critical for survival. So say the lichens.

			Lichens are opportunistic, making efficient use of resources when they’re available and otherwise happily doing without. Most of the time when you encounter Umbilicaria it is as crisp and dry as a dead leaf, but it’s far from deceased. It is only waiting, empowered with a remarkable physiology to endure drought. Like the mosses with whom it shares the rocks, lichens are poikilohydric: they can photosynthesize and grow only when they are wet, but they are not able to regulate their own water balance—their moisture content mirrors the moisture in the environment. If the rock is dry, so are they. A rain shower changes everything.

			The very first drops splatter hard against the rigid surface of rock tripe, which instantly changes color. The mud-brown thallus becomes sprinkled with clay-gray polka dots, the tracks of raindrops, which deepen over the next minute to sage green, like a magic picture developing before your eyes. And then, as the green spreads, the thallus begins to move as if animated by muscle, stretching and flexing as the water expands its tissue. In a matter of minutes it is transformed from a dry scab to tender green skin, as smooth as the inside of your arm.

			With the lichen restored, you can see how it got its other name. Where the umbilicus anchors the thallus to the rock, the soft skin is dimpled, with little wrinkles radiating about its center. It looks to all the world like a belly button. Some are such perfect little navels that you want to kiss them, like a little baby tummy. Some are kind of saggy and wrinkled, like the old woman whose belly carried those babies.

			Since the navel lichen grows on vertical surfaces, the top will dry out faster than the bottom, where moisture collects. When the thallus starts to dry and its edges curl up, a shallow water-holding trough forms along its lower edge. As the lichen gets older, it becomes asymmetrical, the bottom half as much as 30 percent longer than the upper, a legacy of lingering moisture that permitted it to keep photosynthesizing and growing after the top half was dry and still. The trough can also collect debris, the lichen equivalent of belly-button lint.

			I lean in close and find lots of baby thalli, little brown discs about the size of a pencil eraser, scattered over the rock. This is a healthy population. These juveniles arose either from broken fragments of the parent or, because of their perfect symmetry, more likely from specialized propagules called soredia—a little package of both fungus and alga designed for joint dispersal, so they’ll never be without their partners.

			Even the tiny thalli are dimpled with navels. How fitting that this ancient being, one of the first forms of life on the planet, should be connected to the earth by an umbilicus. The marriage of alga and fungus, Umbilicaria is the child of earth, life nourished by stone.

			And people are nourished by Umbilicaria, as the name rock tripe suggests. Rock tripe is generally categorized as a starvation food, but it’s not so bad. My students and I make a pot every summer. Each thallus may take decades to grow, so our harvest is minimal, just enough to taste. First we soak the thallus overnight in freshwater to remove the grit it has accumulated. The soaking water is poured off to leach away the powerful acids the lichen uses to eat away at the rock. Then we set it to boil for half an hour. It yields a lichen broth that is quite palatable and rich enough in protein to gel like consommé when it is chilled, tasting vaguely of rock and mushroom. The thallus itself we cut into strips that are like a chewy pasta, making a quite serviceable lichen noodle soup.

			Umbilicaria is often the victim of its own success. Accumulation is its undoing. Slowly, slowly the lichens build up a thin layer of debris around them, perhaps their own exfoliations, or dust, or falling needles—the flotsam of the forest. The dusting of organic matter holds the moisture that the bare rock could not hold and gradually an accretion of soil creates a habitat for mosses and ferns. Through the laws of ecological succession, the lichens have done their work of laying the foundation for others, and now the others have come.

			I know a whole escarpment covered with rock tripe. Water trickles down fissures in the cliff face and the trees have closed in, making a shady paradise for mosses. The lichens colonized in an earlier day, before the forest was thick and moist. Today they look like an encampment of floppy canvas tents on the rock, some now tattered, with sagging rooflines. When I scan the oldest tripe with my hand lens I see they are crusted over with algae and other crustose lichens like microscopic barnacles. Some have slippery green streaks where blue-green algae have made themselves at home. These epiphytes can impede the photosynthesis of the lichen by blocking out the sun. A deep pillow of Hypnum moss catches my eye, vivid against the dull lichens. I move along the ledge to admire its plush contours. Sticking out from its base like a ruffle around a pillow are the edges of an Umbilicaria thallus, nearly engulfed by the moss. Its time has come to an end.

			The lichen, in a single body, unites the two great pathways of life: the so-called grazing food chain based on the building up of beings, and the detrital food chain based on taking them apart. Producers and decomposers, the light and the darkness, the givers and receivers wrapped in each other’s arms, the warp and the weft of the same blanket so closely woven that it’s impossible to discern the giving from the taking. Some of earth’s oldest beings, lichens are born from reciprocity. Our elders share the teachings that these rocks, the glacial erratics, are the oldest of grandfathers, the carriers of prophecy, and our teachers. Sometimes I go to sit among them, the proverbial navel gazer at the belly button of the world.

			These ancients carry teachings in the ways that they live. They remind us of the enduring power that arises from mutualism, from the sharing of the gifts carried by each species. Balanced reciprocity has enabled them to flourish under the most stressful of conditions. Their success is measured not by consumption and growth, but by graceful longevity and simplicity, by persistence while the world changed around them. It is changing now.

			While lichens can sustain humans, people have not returned the favor of caring for lichens. Umbilicaria, like many lichens, is highly sensitive to air pollution. When you find Umbilicaria, you know you’re breathing the purest air. Atmospheric contaminants like sulfur dioxide and ozone will kill it outright. Pay attention when it departs.

			Indeed, whole species and entire ecosystems are vanishing before our eyes in the vanguard of accelerating climate chaos. At the same time, other habitats are on the rise. Melting glaciers are exposing land where it has not been seen for millennia. At the edge of the ice, newly scraped land is emerging, a jumble of rocky till, harsh and cold. Umbilicaria is known to be among the first to colonize postglacial forelands today, just as it did when the earth was raw and bare, ten thousand years ago—another era of great climate change. Our indigenous herbalists say to pay attention when plants come to you; they’re bringing you something you need to learn.

			For millennia, these lichens have held the responsibility of building up life and in an eyeblink of earth’s history we have set about undermining their work to usher in a time of great environmental stress, a barrenness of our own making. I suspect that lichens will endure. We could, too, if we listen to their teachings. If not, I imagine Umbilicaria will cover the rocky ruins of our time long after our delusions of separateness have relegated us to the fossil record, a ruffled green skin adorning the crumbling halls of power.

			Rock tripe, oak leaf lichen, navel lichen. I’m told that Umbilicaria is known in Asia by another name: the ear of the stone. In this almost silent place I imagine them listening. To the wind, to a hermit thrush, to thunder. To our wildly growing hunger. Ear of stone, will you hear our anguish when we understand what we have done? The harsh postglacial world in which you began may well become our own unless we listen to the wisdom carried in the mutualistic marriage of your bodies. Redemption lives in knowing that you might also hear our hymns of joy when we too marry ourselves to the earth.





Old-Growth Children


			We’re chatting like vireos as we hike with long, easy strides through rolling stands of Doug Fir. Then, at some invisible boundary, the temperature drops in a cool breath and we descend into a basin. The conversation halts.

			Fluted trunks rise from a lawn of deep moss-green, their canopies lost in the hanging mist that suffuses the forest with hazy silver twilight. Strewn with huge logs and clumps of ferns, the forest floor is a featherbed of needles dappled with sun flecks. Light streams through holes over the heads of young trees while their grandmothers loom in shadows, great buttressed trunks eight feet in diameter. You want to be quiet in instinctive deference to the cathedral hush and because nothing you could possibly say would add a thing.

			But it wasn’t always quiet here. Girls were here, laughing and chatting while their grandmas sat nearby with singing sticks, supervising. A long scar runs up the tree across the way, a dull gray arrow of missing bark tapering off among the first branches, thirty feet up. The one who took this strip would have backed away, up the hill behind her, with the bark ribbon grasped in her hands, pulling until it tore loose.

			In those days the ancient rainforests spread from Northern California to southeastern Alaska in a band between the mountains and the sea. Here is where the fog drips. Here is where the moistureladen air from the Pacific rises against the mountains to produce upward of one hundred inches of rain a year, watering an ecosystem rivaled nowhere else on earth. The biggest trees in the world. Trees that were born before Columbus sailed.

			And trees are just the beginning. The numbers of species of mammals, birds, amphibians, wildflowers, ferns, mosses, lichens, fungi, and insects are staggering. It’s hard to write without running out of superlatives, for these were among the greatest forests on earth, forests peopled with centuries of past lives, enormous logs and snags that foster more life after their death than before. The canopy is a multilayered sculpture of vertical complexity from the lowest moss on the forest floor to the wisps of lichen hanging high in the treetops, raggedy and uneven from the gaps produced by centuries of windthrow, disease, and storms. This seeming chaos belies the tight web of interconnections between them all, stitched with filaments of fungi, silk of spiders, and silver threads of water. Alone is a word without meaning in this forest.

			Native peoples of the coastal Pacific Northwest made rich livelihoods here for millennia, living with one foot in the forest and one on the shore, gathering the abundance of both. This is the rainy land of salmon, of wintergreen conifers, huckleberries, and sword fern. This is the land of the tree of ample hips and full baskets, the one known in the Salish languages as Maker of Rich Women, as Mother Cedar. No matter what the people needed, the cedar was ready to give, from cradleboard to coffin, holding the people.

			In this wet climate, where everything is on its way back to decay, rot-resistant cedar is the ideal material. The wood is easily worked and buoyant. The huge, straight trunks practically offer themselves for seagoing craft that could carry twenty paddlers. And everything that was carried in those canoes was also the gift of cedar: paddles, fishing floats, nets, ropes, arrows, and harpoons. The paddlers even wore hats and capes of cedar, warm and soft against the wind and rain.

			Along the creeks and bottomlands, the women sang their way down well-worn trails to find just the right tree for each purpose. Whatever they needed they asked for respectfully, and for whatever they received they offered prayers and gifts in return. Notching a wedge in the bark of a middle-aged tree, the women could peel off a ribbon a hands-width wide and twenty-five feet long. Harvesting bark from just a fraction of the tree’s circumference, they ensured that the damage would heal over without ill effect. The dried strips were then beaten to separate the many layers, yielding inner bark with a satiny softness and a glossy sheen. A long process of shredding bark with a deer bone yielded a pile of fluffy cedar “wool.” Newborn babies were delivered into a nest of this fleece. The “wool” could also be woven into warm, durable clothing and blankets. A family sat on woven mats of outer bark, slept on cedar beds, and ate from cedar dishes.

			Every part of the tree was used. The ropy branches were split for tools, baskets, and fish traps. Dug and cleaned, cedars’ long roots were peeled and split into a fine, strong fiber that is woven into the famous conical hats and ceremonial headgear that signify the identity of the one beneath the brim. During the famously cold and rainy winters, with a perpetual twilight of fog, who lit the house? Who warmed the house? From bow drill to tinder to fire, it was Mother Cedar.

			When sickness came, the people turned again to her. Every part is medicine for the body, from the flat sprays of foliage to the flexible branches to the roots, and throughout there is powerful spiritual medicine as well. Traditional teachings recount that the power of cedars is so great and so fluid that it can flow into a worthy person who leans back into the embrace of her trunk. When death came, so came the cedar coffin. The first and last embrace of a human being was in the arms of Mother Cedar.

			Just as old-growth forests are richly complex, so too were the oldgrowth cultures that arose at their feet. Some people equate sustainability with a diminished standard of living, but the aboriginal people of the coastal old-growth forests were among the wealthiest in the world. Wise use and care for a huge variety of marine and forest resources, allowed them to avoid overexploiting any one of them while extraordinary art, science, and architecture flowered in their midst. Rather than to greed, prosperity here gave rise to the great potlatch tradition in which material goods were ritually given away, a direct reflection of the generosity of the land to the people. Wealth meant having enough to give away, social status elevated by generosity. The cedars taught how to share wealth, and the people learned.

			Scientists know Mother Cedar as Thuja plicata, the western red cedar. One of the venerable giants of the ancient forests, they reach heights of two hundred feet. They are not the tallest, but their enormous buttressed waistlines can be fifty feet in circumference, rivaling the girth of the redwoods. The bole tapers from the fluted base, sheathed in bark the color of driftwood. Her branches are graceful and drooping with tips that swoop upward like a bird in flight, each branch like a frond of green feathers.

			Looking closely, you can see the tiny overlapping leaves that shingle each twig. The species epithet plicata refers to their folded, braided appearance. The tight weave and golden-green sheen make the leaves look like tiny braids of sweetgrass, as if the tree itself was woven of kindness.

			Cedar unstintingly provided for the people, who responded with gratitude and reciprocity. Today, when cedar is mistaken for a commodity from the lumberyard, the idea of gift is almost lost. What can we who recognize the debt possibly give back?

			The blackberries clawed at Franz Dolp’s sleeves as he forced himself through the bramble. Salmonberry grabbing an ankle threatened to pull him down the nearly vertical hill, but you can’t fall far before the thicket, eight feet tall, will trap you like Br’er Rabbit in the briar patch. You lose any sense of direction in the tangle; the only way is up, toward the ridgetop. Clearing trail is the first step. Nothing else is possible without access, so he pressed on, machete swinging.

			Tall and lean in field pants and the tall rubber work boots that are endemic in this muddy, thorny terrain, he wore a black baseball cap pulled low. With artist’s hands in worn work gloves, he was a man who knew how to sweat. That night he wrote in his journal: “This is work I should have started in my twenties, not my mid-fifties.”

			All afternoon he lopped and slashed a way toward the ridge, hacking blindly through the brush, his rhythm broken only by the clang of the blade off an obstacle hidden in the brambles: a huge old log, shoulder high, cedar by the looks of it. They were only milling Douglas fir in those early days, so they left the other trees to rot. Only thing is, cedar doesn’t rot: it can last for a hundred years on the forest floor, maybe more. This one was a remnant of the missing forest, left over from the first cut more than a century ago. It was too big to cut through and a long way around, so Franz just created another bend in the trail.

			Today, now that the old cedars are nearly gone, people want them. They scrounge old clear-cuts for the logs that were left behind. Shakebolting, they call it, turning old logs into high-priced cedar shakes. The grain is so straight the shakes split right off.

			It’s amazing to think that, within the lifetime of those old trees on the ground, they have gone from being revered to being rejected to nearly being eliminated, and then somebody looked up and noticed they were gone and wanted them again.

			“My tool of preference was a Cutter Mattock, commonly known in this area as a Maddox,” Franz wrote. With this sharp edge, he could chop roots and grade trail, defeating, if briefly, the march of the vine maples.

			It took several more days of wrangling impenetrable brush to break through to the ridgetop, where a view of Mary’s Peak was the reward. “I remember the exhilaration as we reached a certain point and savored our accomplishment. Also the days when with the slopes and the weather contributing mightily to the feeling that everything had gotten out of hand and we just fell down laughing.”

			Franz’s journals record his impressions of the view from the ridge, across a crazy-quilt landscape, the panorama broken up into forestry management units: polygons of dead brown and mottled patches of gray and green next to “dense plantations of young Doug Fir like sections of manicured lawn” in squares and wedges, all broken up like shards of shattered glass on the mountain. Only at the top of Mary’s Peak, within the boundaries of a preserve, is there a continuous span of forest, rough textured and multihued from a distance, the signature of the old-growth forest, the forest that used to be.

			“My work grew out of a deeply experienced sense of loss,” he wrote, “the loss of what should be here.”

			When the Coast Range was first opened to logging in the 1880s, the trees were so big—three hundred feet tall and fifty feet around— that the bosses didn’t know what to do with them. Eventually two poor sods were told to man the “misery whip,” a thin, two-man crosscut saw that they pulled for weeks to fell the behemoths. These were the trees that built the cities of the west, which grew and then demanded even more. They said in those days, “You could never cut all the old growth.”

			About the time the chain saws last growled on these slopes, Franz was planting apple trees and thinking of cider, with his wife and kids on a farm hours away. A father, a young professor of economics, he was investing in home economics, his dream of an Oregon homestead, embedded in the forest, like the one he grew up on, and where he would stay forever.

			Unknown to him, while he was raising cows and kids, the blackberries got started in the full sun above what would become his new land on Shotpouch Creek. They were doing their work of covering the stump farm and rusting remnants of logging chains, wheels, and rails. The salmonberries mingled their thorns with the rolls of barbed wire while moss reupholstered the old couch in the gully.

			While his marriage was eroding and running downhill on the home farm, so was the soil at Shotpouch. The alders came to try to hold it in place, and then the maples. This was a land whose native language was conifer but now spoke only the slang of leggy hardwoods. Its dream of itself as groves of cedar and fir was gone, lost under the unrelenting chaos of brush. Straight and slow has little chance against fast and thorny. When he drove away from the farm intended for “till death do us part,” the woman waving good-bye said, “I hope that your next dream turns out better than your last.”

			In his journal he wrote that he “made the mistake of visiting the farm after it was sold. The new owners had cut it all. I sat among the stumps and the swirling red dust and I cried. When I moved to Shotpouch after leaving the farm, I realized that making a new home required more than building a cabin or planting an apple tree. It required some healing for me and for the land.”

			And so it was that a wounded man moved to live on wounded land at Shotpouch Creek.

			This patch of land was in the heart of the Oregon Coast Range, the same mountains where his grandfather had made a hardscrabble homestead. Old family photos show a rough cabin and grim faces, surrounded by nothing but stumps.

			He wrote, “These forty acres were to be my retreat, my escape to the wild. But this was no pristine wilderness.” The place he chose was near a spot on the map called Burnt Woods. Scalped Woods would have been more apt. The land was razed by a series of clear-cuts, first the venerable old forest and then its children. No sooner had the firs grown back than the loggers came for them again.

			After land is clear-cut, everything changes. Sunshine is suddenly abundant. The soil has been broken open by logging equipment, raising its temperature and exposing mineral soil beneath the humus blanket. The clock of ecological succession has been reset, the alarm buzzing loudly.

			Forest ecosystems have tools for dealing with massive disturbance, evolved from a history of blowdown, landslide, and fire. The early successional plant species arrive immediately and get to work on damage control. These plants—known as opportunistic, or pioneer, species— have adaptations that allow them to thrive after disturbance. Because resources like light and space are plentiful, they grow quickly. A patch of bare ground around here can disappear in a few weeks. Their goal is to grow and reproduce as fast as possible, so they don’t bother themselves with making trunks but rather madly invest in leaves, leaves, and more leaves borne on the flimsiest of stems.

			The key to success is to get more of everything than your neighbor, and to get it faster. That life strategy works when resources seem to be infinite. But pioneer species, not unlike pioneer humans, require cleared land, hard work, individual initiative, and numerous children. In other words, the window of opportunity for opportunistic species is short. Once trees arrive on the scene, the pioneers’ days are numbered, so they use their photosynthetic wealth to make babies that will be carried by birds to the next clear-cut. As a result, many are berry makers: salmonberry, elderberry, huckleberry, blackberry.

			The pioneers produce a community based on the principles of unlimited growth, sprawl, and high energy consumption, sucking up resources as fast as they can, wresting land from others through competition, and then moving on. When resources begin to run short, as they always will, cooperation and strategies that promote stability—strategies perfected by rainforest ecosystems—will be favored by evolution. The breadth and depth of these reciprocal symbioses are especially well developed in oldgrowth forests, which are designed for the long haul.

			Industrial forestry, resource extraction, and other aspects of human sprawl are like salmonberry thickets—swallowing up land, reducing biodiversity, and simplifying ecosystems at the demand of societies always bent on having more. In five hundred years we exterminated old-growth cultures and old-growth ecosystems, replacing them with opportunistic culture. Pioneer human communities, just like pioneer plant communities, have an important role in regeneration, but they are not sustainable in the long run. When they reach the edge of easy energy, balance and renewal are the only way forward, wherein there is a reciprocal cycle between early and late successional systems, each opening the door for the other.

			The old-growth forest is as stunning in its elegance of function as in its beauty. Under conditions of scarcity, there can be no frenzy of uncontrolled growth or waste of resources. The “green architecture” of the forest structure itself is a model of efficiency, with layers of foliage in a multilayered canopy that optimizes capture of solar energy. If we are looking for models of self-sustaining communities, we need look no further than an old-growth forest. Or the old-growth cultures they raised in symbiosis with them.

			Franz’s journals recall that when he compared the fragment of old growth he could see in the distance with the raw land at Shotpouch— where the only remnant of the ancient forest was an old cedar log—he knew he had found his purpose. Displaced from his own vision of how the world should be, he vowed that he would heal this place and return it to what it was meant to be. “My goal,” he wrote, “is to plant an oldgrowth forest.”

			But his ambitions ranged beyond physical restoration. As Franz wrote, “It is important to engage in restoration with development of a personal relationship with the land and its living things.” In working with the land, he wrote of the loving relationship that grew between them: “It was as if I discovered a lost part of myself.”

			After the garden and the fruit trees, his next goal was building a house that would honor the self-sufficiency and simplicity that he sought. His ideal had been to build the cabin from the red cedar— beautiful, fragrant, rot-resistant, and symbolic—left behind by the loggers on the slopes above. But the repeated logging had simply taken too much. So, regrettably, he had to purchase the cedar timber for the cabin, “with the promise that I would plant and grow more cedar trees than would ever be cut for my use.”

			Lightweight and highly water-repellent, sweet-smelling cedar was also the architectural choice for indigenous rainforest peoples. Cedar houses, constructed of both logs and planks, were emblematic of the region. The wood split so readily that, in skilled hands, dimensional boards could be made without a saw. Sometimes trees were felled for lumber, but planks were more often split from naturally fallen logs. Remarkably, Mother Cedar also yielded planks from her living flanks. When a line of wedges of stone or antler were pounded into a standing tree, long boards would pop from the trunk along the straight grain. The wood itself is dead supportive tissue, so the harvest of a few boards from a big tree does not risk killing the whole organism—a practice that redefines our notions of sustainable forestry: lumber produced without killing a tree.

			Now, however, industrial forestry dictates how the landscape is shaped and used. To own the land at Shotpouch, which is designated as timberlands, Franz was required to register an approved forest management plan for his new property. He wryly wrote his dismay that his land was classified “not as forestland, but timberland,” as if the sawmill was the only possible destiny for a tree. Franz had an old-growth mind in a Doug Fir world.

			The Oregon Department of Forestry and the College of Forestry at Oregon State University offered Franz technical assistance, prescribing herbicides to quell the brush and replanting with genetically improved Douglas fir. If you can ensure plenty of light by eliminating understory competition, Douglas fir makes timber faster than anything else around. But Franz didn’t want timber. He wanted a forest.

			“My love of this country motivated me to purchase land at Shotpouch,” he wrote. “I wanted to do right here, even if I had little idea of what ‘right’ meant. To love a place is not enough. We must find ways to heal it.” If he used the herbicides, the only tree that could tolerate the chemical rain was Douglas Fir, and he wanted all the species to be present. He vowed to clear the brush by hand.

			Replanting an industrial forest is backbreaking labor. Crews of tree planters come in, progressing sideways on steep slopes with bulging sacks of seedlings. Walk six feet, dibble in a seedling, tamp it down. Walk six feet, repeat. One species. One pattern. But at that time there was no prescription for how to plant a natural forest, so Franz turned to the only teacher he had, the forest itself.

			Observing the locations of species in the few existing old-growth plots, he tried to replicate their patterns on his own land. Douglas fir went on sunny open slopes, hemlock on the shady aspects, and cedar on the dimly lit, wet ground. Rather than getting rid of the young stands of alder and big-leaf maple as the authorities recommended, he let them stay to do their work of rebuilding soil and planted the shade-tolerant species beneath their canopy. Every tree was marked and mapped and tended. He hand-cleared the brush that threatened to swallow them up, until back surgery eventually forced him to hire a good crew.

			Over time, Franz became a very good ecologist, reading his way through both the printed library and the more subtle library of texts offered by the forest itself. His goal was to match his vision for an ancient forest with the possibilities that the land provided.

			His journals make it clear that there were times when he doubted the wisdom of his endeavors. He recognized that no matter what he did, the land would eventually turn back to some sort of forest whether he slogged up hills with a sack of seedlings or not. Human time is not the same as forest time. But time alone is no guarantee of the oldgrowth forest he imagined. When the surrounding landscape is a mosaic of clear-cut and Douglas fir lawns, it is not necessarily possible for a natural forest to reassemble itself. Where would the seeds come from? Would the land be in a condition to welcome them?

			This last question is especially critical for the regeneration of “Maker of Rich Women.” Despite its huge stature, cedar has tiny seeds, flakes wafted on the wind from delicate cones not more than half an inch long. Four hundred thousand cedar seeds add up to a single pound. It’s a good thing that the adults have a whole millennium to reseed themselves. In the profusion of growth in these forests, such a speck of life has almost no chance at all to establish a new tree.

			While adult trees are tolerant of the various stresses that an always changing world throws their way, the young are quite vulnerable. Red cedar grows more slowly than the other species who quickly overtop it and steal the sun—especially after a fire or logging, it is almost entirely outcompeted by species better adapted to the dry, open conditions. If red cedars do survive, despite being the most shade tolerant of all the western species, they do not flourish but rather bide their time, waiting for a windthrow or a death to punch a hole in the shade. Given the opportunity, they climb that transient shaft of sunlight, step by step, making their way to the canopy. But most never do. Forest ecologists estimate that the window of opportunity for cedars to get started occurs perhaps only twice in a century. So at Shotpouch, natural recolonization was out. In order to have cedars in the restored forest, Franz had to plant them.

			Given all cedar’s traits—slow growth, poor competitive ability, susceptibility to browsing, wildly improbable seedling establishment— one would expect it to be a rare species. But it’s not. One explanation is that while cedars can’t compete well on uplands, they thrive with wet feet in alluvial soils, swamps, and water edges that other species can’t stand. Their favorite habitat provides them with a refuge from competition. Accordingly, Franz carefully selected creekside areas and planted them thickly with cedar.

			The unique chemistry of cedar endows it with both life-saving and tree-saving medicinal properties. Rich with many highly antimicrobial compounds, it is especially resistant to fungi. Northwest forests, like any ecosystem, are susceptible to outbreaks of disease, the most significant of which is laminated root rot caused by the native fungus Phellinus weirii. While this fungus can be fatal for Douglas firs, hemlock, and other trees, the red cedars are blessedly immune. When root rot strikes the others, the cedars are poised to fill in the empty gaps, freed of competition. The Tree of Life survives in patches of death.

			After years of working alone to keep the cedar thriving, Franz found someone who shared his notion of a good time: planting trees and chopping salmonberry. Franz’s first date with Dawn was on the ridgetop at Shotpouch. Over the following eleven years, they planted more than thirteen thousand trees and created a network of trails with names that reflect intimacy with their forty acres.

			Forest Service lands are often named something like Management Unit 361. At Shotpouch, more evocative place names are penned on the hand-drawn trail map of the property: Glass Canyon, Viney Glen, Cow Hip Dip. Even individual trees, remnants of the original forest, are named: Angry Maple, Spider Tree, Broken Top. One word appears on the map more than any other: Cedar Springs, Cedar Rest, Sacred Cedar, Cedar Family.

			Cedar Family is especially evocative of how cedar often lives in familylike groves. Perhaps in compensation for its difficulty in sprouting from seed, cedar is a champion at vegetative reproduction. Almost any part of the tree that rests on wet ground can take root, in a process known as layering. The low swooping foliage may send roots into moist beds of moss. The flexible branches themselves can initiate new trees—even after they’re cut from the tree. Native peoples probably tended the cedar groves by propagating them in this way. Even a young cedar that has tipped over or been flattened by hungry elk will reorient its branches and start over. The aboriginal names for the tree, Long Life Maker and Tree of Life, are appropriately bestowed.

			One of the most touching place names on Franz’s map is a spot he called Old Growth Children. To plant trees is an act of faith. Thirteen thousand acts of faith live on this land.

			Franz studied and planted, studied and planted, making a lot of mistakes and learning as he went. Franz wrote, “I was a temporary steward of this land. I was its caretaker. More accurately I was its caregiver. The devil was in the details and the devil presented details at every turn.” He observed the reaction of the old-growth children to their habitats and then tried to remedy whatever ailed them. “Reforestation took on the flavor of tending a garden. This was a forestry of intimacy. When I am on the land, it is very hard to keep from messing around. Planting one more tree, cutting a limb. Transplanting what has already been planted to a more favorable spot. I call it ‘anticipatory redistributive naturalization.’ Dawn calls it tinkering.”

			Cedar’s generosity extends not only to people, but to many other forest dwellers as well. Its tender, low-hanging foliage is among deer and elk’s favorite food. You’d think that seedlings hidden under the canopies of everything else would be camouflaged, but they are so palatable that the herbivores hunt them out as if they were hidden chocolate bars. And because they grow so slowly, they remain vulnerable at deer height for a long time.

			“The unknowns pervading my work were as pervasive as shade in the forest,” Franz wrote. His plan to grow cedars on the stream banks was a good one, except that’s where the beavers also live. Who knew that they eat cedar for dessert? His cedar nurseries were gnawed to oblivion. So he planted them again, this time with a fence. The wildlife just snickered. Thinking like a forest, he then planted a thicket of willow, beavers’ favorite meal, along the creek, hoping to distract them from his cedars.

			“I definitely should have met with a council of mice, boomers, bobcats, porcupines, beaver, and deer before I started this experiment,” he wrote.

			Many of these cedars today are gangly teens, all limbs and floppy leader, not yet grown into themselves. Nibbled by deer and elk, they become even more awkward. Under the tangle of vine maple they struggle toward light, reaching an arm here, a branch there. But their time is coming.

			After completing the final plantings, Franz wrote, “I may heal the land. Yet I have little doubt of the direction that the real benefits flow. An element of reciprocity is the rule here. What I give, I receive in return. Here on the slopes of Shotpouch Valley, I have been engaged less in a personal forestry of restoration than in a forestry of personal restoration. In restoring the land, I restore myself.”

			Maker of Rich Women, there is truth in her name. She made Franz rich, too, with the wealth of seeing his vision alive in the world, of giving a gift to the future that only grows more beautiful with time.

			Of Shotpouch he wrote, “This was an exercise in personal forestry. But it was also an exercise in the creation of personal art. I could have been painting a landscape or composing a cycle of songs. The exercise in finding the right distribution of trees feels like revising a poem. Given my lack of technical expertise, I could not reconcile myself to the title of ‘forester,’ but I could live with the idea that I am a writer who works in the forest. And with the forest. A writer who practices the art of forestry and writes in trees. The practice of forestry may be changing, but I am unaware of any instances where proficiency in the arts is sought as a professional qualification by timber companies or schools of forestry. Perhaps that is what we need. Artists as foresters.”

			In his years on this plot, he watched the watershed start to heal from a long history of damage. His journal describes a time-travel visit to Shotpouch one hundred and fifty years in the future, when “the venerable cedars have captured the landscape where an alder thicket once stood.” But he knew that, in the present, his forty acres were just a seedling, and a vulnerable one at that. Meeting his goal would require many more careful hands—and hearts and minds too. Through his art on the land and on the page, he had to help shift people toward the worldview of old-growth cultures, a renewal of relationship to land.

			Old-growth cultures, like old-growth forests, have not been exterminated. The land holds their memory and the possibility of regeneration. They are not only a matter of ethnicity or history, but of relationships born out of reciprocity between land and people. Franz showed that you can plant an old-growth forest, but he also envisioned the propagation of an old-growth culture, a vision of the world, whole and healed.

			To further this vision, Franz co-created the Spring Creek Project, whose “challenge is to bring together the practical wisdom of the environmental sciences, the clarity of philosophical analysis and the creative, expressive power of the written word, to find new ways to understand and reimagine our relation to the natural world.” His notion of foresters as artists and poets as ecologists takes root in the forest and in the cozy cedar cabin at Shotpouch. It has become a place of inspiration and solitude for writers, writers who could be the restoration ecologists of relationship. Writers who could be like birds in a thicket of salmonberry, carrying seeds to a wounded land, making it ready for renewal of old-growth culture.

			The cabin is a gathering spot for fertile collaborations among artists, scientists, and philosophers, whose works are then expressed in a dazzling array of cultural events. His inspiration has become a nurse log for the inspiration of others. Ten years, thirteen thousand trees, and countless inspired scientists and artists later, he wrote, “I had confidence now that when it came time for me to rest, I could step aside and let others pass upon a path to a very special place. To a forest of giant fir, cedar, and hemlock, to the ancient forest that was.” He was right, and many have followed the path he blazed from weedy brambles to old-growth children. Franz Dolp passed away in 2004 in a collision with a paper mill truck on his way to Shotpouch Creek.

			Outside the door of his cabin, the circle of young cedars look like women in green shawls, beaded with raindrops catching the light, graceful dancers in feathery fringe that sways with their steps. They spread their branches wide, opening the circle, inviting us to be part of the dance of regeneration. Clumsy at first, from generations of sitting on the sidelines, we stumble until we find the rhythm. We know these steps from deep memory, handed down from Skywoman, reclaiming our responsibility as cocreators. Here in a homemade forest, poets, writers, scientists, foresters, shovels, seeds, elk, and alder join in the circle with Mother Cedar, dancing the old-growth children into being. We’re all invited. Pick up a shovel and join the dance.





Witness to the Rain


			This Oregon rain, at the start of winter, falls steadily in sheets of gray, unimpeded, making a gentle hiss. You’d think that rain falls equally over the land, but it doesn’t. The rhythm and the tempo change markedly from place to place. In a tangle of salal and Oregon grape, the rain strikes ratatatat on the hard, shiny leaves, the snare drum of sclerophylls. Rhododendron leaves, broad and flat, receive the rain with a smack that makes the leaves bounce and rebound, dancing in the downpour. Beneath a massive hemlock, the drops are fewer and the craggy trunk knows rain as dribbles down its furrows. On bare soil the rain splats on the clay while fir needles swallow it up with an audible gulp.

			In contrast, the fall of rain on moss is nearly silent. I kneel among them, sinking into their softness to watch and to listen. The drops are so quick that my eye is always chasing, but not catching, their arrival. At last, by narrowing my gaze to just a single frond, I can see it. The impact bows the shoot downward, but the drop itself vanishes. It is soundless. There is no drip or splash, but I can see the front of water move, darkening the stem as it is drunk in, silently dissipating among the tiny shingled leaves.

			Most other places I know, water is a discrete entity. It is hemmed in by well-defined boundaries: lakeshores, stream banks, the great rocky coastline. You can stand at its edge and say “this is water” and “this is land.” Those fish and those tadpoles are of the water realm; these trees, these mosses, and these four-leggeds are creatures of the land. But here in these misty forests those edges seem to blur, with rain so fine and constant as to be indistinguishable from air and cedars wrapped with cloud so dense that only their outlines emerge. Water doesn’t seem to make a clear distinction between gaseous phase and liquid. The air merely touches a leaf or a tendril of my hair and suddenly a drop appears.

			Even the river, Lookout Creek, doesn’t respect clear boundaries. It tumbles and slides down its main channel, where a dipper rides between pools. But Fred Swanson, a hydrologist here at the Andrews Experimental Forest, has told me stories of another stream, an invisible shadow of Lookout Creek, the hyporheic flow. This is the water that moves under the stream, in cobble beds and old sandbars. It edges up the toe slope to the forest, a wide unseen river that flows beneath the eddies and the splash. A deep invisible river, known to roots and rocks, the water and the land intimate beyond our knowing. It is hyporheic flow that I’m listening for.

			Wandering along the banks of Lookout Creek, I lean up against an old cedar with my back nestled in its curves and try to imagine the currents below. But all I sense is water dripping down my neck. Every branch is weighed down with mossy curtains of Isothecium and droplets hang from the tangled ends, just as they hang from my hair. When I bend my head over, I can see them both. But the droplets on Isothecium are far bigger than the drops on my bangs. In fact, the drops of moss water seem larger than any I know and they hang, swelling and pregnant with gravity, far longer than the drops on me, or on twigs or bark. They dangle and rotate, reflecting the entire forest and a woman in a bright-yellow slicker.

			I’m not sure I can trust what I’m seeing. I wish I had a set of calipers, so that I could measure the drops of moss water and see if they really are bigger. Surely all drops are created equal? I don’t know, so I take refuge in the play of the scientist spinning out hypotheses. Perhaps the high humidity around moss makes the drops last longer? Maybe in residence among mosses, raindrops absorb some property that increases their surface tension, making them stronger against the pull of gravity? Perhaps it is just an illusion, like how the full moon looks so much bigger at the horizon. Does the diminutive scale of the moss leaves make the drops appear larger? Maybe they want to show off their sparkle just a little longer?

			After hours in the penetrating rain, I am suddenly damp and chilled and the path back to the cabin is a temptation. I could so easily retreat to tea and dry clothes, but I cannot pull myself away. However alluring the thought of warmth, there is no substitute for standing in the rain to waken every sense—senses that are muted within four walls, where my attention would be on me instead of all that is more than me. Inside looking out, I could not bear the loneliness of being dry in a wet world. Here in the rainforest, I don’t want to just be a bystander to rain, passive and protected; I want to be part of the downpour, to be soaked, along with the dark humus that squishes underfoot. I wish that I could stand like a shaggy cedar with rain seeping into my bark, that water could dissolve the barrier between us. I want to feel what the cedars feel and know what they know.

			But I am not a cedar and I am cold. Surely there are places where the warm-blooded among us take refuge. There must be niches here and there where the rain does not reach. I try to think like a squirrel and find them. I poke my head into an undercut bank by the stream, but its back wall runs with rivulets. No shelter there, nor in the hollow of a treefall where I hoped the upturned roots would slow the rain. A spiderweb hangs between two dangling roots. Even this is filled, a silken hammock cradling a spoonful of water. My hopes rise where the vine maples are bent low to form a moss-draped dome. I push aside the Isothecium curtain and stoop to enter the tiny dark room, roofed with layers of moss. It’s quiet and windless, just big enough for one. The light comes through the moss-woven roof like pinprick stars, but so do the drips.

			As I walk back to the trail, a giant log blocks the way. It has fallen from the toe slope out into the river, where its branches drag in the rising current. Its top rests on the opposite shore. Going under looks easier than going over, so I drop to my hands and knees. And here I find my dry place. The ground mosses are brown and dry, the soil soft and powdery. The log makes a roof overhead more than a meter wide in the wedge-shaped space where the slope falls away to the stream. I can stretch out my legs, the slope angle perfectly accommodating the length of my back. I let my head rest in a dry nest of Hylocomium moss and sigh in contentment. My breath forms a cloud above me, up where brown tufts of moss still cling to the furrowed bark, embroidered with spiderwebs and wisps of lichen that haven’t seen the sun since this tree became a log.

			This log, inches above my face, weighs many tons. All that keeps it from seeking its natural angle of repose on my chest is a hinge of fractured wood at the stump and cracked branches propped on the other side of the stream. It could loose those bonds at any moment. But given the fast tempo of raindrops and the slow tempo of treefalls, I feel safe in the moment. The pace of my resting and the pace of its falling run on different clocks.

			Time as objective reality has never made much sense to me. It’s what happens that matters. How can minutes and years, devices of our own creation, mean the same thing to gnats and to cedars? Two hundred years is young for the trees whose tops this morning are hung with mist. It’s an eyeblink of time for the river and nothing at all for the rocks. The rocks and the river and these very same trees are likely to be here in another two hundred years, if we take good care. As for me, and that chipmunk, and the cloud of gnats milling in a shaft of sunlight—we will have moved on.

			If there is meaning in the past and in the imagined future, it is captured in the moment. When you have all the time in the world, you can spend it, not on going somewhere, but on being where you are. So I stretch out, close my eyes, and listen to the rain.

			The cushiony moss keeps me warm and dry, and I roll over on my elbow to look out on the wet world. The drops fall heavily on a patch of Mnium insigne, right at eye level. This moss stands upright, nearly two inches tall. The leaves are broad and rounded, like a fig tree in miniature. One leaf among the many draws my eye because of its long tapered tip, so unlike the rounded edges of the others. The threadlike tip of the leaf is moving, animated in a most unplantlike fashion. The thread seems firmly anchored to the apex of the moss leaf, an extension of its pellucid green. But the tip is circling, waving in the air as if it is searching for something. Its motion reminds me of the way inchworms will rise up on their hind sucker feet and wave their long bodies about until they encounter the adjacent twig, to which they then attach their forelegs, release the back, and arch across the gulf of empty space.

			But this is no many-legged caterpillar; it is a shiny green filament, a moss thread, lit from within like a fiber-optic element. As I watch, the wandering thread touches upon a leaf just millimeters away. It seems to tap several times at the new leaf and then, as if reassured, stretches itself out across the gap. It holds like a taut green cable, more than doubling its initial length. For just a moment, the two mosses are bridged by the shining green thread and then green light flows like a river across the bridge and vanishes, lost in the greenness of the moss. Is that not grace—to see an animal made of green light and water, a mere thread of a being who like me has gone walking in the rain?

			Down by the river, I stand and listen. The sound of individual raindrops is lost in the foaming white rush and smooth glide over rock. If you didn’t know better, you might not recognize raindrops and rivers as kin, so different are the particular and the collective. I lean over a still pool, reach in my hand, and let the drops fall from my fingers, just to be sure.

			Between the forest and the stream lies a gravel bar, a jumble of rocks swept down from high mountains in a river-changing flood last decade. Willows and alders, brambles and moss have taken hold there, but this too shall pass, says the river.

			Alder leaves lie fallen on the gravel, their drying edges upturned to form leafy cups. Rainwater has pooled in several, and it is stained red brown like tea from the tannins leached from the leaf. Strands of lichen lie scattered among them where the wind has torn them free. Suddenly I see the experiment I need to test my hypothesis; the materials are neatly laid out before me. I find two strands of lichen, equal in size and length, and blot them on my flannel shirt inside my raincoat. One strand I place in the leaf cup of red alder tea, the other I soak in a pool of pure rainwater. Slowly I lift them both up, side by side, and watch the droplets form at the ends of the strands. Sure enough, they are different. The plain water forms small, rapid drops that seem in a hurry to let go. But the droplets steeped in alder water grow large and heavy, and then hang for a long moment before gravity pulls them away. I feel the grin spreading over my face with the aha! moment. There are different kinds of drops, depending on the relationship between the water and the plant. If tannin-rich alder water increases the size of the drops, might not water seeping through a long curtain of moss also pick up tannins, making the big strong drops I thought I was seeing? One thing I’ve learned in the woods is that there is no such thing as random. Everything is steeped in meaning, colored by relationships, one thing with another.

			Where new gravel meets old shore, a still pool has formed beneath the overhanging trees. Cut off from the main channel, it fills from the rise of hyporheic flow, the water rising from below to fill the shallow basin where summer’s daisies look surprised to be submerged two feet deep now that the rains have come. In summer this pool was a flowery swale, now a sunken meadow that tells of the river’s transition from low, braided channel to the full banks of winter. It is a different river in August than in October. You’d have to stand here a long time to know them both. And even longer to know the river that was here before the coming of the gravel bar, and the river that will be after it leaves.

			Perhaps we cannot know the river. But what about the drops? I stand for a long time by the still backwater pool and listen. It is a mirror for the falling rain and is textured all over by the fine and steady fall. I strain to hear only rain whisper among the many sounds, and find that I can. It arrives with a high sprickley sound, a shurrr so light that it only blurs the glassy surface but does not disrupt the reflection. The pool is overhung with branches of vine maple reaching from the shore, a low spray of hemlock, and, from the gravel bar, alder stems inclining over the edge. Water falls from these trees into the pool, each to its own rhythm. The hemlock makes a rapid pulse. Water collects on every needle but travels to the branch tips before falling, running to the drip line, where it releases in a steady pit, pit, pit, pit, pit, drawing a dotted line in the water below.

			Maple stems shed their water much differently. The drips from maple are big and heavy. I watch them form and then plummet to the surface of the pool. They hit with such force that the drop makes a deep and hollow sound. Bloink. The rebound causes the water to jump from the surface, so it looks as if it were erupting from below. There are sporadic bloinks beneath the maples. Why is this drop so different from the hemlock drips? I step in close to watch the way that water moves on maple. The drops don’t form just anywhere along the stem. They arise mostly where past years’ bud scars have formed a tiny ridge. The rainwater sheets over the smooth green bark and gets dammed up behind the wall of the bud scar. It swells and gathers until it tops the little dam and spills over, tumbling in a massive drop to the water below. Bloink.

			Sshhhhh from rain, pitpitpit from hemlock, bloink from maple, and lastly popp of falling alder water. Alder drops make a slow music. It takes time for fine rain to traverse the scabrous rough surface of an alder leaf. The drops aren’t as big as maple drops, not enough to splash, but the popp ripples the surface and sends out concentric rings. I close my eyes and listen to the voices of the rain.

			The reflecting surface of the pool is textured with their signatures, each one different in pace and resonance. Every drip it seems is changed by its relationship with life, whether it encounters moss or maple or fir bark or my hair. And we think of it as simply rain, as if it were one thing, as if we understood it. I think that moss knows rain better than we do, and so do maples. Maybe there is no such thing as rain; there are only raindrops, each with its own story.

			Listening to rain, time disappears. If time is measured by the period between events, alder drip time is different from maple drip. This forest is textured with different kinds of time, as the surface of the pool is dimpled with different kinds of rain. Fir needles fall with the high-frequency hiss of rain, branches fall with the bloink of big drops, and trees fall with a rare but thunderous thud. Rare, unless you measure time like a river. And we think of it as simply time, as if it were one thing, as if we understood it. Maybe there is no such thing as time; there are only moments, each with its own story.

			I can see my face reflected in a dangling drop. The fish-eye lens gives me a giant forehead and tiny ears. I suppose that’s the way we humans are, thinking too much and listening too little. Paying attention acknowledges that we have something to learn from intelligences other than our own. Listening, standing witness, creates an openness to the world in which the boundaries between us can dissolve in a raindrop. The drop swells on the tip of a cedar and I catch it on my tongue like a blessing.





BURNING SWEETGRASS


			A sweetgrass braid is burned to create a ceremonial smudge that washes the recipient in kindness and compassion to heal the body and the spirit.





Windigo Footprints


			In the winter brilliance, the only sounds are the rub of my jacket against itself, the soft ploompf of my snowshoes, the rifle-shot crack of trees bursting their hearts in the freezing temperatures, and the beating of my own heart, pumping hot blood to fingers still tingling in double mittens. In the break between squalls, the sky is painfully blue. The snowfields sparkle below like shattered glass.

			This last storm has sculpted the drifts like surf on a frozen sea. Earlier, my tracks were filled with pink and yellow shadows; now they deepen to blue in the fading light. I walk alongside fox tracks, vole tunnels, and a bright-red spatter in the snow framed by the imprint of hawk wings.

			Everybody’s hungry.

			When the wind picks up again I can smell more snow coming and within minutes the squall line roars over the treetops, carrying flakes like a gray curtain blowing straight at me. I turn to get to shelter before full dark, retracing my steps, which have already begun to fill. When I look more closely I can see that inside each of my tracks is another print that is not my tread. I scan the growing darkness for a figure, but the snow is too heavy to see. The trees thrash beneath racing clouds. A howl rises behind me. Maybe it’s just the wind.

			It is on nights like this that the Windigo is afoot. You can hear its unearthly shrieks as it hunts through the blizzard.

			. . . .

			The Windigo is the legendary monster of our Anishinaabe people, the villain of a tale told on freezing nights in the north woods. You can feel it lurking behind you, a being in the shape of an outsized man, ten feet tall, with frost-white hair hanging from its shaking body. With arms like tree trunks, feet as big as snowshoes, it travels easily through the blizzards of the hungry time, stalking us. The hideous stench of its carrion breath poisons the clean scent of snow as it pants behind us. Yellow fangs hang from its mouth that is raw where it has chewed off its lips from hunger. Most telling of all, its heart is made of ice.

			Windigo stories were told around the fire to scare children into safe behavior lest this Ojibwe boogeyman make a meal of them. Or worse. This monster is no bear or howling wolf, no natural beast. Windigos are not born, they are made. The Windigo is a human being who has become a cannibal monster. Its bite will transform victims into cannibals too.

			When I come in from the rising blizzard and peel off my ice-coated clothes, there is a fire in the woodstove and a simmering pot of stew. It wasn’t always that way for our people, when the storms would bury the lodges and the food was gone. They named this time—when the snow is too deep and the deer are gone and the caches are empty—the Hunger Moon. It is the time when an elder leaves to hunt and never returns. When sucking a bone is not enough, the infants follow. After too many days, desperation is the only soup.

			Starvation in winter was a reality for our people, particularly in the era of the Little Ice Age when winters were especially hard and long. Some scholars suggest that Windigo mythology also spread quickly in the time of the fur trade, when overexploitation of game brought famine to the villages. The ever-present fear of winter famine is embodied in the icy hunger and gaping maw of the Windigo.

			As the monster shrieked on the wind, the Windigo stories reinforced the taboo against cannibalism, when the madness of hunger and isolation rustled at the edge of winter lodges. Succumbing to such a repulsive urge doomed the gnawer of bones to wander as a Windigo for the rest of time. It is said that the Windigo will never enter the spirit world but will suffer the eternal pain of need, its essence a hunger that will never be sated. The more a Windigo eats, the more ravenous it becomes. It shrieks with its craving, its mind a torture of unmet want. Consumed by consumption, it lays waste to humankind.

			But the Windigo is more than just a mythic monster intended to frighten children. Creation stories offer a glimpse into the worldview of a people, of how they understand themselves, their place in the world, and the ideals to which they aspire. Likewise, the collective fears and deepest values of a people are also seen in the visage of the monsters they create. Born of our fears and our failings, Windigo is the name for that within us which cares more for its own survival than for anything else.


In terms of systems science, the Windigo is a case study of a positive feedback loop, in which a change in one entity promotes a similar change in another, connected part of the system. In this case, an increase in Windigo hunger causes an increase in Windigo eating, and that increased eating promotes only more rampant hunger in an eventual frenzy of uncontrolled consumption. In the natural as well as the built environment, positive feedback leads inexorably to change— sometimes to growth, sometimes to destruction. When growth is unbalanced, however, you can’t always tell the difference.

			Stable, balanced systems are typified by negative feedback loops, in which a change in one component incites an opposite change in another, so they balance each other out. When hunger causes increased eating, eating causes decreased hunger; satiety is possible. Negative feedback is a form of reciprocity, a coupling of forces that create balance and sustainability.

			Windigo stories sought to encourage negative feedback loops in the minds of listeners. Traditional upbringing was designed to strengthen self-discipline, to build resistance against the insidious germ of taking too much. The old teachings recognized that Windigo nature is in each of us, so the monster was created in stories, that we might learn why we should recoil from the greedy part of ourselves. This is why Anishinaabe elders like Stewart King remind us to always acknowledge the two faces—the light and the dark side of life—in order to understand ourselves. See the dark, recognize its power, but do not feed it.

			The beast has been called an evil spirit that devours mankind. The very word, Windigo, according to Ojibwe scholar Basil Johnston, can be derived from roots meaning “fat excess” or “thinking only of oneself.” Writer Steve Pitt states that “a Windigo was a human whose selfishness has overpowered their self-control to the point that satisfaction is no longer possible.”

			No matter what they call it, Johnston and many other scholars point to the current epidemic of self-destructive practices—addiction to alcohol, drugs, gambling, technology, and more—as a sign that Windigo is alive and well. In Ojibwe ethics, Pitt says, “any overindulgent habit is self-destructive, and self-destruction is Windigo.” And just as Windigo’s bite is infectious, we all know too well that self-destruction drags along many more victims—in our human families as well as in the more-thanhuman world.

			The native habitat of the Windigo is the north woods, but the range has expanded in the last few centuries. As Johnston suggests, multinational corporations have spawned a new breed of Windigo that insatiably devours the earth’s resources “not for need but for greed.” The footprints are all around us, once you know what to look for.


Our plane had to land for repairs on a short paved strip in the jungle at the heart of the Ecuadorian Amazon oil fields, a few miles from the Colombian border. We flew in over unbroken rainforest, following the river shining like a blue satin ribbon below. But the water abruptly turned black when we flew over the raw gashes of red soil marking the paths of pipelines.

			Our hotel was on a dirt street where dead dogs and prostitutes shared the corners under a perpetually orange sky lit by the flaring stacks. When we got the room key, the concierge told us to push a dresser against the door and not leave our rooms during the night. In the lobby was a cage of scarlet macaws, staring dully at the street, where half-naked children were begging and AK47s hung from the shoulders of boys no older than twelve, standing guard outside the houses of the narcotraffickers. We passed the night without incident.

			The next morning we flew out as the sun rose over the steaming jungle. Below us was the snarling town ringed with rainbow-colored lagoons of petrochemical waste, too many to count. The footprints of the Windigo.

			They’re everywhere you look. They stomp in the industrial sludge of Onondaga Lake. And over a savagely clear-cut slope in the Oregon Coast Range where the earth is slumping into the river. You can see them where coal mines rip off mountaintops in West Virginia and in oil-slick footprints on the beaches of the Gulf of Mexico. A square mile of industrial soybeans. A diamond mine in Rwanda. A closet stuffed with clothes. Windigo footprints all, they are the tracks of insatiable consumption. So many have been bitten. You can see them walking the malls, eying your farm for a housing development, running for Congress.

			We are all complicit. We’ve allowed the “market” to define what we value so that the redefined common good seems to depend on profligate lifestyles that enrich the sellers while impoverishing the soul and the earth.

			Cautionary Windigo tales arose in a commons-based society where sharing was essential to survival and greed made any individual a danger to the whole. In the old times, individuals who endangered the community by taking too much for themselves were first counseled, then ostracized, and if the greed continued, they were eventually banished. The Windigo myth may have arisen from the remembrance of the banished, doomed to wander hungry and alone, wreaking vengeance on the ones who spurned them. It is a terrible punishment to be banished from the web of reciprocity, with no one to share with you and no one for you to care for.

			I remember walking a street in Manhattan, where the warm light of a lavish home spilled out over the sidewalk on a man picking through the garbage for his dinner. Maybe we’ve all been banished to lonely corners by our obsession with private property. We’ve accepted banishment even from ourselves when we spend our beautiful, utterly singular lives on making more money, to buy more things that feed but never satisfy. It is the Windigo way that tricks us into believing that belongings will fill our hunger, when it is belonging that we crave.

			On a grander scale, too, we seem to be living in an era of Windigo economics of fabricated demand and compulsive overconsumption. What Native peoples once sought to rein in, we are now asked to unleash in a systematic policy of sanctioned greed.

			The fear for me is far greater than just acknowledging the Windigo within. The fear for me is that the world has been turned inside out, the dark side made to seem light. Indulgent self-interest that our people once held to be monstrous is now celebrated as success. We are asked to admire what our people viewed as unforgivable. The consumption-driven mind-set masquerades as “quality of life” but eats us from within. It is as if we’ve been invited to a feast, but the table is laid with food that nourishes only emptiness, the black hole of the stomach that never fills. We have unleashed a monster.

			Ecological economists argue for reforms that would ground economics in ecological principles and the constraints of thermodynamics. They urge the embrace of the radical notion that we must sustain natural capital and ecosystem services if we are to maintain quality of life. But governments still cling to the neoclassical fallacy that human consumption has no consequences. We continue to embrace economic systems that prescribe infinite growth on a finite planet, as if somehow the universe had repealed the laws of thermodynamics on our behalf. Perpetual growth is simply not compatible with natural law, and yet a leading economist like Lawrence Summers, of Harvard, the World Bank, and the U.S. National Economic Council, issues such statements as, “There are no limits to the carrying capacity of the earth that are likely to bind at any time in the foreseeable future. The idea that we should put limits on growth because of some natural limit is a profound error.” Our leaders willfully ignore the wisdom and the models of every other species on the planet—except of course those that have gone extinct. Windigo thinking.





The Sacred and the Superfund


			Above the spring behind my house a drop forms at the end of a mossy branch, hangs in a momentary sparkle, and then lets go. Other drips and drops join in the procession, just a few of the hundreds of rivulets from the hills. Gathering speed, they splish over rocky ledges with growing urgency to be on their way, down Nine Mile Creek until they find Onondaga Lake. I cup my hands to the spring and drink. Knowing what I know, I worry about the journey these drops will soon take, wanting to hold them here forever. But there is no stopping water.

			The watershed of my home in upstate New York lies within the ancestral homelands of the Onondaga people, the central fire of the Iroquois, or Haudenosaunee, Confederacy. Traditional Onondaga understand a world in which all beings were given a gift, a gift that simultaneously engenders a responsibility to the world. Water’s gift is its role as life sustainer, and its duties are manifold: making plants grow, creating homes for fish and mayflies, and, for me today, offering a cool drink.

			The particular sweetness of this water comes from the surrounding hills, great shoulders of inordinately pure, fine-grained limestone. These old seafloors are almost pure calcium carbonate with scarcely a trace of other elements to discolor their pearly gray. Other springs in these hills are less sweet, emerging from limestone shelves that hide salt-filled caverns, crystal palaces lined with cubes of halite. The Onondaga used these salt springs to season their corn soup and venison and preserve the baskets of fish the waters offered up. Life was good and water rushed off to do its work, faithful to its responsibility every day. But people are not always as mindful as water—we can forget. And so the Haudenosaunee were given the Thanksgiving Address to remind themselves to greet and thank all of the members of the natural world whenever they gathered. To the waters they say:

			We give thanks to all the Waters of the world. We are grateful that the waters are still here and doing their duty of sustaining life on Mother Earth. Water is life, quenching our thirst and providing us with strength, making the plants grow and sustaining us all. Let us gather our minds together and with one mind, we send greetings and thanks to the Waters.

			These words reflect the sacred purpose of the people. For just as water was given certain responsibilities for sustaining the world, so were the people. Chief among their duties was to give thanks for the gifts of the earth and to care for them.

			Stories are told of long-ago times when the Haudenosaunee people did forget to live in gratitude. They became greedy and jealous and began fighting among themselves. Conflict brought only more conflict, until war between the nations became continuous. Soon grief was known in every longhouse and yet the violence went on. All were suffering.

			During that sorry time a son was born to a Huron woman far to the west. This handsome youth grew to manhood knowing that he had a special purpose. One day he explained to his family that he must leave home to carry a message to people in the east, a message from the Creator. He built a great canoe carved of white stone and journeyed far until at last he pulled his boat ashore in the midst of the warring Haudenosaunee. Here he spoke his message of peace and became known as the Peacemaker. Few heeded him at first, but those who listened were transformed.

			His life in danger, weighed down with sorrow, the Peacemaker and his allies, among them the real Hiawatha, spoke peace in times of terrible trouble. For years they traveled between villages and one by one the chiefs of the warring nations came to accept the message of peace, all but one. Tadodaho, an Onondaga leader, refused the way of peace for his people. He was so filled with hate that his hair writhed with snakes and his body was crippled by vitriol. Tadodaho sent death and sorrow to the carriers of the message, but the peace was more powerful than he and eventually the Onondaga too accepted the message of peace. Tadodaho’s twisted body was restored to health and together the messengers of peace combed the snakes from his hair. He too was transformed.

			The Peacemaker gathered together the leaders of all five Haudenosaunee nations and joined them with one mind. The Great Tree of Peace, an enormous white pine, has five long green needles joined in one bundle, representing the unity of the Five Nations. With one hand the Peacemaker lifted the great tree from the soil and the assembled chiefs stepped forward to cast their weapons of war into the hole. On this very shore, the nations agreed to “bury the hatchet” and live by the Great Law of Peace, which sets out right relations among peoples and with the natural world. Four white roots spread out to the four directions, inviting all peaceloving nations to shelter under the tree’s branches.

			So was born the great Haudenosaunee Confederacy, the oldest living democracy on the planet. It was here, at Onondaga Lake, where this Great Law was born. For its pivotal role, the Onondaga Nation became the central fire of the Confederacy and from that time forward, the name Tadodaho has been carried by the spiritual leader of the Confederacy. As a final measure, the Peacemaker placed the far-seeing eagle atop the Great Tree to warn the people of approaching danger. For the many centuries that followed, the eagle did its work and the Haudenosaunee people lived in peace and prosperity. But then another danger—a different kind of violence—came to their homelands. The great bird must have called and called, but its voice was lost in the maelstrom winds of change. Today, the ground where the Peacemaker walked is a Superfund site.


In fact, nine Superfund sites line the shore of Onondaga Lake, around which the present-day city of Syracuse, New York, has grown. Thanks to more than a century of industrial development, the lake known as one of North America’s most sacred sites is now known as one of the most polluted lakes in the United States.

			Drawn by abundant resources and the coming of the Erie Canal, the captains of industry brought their innovations to Onondaga territory. Early journals record that smokestacks made the air “a choking miasma.” The manufacturers were happy to have Onondaga Lake so close at hand, to use as a dumping ground. Millions of tons of industrial waste were slurried onto the lake bottom. The growing city followed suit, adding sewage to the suffering of the waters. It is as if the newcomers to Onondaga Lake had declared war, not on each other, but with the land.

			Today, the land where the Peacemaker walked and the Tree of Peace stood isn’t land at all, but beds of industrial waste sixty feet deep. It sticks to shoes like thick white school paste used in kindergartens to glue cutout birds onto construction-paper trees. There aren’t too many birds here, and the Tree of Peace is buried. The original people could no longer find even the familiar curve of the shore. The old contours were filled in, creating a new shoreline of more than a mile of waste beds.

			It has been said that the waste beds made new land, but that is a lie. The waste beds are actually old land, chemically rearranged. This greasy sludge used to be limestone and freshwater and rich soil. The new terrain is old land that has been pulverized, extracted, and poured out the end of a pipe. It is known as Solvay waste, after the Solvay Process Company that left it behind.

			The Solvay Process was a chemical breakthrough that allowed for the production of soda ash, an essential component of other industrial processes such as glass manufacturing and making detergents, pulp, and paper. Native limestone was melted in coke-fired furnaces and then reacted with salt to produce soda ash. This industry fueled the growth of the whole region, and chemical processing expanded to include organic chemicals, dyes, and chlorine gas. Train lines ran steadily past the factories, shipping out tons of products. Pipes ran in the other direction, pouring out tons of waste.

			The hills of waste are the topographic inverse of the open pit mines— the largest open pit mines in New York State, still unreclaimed— where the limestone rocks were quarried, the earth gouged out in one place to bury the ground in another. If time could run backward, like a film in reverse, we would see this mess reassemble itself into lush green hills and moss-covered ledges of limestone. The streams would run back up the hills to the springs and the salt would stay glittering in underground rooms.

			I can too easily imagine what it must have been like, those first ejections from the pipe falling in chalky white splats like the droppings of an enormous mechanical bird. Splurting and pulsing at first, with air in the mile-long intestine that stretched back to the gut of the factory. But it would soon settle into a steady flow, burying the reeds and rushes. Did the frogs and mink get away in time to avoid being entombed? What about the turtles? Too slow—they wouldn’t be able to escape being embedded at the bottom of the pile in a perversion of the story of the world’s creation, when the earth was carried on Turtle’s back.

			First they filled in the lakeshore itself, sending tons of sludge into the waters in a plume that turned blue water to white paste. Then they moved the end of the pipe to the surrounding wetlands, right up to the edges of the stream. The water of Nine Mile Creek must have wanted to head back uphill, to defy gravity and find again the mossy pools beneath the springs. But it kept to its work and found its way, seeping through the waste beds and out to the lake.

			Rain bound for waste beds is in trouble too. At first, the waste particles are so fine that they trap the water in white clay. Then gravity eventually pulls the drops through sixty feet of sludge and out the bottom of the pile to join a drainage ditch instead of a stream. As it passes through the chalky depths, the rain cannot help doing what it has been called to do: dissolving minerals, carrying ions intended to nurture plants and fish. By the time it reaches the bottom of the heap, the water has picked up enough chemicals to be as salty as soup and as corrosive as lye. Its beautiful name, water, is lost. It is now called leachate. Leachate seeps from the waste beds with a ph of 11. Like drain cleaner, it will burn your skin. Normal drinking water has a ph value of 7. Today, engineers collect the leachate and mix it with hydrochloric acid in order to neutralize the ph. It is then released to Nine Mile Creek and out into Onondaga Lake.

			The water has been tricked. It started on its way full of innocence, full of its own purpose. Through no fault of its own it has been corrupted and, instead of being a bearer of life, it must now deliver poison. And yet it cannot stop itself from flowing. It must do what it must do, with the gifts bestowed upon it by the Creator. It is only people who have a choice.

			Today, you can drive a motorboat on the lake the Peacemaker paddled. From across the water, the western shore stands out in sharp relief. Bright white bluffs gleam in the summer sun like the White Cliffs of Dover. But when you approach by water, you’ll see that the cliffs are not rock at all, but sheer walls of Solvay waste. While your boat bobs on the waves, you can see erosion gullies in the wall, the weather conspiring to mix the waste into the lake: summer sun dries out the pasty surface until it blows, and subzero winter temperatures fracture it off in plates that fall to the water. A beach beckons around the point but there are no swimmers, no docks. This bright white expanse is a flat plain of waste that slumped into the water when a retaining wall collapsed many years ago. A white pavement of settled waste extends far out from shore, barely under water. The smooth shelf is punctuated by cobble-sized rocks, ghostly beneath the water, unlike any rock you know. These are oncolites, accretions of calcium carbonate, that pepper the lake bottom. Oncolites—tumorous rocks.

			Pilings stick up through the flat like a backbone, remnants of the old retaining wall. Here and there, rusted pipes that carried the sludge stick out at odd angles. Where the sludge piles meet the flats of Solvay, there are small, trickling seeps that are eerily reminiscent of springs, but the liquid that emerges seems slightly thicker than water. There are plates of summer ice along the little rivulets that drain toward the lake, crystal sheets made of salt, beneath which the water bubbles like a melting stream at the end of winter. The waste beds continue to leach tons of salt into the lake every year. Before the Allied Chemical Company, successor to Solvay Process, ceased operation, the salinity of Onondaga Lake was ten times the salinity of the headwaters of Nine Mile Creek.

			The salt, the oncolites, and the waste impede the growth of rooted aquatic plants. Lakes rely on their submerged plants to generate oxygen by photosynthesis. Without plants, the depths of Onondaga Lake are oxygen-poor, and without swaying beds of vegetation, fish, frogs, insects, herons—the whole food chain—are left without habitat. While rooted water plants have a hard time, floating algae flourish in Onondaga Lake. For decades high quantities of nitrogen and phosphorous from municipal sewage fertilized the lake and fueled their growth. Algae blooms cover the surface of the water, then die and sink to the bottom. Their decay depletes what little oxygen is in the water and the lake begins to smell of the dead fish that wash up on shore on hot summer days.

			The fish that survive, you may not eat. Fishing was banned in 1970 due to high concentrations of mercury. It is estimated that one hundred and sixty-five thousand pounds of mercury were discharged into Onondaga Lake between 1946 and 1970. Allied Chemical used the mercury cell process to produce industrial chlorine from the native salt brines. The mercury waste, which we know to be extremely toxic, was handled freely on its way to disposal in the lake. Local people recall that a kid could make good pocket money on “reclaimed” mercury. One old-timer told me that you could go out to the waste beds with a kitchen spoon and pick up the small glistening spheres of mercury that lay on the ground. A kid could fill an old canning jar with mercury and sell it back to the company for the price of a movie ticket. Inputs of mercury were sharply curtailed in the 1970s, but the mercury remains trapped in the sediments where, when methylated, it can circulate through the aquatic food chain. It is estimated that seven million cubic yards of lake sediments are today contaminated with mercury.

			A sampling core drilled into the lake bottom cuts through sludge, trapped layers of discharged gas, oil, and sticky black ooze. Analysis of these cores reveals significant concentrations of cadmium, barium, chromium, cobalt, lead, benzene, chlorobenzene, assorted xylenes, pesticides, and PCBs. Not many insects and not many fish.

			Onondaga Lake in the 1880s was famed for its whitefish, served freshly caught on steaming platters alongside potatoes boiled in salty brine. Fine restaurants did a booming business along the lakeshore, where tourists came for the scenery, the amusement parks, and picnic grounds where families spread their blankets on a Sunday afternoon. A trolley delivered passengers to the grand hotels that lined its shore. One famed resort, White Beach, featured a long wooden slide lit with strings of glittering gaslights. Holidaymakers would sit in wheeled carts and whoosh down the ramp to splash into the lake below. The resort promised an “exhilarating dousing for ladies, gentlemen, and children of all ages.” But swimming was banned in 1940. Beautiful Onondaga Lake. People spoke of it with pride. Now they barely speak of it at all, as if it were a family member whose demise was so shameful that the name never comes up.

			You would think that such toxic waters would be nearly transparent with the absence of life, but some areas are often nearly opaque with a dark cloud of silt. The turbidity comes from a muddy plume that enters the lake from another tributary, Onondaga Creek. It flows in from the south, from the high ridge above the Tully Valley, from hillsides of forests, farms, and sweet-smelling apple orchards.

			Muddy water is usually attributed to runoff from farmland, but in this case the mud comes from below. High in the watershed are the Tully mudboils, which erupt into the creek like mud volcanoes, sending tons of soft sediment downstream. There is some debate as to whether the mudboils are of natural geologic origin. The Onondaga elders remember when, not so long ago, Onondaga Creek ran so clear through their Nation that they could spearfish by lantern light. They know that there was no mud in the creek until salt mining began upstream.

			When the salt wells near the factories ran out, Allied Chemical used solution mining to access the underground salt deposits up near the headwaters. The company pumped water into the subterranean deposits, dissolved them away, and then pumped the brine miles down the valley to the Solvay plant. The brine line was run through the remaining territory of the Onondaga Nation, where breaks in the line ruined the well water. Eventually the dissolved salt domes collapsed underground, creating holes through which groundwater pushed with high pressure. The resulting gushers created the mudboils that flow downstream and fill the lake with sediment. The creek that was once a fishery for Atlantic salmon, a swimming hole for kids, and a focal point of community life now runs as brown as chocolate milk. Allied Chemical and its successors deny any role in the formation of the mudboils. They claim it was an act of God. What kind of God would that be?


The wounds to these waters are as numerous as the snakes in the Tadodaho’s hair, and they must be named before they can be combed out. The ancestral Onondaga territory stretches from the Pennsylvania border north to Canada. It was a mosaic of rich woodlands, expansive cornfields, clear lakes and rivers that sustained the Native people for centuries. The original territory also encompasses the site of presentday Syracuse and the sacred shores of Onondaga Lake. Onondaga rights to these lands were guaranteed by treaties between the two sovereign nations, Onondaga Nation and the United States government. But water is more faithful to its responsibilities than the United States would ever be.

			When George Washington directed federal troops to exterminate the Onondaga during the Revolutionary War, a nation that had numbered in the tens of thousands was reduced to a few hundred people in a matter of one year. Afterward, every single treaty was broken. Illegal takings of land by the state of New York diminished the aboriginal Onondaga territories to a reservation of only forty-three hundred acres. The Onondaga Nation territory today is not much bigger than the Solvay waste beds. Assaults on Onondaga culture continued. Parents tried to hide their children from Indian agents, but they were taken and sent to boarding schools like Carlisle Indian School. The language that framed the Great Law of Peace was forbidden. Missionaries were dispatched to the matrilineal communities—in which men and women were equals—to show them the error of their ways. Longhouse ceremonies of thanksgiving, ceremonies meant to keep the world in balance, were banned by law.

			The people have endured the pain of being bystanders to the degradation of their lands, but they never surrendered their caregiving responsibilities. They have continued the ceremonies that honor the land and their connection to it. The Onondaga people still live by the precepts of the Great Law and still believe that, in return for the gifts of Mother Earth, human people have responsibility for caring for the nonhuman people, for stewardship of the land. Without title to their ancestral lands, however, their hands were tied to protect it. So they watched, powerless, as strangers buried the Peacemaker’s footsteps. The plants, animals, and waters they were bound to protect dwindled away, though the covenant with the land was never broken. Like the springs above the lake, the people just kept doing what they were called to do, no matter what fate met them downstream. The people went on giving thanks to the land, although so much of the land had little reason to be thankful for the people.


Generations of grief, generations of loss, but also strength—the people did not surrender. They had spirit on their side. They had their traditional teachings. And they also had the law. Onondaga is a rarity in the United States, a Native nation that has never surrendered its traditional government, never given up its identity nor compromised its status as a sovereign nation. Federal laws were ignored by their own authors, but the Onondaga people still live by the precepts of the Great Law.

			Out of grief and its strength has come a rising power, a resurgence that became public on March 11, 2005, when the Onondaga Nation filed a complaint in federal court with the goal of reclaiming title to their lost homelands, that they might once again exercise their care-giving responsibilities. While elders passed on and babies became elders, the people held to the dream of regaining their traditional lands, but they had no legal voice by which to do so. The halls of justice were closed to them for decades. As the judicial climate gradually changed to permit tribes to bring federal suit, other Haudenosaunee nations filed claims to recover their lands. The substance of these claims was upheld by the Supreme Court, which ruled that Haudenosaunee lands were illegally taken, and the people greatly wronged. Indian lands were unlawfully “purchased” in contravention of the United States Constitution. New York State has been ordered to forge a settlement, though remedies and reparations have proven difficult to find.

			Some nations have negotiated land claims for cash payoffs or land gains and casino deals in an effort to find relief from poverty and ensure their cultural survival on the remnants of their territories. Others have sought to reclaim their original lands via outright purchase from willing sellers, land swaps with New York State, or the threat of lawsuits against individual landowners.

			The Onondaga Nation took a different approach. Their claim was made under United States law, but its moral power lay in the directives of the Great Law: to act on behalf of peace, the natural world, and future generations. They did not call their suit a land claim, because they know that land is not property, but a gift, the sustainer of life. Tadodaho Sidney Hill has said that the Onondaga Nation will never seek to evict people from their homes. The Onondaga people know the pain of displacement too well to inflict it on their neighbors. Instead the suit was termed a land rights action. The motion began with a statement unprecedented in Indian Law:

			The Onondaga people wish to bring about a healing between themselves and all others who live in this region that has been the homeland of the Onondaga Nation since the dawn of time. The Nation and its people have a unique spiritual, cultural, and historic relationship with the land, which is embodied in Gayanashagowa, the Great Law of Peace. This relationship goes far beyond federal and state legal concerns of ownership, possession, or other legal rights. The people are one with the land and consider themselves stewards of it. It is the duty of the Nation’s leaders to work for a healing of this land, to protect it, and to pass it on to future generations. The Onondaga Nation brings this action on behalf of its people in the hope that it may hasten the process of reconciliation and bring lasting justice, peace, and respect among all who inhabit this area.

			The Onondaga land rights action sought legal recognition of title to their home, not to remove their neighbors and not for development of casinos, which they view as destructive to community life. Their intention was to gain the legal standing necessary to move restoration of the land forward. Only with title can they ensure that mines are reclaimed and that Onondaga Lake is cleaned up. Tadodaho Sidney Hill says, “We had to stand by and watch what happens to Mother Earth, but nobody listens to what we think. The land rights action will give us a voice.”

			The list of named defendants was headed by the state of New York, who illegally took the lands, but the suit also listed corporations that have been responsible for degradation: a quarry, a mine, an airpolluting power plant, and the more sweetly named successor to Allied Chemical, Honeywell Incorporated.

			Even without the suit, Honeywell is finally being held accountable for the lake cleanup, but there is great debate about the best approach to dealing with the contaminated sediments so that natural healing can go forward: dredge, cap, or leave it alone? State, local, and federal environmental agencies are all offering solutions with a range of price tags. The scientific issues surrounding competing lake restoration proposals are complex, and each scenario offers environmental and economic trade-offs.

			After decades of foot dragging, the corporation has predictably offered its own cleanup plan, which involves minimum cost and minimum benefits. Honeywell has negotiated a plan to dredge and clean the most contaminated sediments and bury them in a sealed landfill in the waste beds. That may be a good beginning, but the bulk of the contaminants lie diffused in the sediments spread over the entire lake bottom. From here they enter the food chain. The Honeywell plan is to leave those sediments in place and cover them with a four-inch layer of sand that would partially isolate them from the ecosystem. Even if isolation were technically feasible, the proposal is to cap less than half of the lake bottom, leaving the rest to circulate as usual.

			Onondaga Chief Irving Powless characterized the solution as a Band-Aid on the lake bottom. Band-Aids are fine for small hurts, but “you don’t prescribe a Band-Aid for cancer.” The Onondaga Nation called for a thorough cleanup of the sacred lake. Without legal title, however, the powers that be will not give the nation an equal place at the negotiating table.

			The hope was that history would turn itself to prophecy, as the Onondaga Nation combed the snakes from the hair of Allied Chemical. While others quarreled over cleanup costs, the Onondaga took a stance that reversed the usual equation in which economics takes priority over well-being. The Onondaga Nation land rights action stipulated a full cleanup as part of restitution; no halfway measures would be accepted. non-Native people of the watershed joined with them as allies in their call for healing, in an extraordinary partnership, the Neighbors of the Onondaga Nation.

			In the midst of legal wrangling, technical debates, and environmental models, it is important to not lose sight of the sacred nature of the task: to make this most profaned lake worthy of the work of water again. The spirit of the Peacemaker still walks along these shores. The legal action concerned not only rights to the land but also rights of the land, the right to be whole and healthy.

			Clan Mother Audrey Shenandoah made the goal clear. It is not casinos and not money and not revenge. “In this action,” she said, “we seek justice. Justice for the waters. Justice for the four-leggeds and the wingeds, whose habitats have been taken. We seek justice, not just for ourselves, but justice for the whole of Creation.”

			In the spring of 2010, the federal court handed down its ruling on the Onondaga Nation’s suit. The case was dismissed.


In the face of blind injustice, how do we continue? How do we live our responsibility for healing?

			The first time I heard of the place, it was long past saving. But no one even knew. They kept it hidden. Until one day the sign appeared, eerily, out of nowhere.

			H E L P

			Green block letters big enough for a football field, just off the highway. But even then, no one paid attention.

			Fifteen years later, I moved back to Syracuse, where I had been a student and watched those letters fade to brown and die away along that busy stretch of road. And yet the memory of that message hadn’t faded for me—I needed to see the place again for myself.

			It was a fine October afternoon and I had no classes. I wasn’t sure exactly how to find the place, but I’d heard rumors. The lake was so blue you could almost forget what it was. I drove past the backside of the fairgrounds, long closed for the season and desolate. But off a dirt road at the perimeter I found the security gates wide open and swinging in the wind, and I went in, mine the only vehicle in a back lot designed for thousands of fairgoers.

			It’s not like there were maps for what lay behind the fences, but there was a lane of sorts heading off in the general direction of the lake, so off I went, being sure to lock my car in this lonely place. I’d just be a while, back in plenty of time to pick up my girls after school.

			The lane was just a rutted track through a thicket of phragmites, the reedy stems so densely packed as to make a wall on either side. I had heard that every summer the manure from the state fair barns was dumped out here. The mucked-out stalls of blue ribbon dairy cows and midway elephants all ended up on the waste beds. The city later followed suit, dumping tankers of sewage sludge. The resulting paddy was completely overgrown, plumed seed heads towering over my head by several feet. My view of the lake and my sense of direction were lost in the craze of stems, all rubbing and sawing against each other, rocking in the wind with a hypnotic sway. The lane forked off to the left and then to the right and became a walled labyrinth without landmarks of any kind. I felt like a rat in a Phragmites maze. I took the fork that seemed to go lakeward and began to wish I’d brought my compass.

			There are fifteen hundred acres of wasteland along this shore. Even the sound of the highway, usually a good direction finder, was lost in the swishing sound of the reeds. A niggling suspicion that this was not a good place to be alone crept up the back of my neck, but I talked myself out of being afraid. There was absolutely no one here to worry about. Who would be crazy enough to come to this godforsaken place? Who but another biologist, whom I’d be happy to meet. Either that or an ax murderer disposing of a body in the reeds. It would never be found.

			I followed the track as it twisted and turned until I caught a glimpse of the top of a cottonwood. I could hear its leaves in the distance, an unmistakable sound. It was a welcome landmark. Another bend in the lane brought the tree into full view, a big cottonwood with thick spreading branches that hung over the road. From the lowest branch hung a human body. Next to it an empty noose swayed in the wind.

			I screamed and ran, taking any path I could find, panicked and walled in by reeds. With pounding heart I ran blindly on and on, and then met the dead end of every horror movie. Here in a tableau of terror stood an executioner with a black hood, muscled arms, and, of course, a dripping ax. A woman’s body was draped over the chopping block, her blond curls spilling from her severed head. I did not move. And neither did they. At all.

			A space had been cut from the thicket to form a reed-walled room like a museum diorama with life-sized figures posed at the point of murder. Relief poured off me in a cold sweat. No dead bodies. But the palpable presence of some twisted imagination was only a marginal improvement over actual corpses. To make matters worse, I was now entirely lost in the maze, wanting only to be somewhere else, most especially picking up my kids from the school bus. Thinking of them, I gathered my wits and moved as quietly as possible, wanting to avoid detection by the satanic cultists I envisioned.

			On my search for a way out, I encountered additional rooms hacked into the reeds: a mocked-up prison cell with an electric chair, a hospital room with a straitjacketed patient and an ominous nurse, and, finally, an open grave with a long-nailed occupant crawling from it. After another long pass through the eerie reeds, the lane emerged into the parking lot. The light stanchions now cast long shadows and my car was visible way down at the other end. I patted for my keys in my pocket. Still there. I could probably make it. I couldn’t see if the gate was open or closed. I turned for one last look behind me. Off to the side, a nicely lettered sign was pounded into the ground:

			Solvay Lions Club

			Haunted Hayrides

			October 24–31

			8 pm–midnight

			I laughed myself silly. But then I had to cry.

			The Solvay waste beds: how very fitting a venue for our fears. What we ought to be afraid of isn’t in the haunts, but under them. Land buried under sixty feet of industrial waste, trickling toxins into the sacred waters of the Onondaga and the home of half a million people—death may be slower than the fall of the ax, but it is just as gruesome. The executioner’s face is hidden, but its names are known: Solvay Process, Allied Chemical and Dye, Allied Chemical, Allied Signal, and now Honeywell.

			More frightening to me than the act of execution is the mind-set that allowed it to happen, that thought it was okay to fill a lake with toxic stew. Whatever the companies are called, individual people were sitting behind those desks, fathers who took their sons fishing, who made the decision to fill the lake with sludge. Human beings made this happen, not a faceless corporation. There were no threats, no extenuating circumstances to force their hands, just business as usual. And the people of the city allowed it to happen. Interviews with Solvay workers tell the typical story: “I was just doing my job. I had a family to feed and I wasn’t going to worry about what happened out there on the waste beds.”

			Philosopher Joanna Macy writes of the oblivion we manufacture for ourselves to keep us from looking environmental problems straight in the eye. She quotes R. J. Clifton, a psychologist studying human response to catastrophe: “Suppression of our natural responses to disaster is part of the disease of our time. The refusal to acknowledge these responses causes a dangerous splitting. It divorces our mental calculations from our intuitive, emotional, and biological embeddedness in the matrix of life. That split allows us passively to acquiesce in the preparations for our own demise.”

			Waste beds: a new name for an entirely new ecosystem. Waste: we use the word as a noun to mean “a leftover residue,” “refuse or rubbish,” or “a material such as feces which is produced by a living body, but not used.” More contemporary uses are “an unwanted product of manufacturing,” “an industrial material rejected or thrown away.” Wasteland is, therefore, land that has been thrown away. As a verb, to waste means “to render the valuable useless,” “to diminish, to dissipate, and to squander.” I wonder how the public perception of the Solvay waste beds would change if, instead of hiding them, we put up a sign along the highway welcoming people to the lakeshore defined as “squandered land covered in industrial feces.”

			Ruined land was accepted as the collateral damage of progress. But, back in the 1970s, Professor Norm Richards of the College of Environmental Science and Forestry in Syracuse decided to conduct one of the first studies of the dysfunctional ecology of the waste beds. Frustrated by local officials’ lack of concern, “Stormin’ Norman” took matters into his own hands. Following the same lane I walked years later, he snuck into the fenced-off lakeshore and unloaded his guerrilla garden equipment, wheeling his backyard lawn seeder out to the long sloping beds that faced the highway. He pushed the load of grass seed and fertilizer back and forth with measured steps. North twenty paces, east ten paces, north again. A few weeks later the word help appeared, written in grass letters forty feet long on the barren slopes. The scale of the wastelands left room for a longer treatise in fertilized script, but that single word was the right one. The land had been kidnapped. Bound and gagged, it could not speak for itself.


The waste beds are not unique. The cause and the chemistry vary from my homeland to yours, but each of us can name these wounded places. We hold them in our minds and our hearts. The question is, what do we do in response?

			We could take the path of fear and despair. We could document every scary scene of ecological destruction and never run out of material for a Haunted Hayride of environmental disasters, constructing a shocking nightmare tableaux of environmental tragedies, in rooms carved from a monoculture of invasive plants, on the shore of the most chemically contaminated lake in the United States. There could be scenes of oiled pelicans. How about chain saw murders on clear-cut slopes washing into rivers? Corpses of extinct Amazon primates. Prairies paved over for parking lots. Polar bears stranded on melting ice floes.

			What could such a vision create other than woe and tears? Joanna Macy writes that until we can grieve for our planet we cannot love it—grieving is a sign of spiritual health. But it is not enough to weep for our lost landscapes; we have to put our hands in the earth to make ourselves whole again. Even a wounded world is feeding us. Even a wounded world holds us, giving us moments of wonder and joy. I choose joy over despair. Not because I have my head in the sand, but because joy is what the earth gives me daily and I must return the gift.

			We are deluged by information regarding our destruction of the world and hear almost nothing about how to nurture it. It is no surprise then that environmentalism becomes synonymous with dire predictions and powerless feelings. Our natural inclination to do right by the world is stifled, breeding despair when it should be inspiring action. The participatory role of people in the well-being of the land has been lost, our reciprocal relations reduced to a Keep Out sign.

			When my students learn about the latest environmental threat, they are quick to spread the word. They say, “If people only knew that snow leopards are going extinct,” “If people only knew that rivers are dying.” If people only knew . . . then they would, what? Stop? I honor their faith in people, but so far the if-then formula isn’t working. People do know the consequences of our collective damage, they do know the wages of an extractive economy, but they don’t stop. They get very sad, they get very quiet. So quiet that protection of the environment that enables them to eat and breathe and imagine a future for their children doesn’t even make it onto a list of their top ten concerns. The Haunted Hayride of toxic waste dumps, the melting glaciers, the litany of doomsday projections—they move anyone who is still listening only to despair.

			Despair is paralysis. It robs us of agency. It blinds us to our own power and the power of the earth. Environmental despair is a poison every bit as destructive as the methylated mercury in the bottom of Onondaga Lake. But how can we submit to despair while the land is saying “Help”? Restoration is a powerful antidote to despair. Restoration offers concrete means by which humans can once again enter into positive, creative relationship with the more-than-human world, meeting responsibilities that are simultaneously material and spiritual. It’s not enough to grieve. It’s not enough to just stop doing bad things.

			We have enjoyed the feast generously laid out for us by Mother Earth, but now the plates are empty and the dining room is a mess. It’s time we started doing the dishes in Mother Earth’s kitchen. Doing dishes has gotten a bad rap, but everyone who migrates to the kitchen after a meal knows that that’s where the laughter happens, the good conversations, the friendships. Doing dishes, like doing restoration, forms relationships.

			How we approach restoration of land depends, of course, on what we believe that “land” means. If land is just real estate, then restoration looks very different than if land is the source of a subsistence economy and a spiritual home. Restoring land for production of natural resources is not the same as renewal of land as cultural identity. We have to think about what land means.

			This question and more are played out on the Solvay waste beds. In a sense, the “new” land of the waste beds represents a blank slate on which a whole range of ideas have been written in response to the urgent message of help. They are scattered over the waste beds, in scenes every bit as evocative as the tableaux of the Haunted Hayride. A tour of the Onondaga Lake shore captures the scope of what land might mean and what restoration might look like.

			Our first stop would have to be the blank slate itself, greasy, white industrial sludge poured over what once was a grassy green lakeshore. In some places, it is as bare as the day it was spewed, a chalky desert. Our diorama should include a figure of a laborer placing the outfall pipe, but behind him would be the man in the suit. The signpost at stop #1 should say: Land as Capital. If land is only a means to make money, then these fellows are doing it right.

			Norm Richards’s help appeal started something back in the 1970s. If nutrients and seed were all it took to green the waste beds, the city had a ready answer. Slopping sewage sludge onto the terraces of the waste beds provided both nutrients for plant growth and a disposal solution for the output of the water treatment plant. The result was the nightmare swards of Phragmites, a dense monoculture of invasive reeds, ten feet high, that excludes all other forms of life. Stop #2 on our tour. The sign reads: Land as Property. If land is just private property, a mine of “resources,” then you can do whatever you want with it and move on.

			Scarcely thirty years ago, covering up your mess passed for responsibility—a kind of land-as-litter-box approach. Policy dictated only that land ruined by mining or industry had to be covered by vegetation. With this AstroTurf strategy, a mining company that destroyed a forest of two hundred species could satisfy its legal responsibilities by planting the tailings to alfalfa under a mist of irrigation and fertilizer. Once federal inspectors checked and signed off, the company could put up a Mission Accomplished banner, turn off the sprinklers, and walk away. The vegetation disappeared almost as quickly as the corporate executives.

			Happily, scientists like Norm Richards and a host of others had a better idea. When I was at the University of Wisconsin in the early 1980s, on summer evenings I would walk with a young Bill Jordan through the trails of the arboretum, where a collection of natural ecosystems had been put in place on abandoned farmland, homage to Aldo Leopold’s advice that “the first step to intelligent tinkering is to save all the pieces.” At a time when the toll taken by places like the Solvay waste beds was finally being understood, Bill envisioned a whole science of restoration ecology, in which ecologists would turn their skills and philosophy to healing land, not by imposing an industrial blanket of vegetation, but by recreating natural landscapes. He didn’t submit to despair. He didn’t let his idea sit on the shelf. He was the catalyst for and a cofounder of the Society for Ecological Restoration.

			As a result of efforts like his, new laws and policy demanded evolution in the concept of restoration: restored sites would have to not only look like nature, but have functional integrity as well. The National Research Council defined ecological restoration thus:

			The return of an ecosystem to a close approximation of its condition prior to disturbance. In restoration, ecological damage to the resource is repaired. Both the structure and the function of the ecosystem are recreated. Merely recreating form without the function, or the function in an artificial configuration bearing little resemblance to a natural resource does not constitute restoration. The goal is to emulate nature.

			If we got back on the hayride wagon, it would take us to a restoration experiment at Stop #3, another version of what this land might be, what it might mean. It’s visible from way off, in big quilted blocks of vivid green against the chalky white. Moving like a field of grass, you can hear the sound of the wind in the willows. This scene might be titled Land as Machine and be peopled with mannequins of engineers and foresters who are in charge of the machine. They stand before the ravenous jaws of a brush hog and an unending plantation of shrub willows, as thick as the Phragmites and not much more diverse. Their goal is to reestablish structure, and especially function, to a very specific purpose.

			Here the intention is to utilize the plants as an engineering solution to water pollution. When rainwater leaches through the waste beds, it picks up high concentrations of salt, alkali, and a host of other compounds that it carries right to the lake. Willows are champions of absorbing water, which they transpire to the atmosphere. The idea is to use the willows as a green sponge, a living machine to intercept the rain before it gets down into the sludge. As an added benefit, the willows can be mown down periodically and used as woody feedstock for biomass fuel digesters. Use of plants in phytoremediation schemes holds promise, but an industrial monoculture of willow, however well-meaning, does not quite meet the standard for true restoration.

			This kind of fix is at the core of the mechanistic view of nature, in which land is a machine and humans are the drivers. In this reductionist, materialist paradigm an imposed engineering solution makes sense. But what if we took the indigenous worldview? The ecosystem is not a machine, but a community of sovereign beings, subjects rather than objects. What if those beings were the drivers?

			We can clamber back on the hay wagon to travel to the next display, only this one is not well marked. It sprawls across the oldest lakeside section of the beds into a scruffy patchwork of vegetation. The restoration ecologists here at Stop #4 are not university scientists or corporate engineers, but the oldest and most effective of land healers. They are the plants themselves, representing the design firm of Mother Nature and Father Time, llc.

			After that momentous Halloween excursion years ago, I felt completely at ease on the waste beds and enjoyed rambling there to watch restoration in action. I never encountered another dead body. But that is part of the problem. It is, of course, dead bodies that build soil, that perpetuate the nutrient cycle that propels the living. The “soil” here is white emptiness.

			Here on the waste beds there are expanses without a living thing, but there are also teachers of healing and their names are Birch and Alder, Aster and Plantain, Cattail, Moss, and Switchgrass. On the most barren ground, on the wounds we have inflicted, the plants have not turned their backs on us; instead, they have come.

			A few brave trees have become established, mostly cottonwoods and aspens that can tolerate the soil. There are clumps of shrubs, some patches of asters and goldenrod, but mostly a thin scraggly collection of the common roadside weeds. Dandelions, ragweed, chicory, and Queen Anne’s lace blown to this spot have made a go of it. Nitrogenfixing legumes in abundance, and clovers of all kinds, have also come to do their work. That struggling field of green is, to me, a form of peacemaking. Plants are the first restoration ecologists. They are using their gifts for healing the land, showing us the way.

			Imagine the surprise of the infant plants who emerged from their seed coats to find a waste bed habitat no one in their long botanical lineage had ever experienced. Most died of drought, of salt or exposure, or starved from lack of nutrients, but a select few survived and did their best to carry on. Especially the grasses. When I dig my trowel under a grass patch, the soil is different. The waste below is no longer pure white and slippery, but dark gray and crumbly between my fingers. There are roots all through it. The darkening of the soil is humus mixed in; the waste is being changed. True, a few inches down it is still dense and white, but the surface layer holds promise. The plants are doing their work, rebuilding the nutrient cycle.

			If you get down on your knees, you’ll see anthills, no bigger than a quarter. The granulated soil the ants have mounded around the hole is as white as snow. Grain by grain, in their tiny mandibles, they are carrying up waste from below and carrying seeds and bits of leaves down into the soil. Shuttling back and forth. The grasses feed the ants with seeds and the ants feed the grasses with soil. They hand off life to one another. They understand their interconnections; they understand that the life of one is dependent on the life of all. Leaf by leaf, root by root, the trees, the berries, the grasses are joining forces, and so there are birds and deer and bugs that have come to join them. And so the world is made.

			Gray birches dot the top of the waste bed, arriving on the wind, no doubt, and lodging fortuitously against a gelatinous clot of Nostoc algae bubbling in a puddle. Protected in the selfless scum of Nostoc, the birch can grow and thrive on its nitrogen inputs. They are now the biggest trees here, but they are not alone. Directly beneath almost every birch are small shrubs. Not just any shrubs, but those that make juicy fruits: pin cherry, honeysuckle, buckthorn, blackberry. These shrubs are largely absent from the bare expanse between birches. This apron of fruit bearers speaks of the birds who passed over the waste beds and stopped to perch on the trees to defecate their load of seeds into the shade of the birch. More fruit drew more birds, who dropped more seeds, who fed the ants, and so it goes. That same pattern of reciprocity is written all over the landscape. That’s one of the things I honor about this place. Here you can see beginnings, the small incremental processes by which an ecological community is built.

			The beds are greening over. The land knows what to do when we do not. I hope that the waste beds do not disappear entirely, though—we need them to remind us what we are capable of. We have an opportunity to learn from them, to understand ourselves as students of nature, not the masters. The very best scientists are humble enough to listen.

			We could name this tableau Land as Teacher, Land as Healer. With plants and natural processes in sole command, the role of land as a renewable source of knowledge and ecological insight becomes apparent. Human damage has created novel ecosystems, and the plants are slowly adapting and showing us the way toward healing the wounds. This is a testament to the ingenuity and wisdom of plants more than to any action of people. I hope we’ll have the wisdom to let them continue their work. Restoration is an opportunity for a partnership, for us to help. Our part of the work is not complete.

			In just the last few years, the lake has offered signs of hope. As factories have closed and citizens of the watershed build better sewage treatment plants, the waters have responded to that care. The natural resilience of the lake is making its presence known in tiny increments of dissolved oxygen and returning fish. Hydrogeologists have redirected the energies of the mudboils so that their load is lightened. Engineers, scientists, and activists have all applied the gift of human ingenuity on behalf of the water. The water, too, has done its part. With lessened inputs, the lakes and streams seem to be cleaning themselves as the water moves through. In some places, plants are starting to inhabit the bottom. Trout were found once again in the lake and when water quality took an upward turn it was front-page news. A pair of eagles have been spotted on the north shore. The waters have not forgotten their responsibility. The waters are reminding the people that they can use their healing gifts when we will use ours.

			The cleansing potential of the water itself is a powerful force, which gives even greater weight to the work that lies ahead. The presence of eagles seems a sign of their faith in the people, too, and yet what will become of them, as they fish from the wounded waters?

			The slowly accreting community of weedy species can be a partner in restoration. They are developing ecosystem structure and function, beginning ever so slowly to create ecosystem services such as nutrient cycling, biodiversity, and soil formation. In a natural system, of course, there is no goal other than proliferation of life. In contrast, professional restoration ecologists design their work to move toward the “reference ecosystem,” or the predamage, native condition.

			The volunteer successional community creating itself on the waste beds is “naturalized,” but it is not native. It is unlikely to lead to a plant community that the Onondaga Nation would recognize from their ancestral past. The outcome will not be a native landscape peopled with the plants who lived here when Allied Chemical was only a gleam in the eye of a smokestack. Given the drastic changes produced by industrial contamination, it is probably not possible to recreate cedar swamps and beds of wild rice without some help. We can trust the plants to do their work, but except for windblown volunteers, new species can’t get here across highways and acres of industry. Mother Nature and Father Time could use someone to push a wheelbarrow, and a few intrepid beings have volunteered.

			The plant communities that will thrive in this environment are the ones that are tolerant of salt and the sodden “soil.” It’s tough to imagine a reference ecosystem of native species that could survive. But, in presettlement times, there were salt springs around the lake, and they supported one of the rarest of native plant communities, an inland salt marsh. Professor Don Leopold and his students have brought in wheelbarrows full of these missing native plants and conducted planting trials, watching their survival and growth with hopes of playing midwife to the recreation of a salt marsh. I went out to visit with the students, to hear their story and look at the plants. Some were dead, some were hanging on, and some were flourishing.

			I headed to where the green seemed the strongest; I caught a whiff of a fragrance that haunts my memory, and then it was gone. I must have imagined it. I stopped to admire a thriving stand of seaside goldenrod and some asters. To witness the regenerative power of the land tells us that there is resilience here, signs of possibility that arise from partnership between the plants and the people. Don’s work fulfills the scientific definition of restoration: working toward ecosystem structure, function, and the delivery of ecosystem services. We should make this nascent native meadow the next stop on the hayride, Stop # 5, with a sign that says Land as Responsibility. This work raises the bar for what restoration can mean, to create habitat for our nonhuman relatives.

			As hopeful as this tableau of restored vegetation might become, it doesn’t feel quite whole. When I visited with the students with shovels in their hands, their pride in the planting was evident. I asked what motivated them in their work, and I heard about “getting adequate data” and “devising a solution” and a “feasible dissertation.” No one mentioned love. Maybe they were afraid. I’ve sat on too many dissertation committees where students were ridiculed for describing the plants they’ve worked with for five years with so unscientific a term as beautiful. The word love is unlikely to make an appearance, but I know that it is there.

			That familiar fragrance was tugging at my sleeve again. I raised my eyes to meet the brightest green in the place, shiny blades gleaming in the sun, smiling up at me like a long lost friend. There she was—sweetgrass—growing in one of the last places I might ever have expected. But I should have known better. Tentatively sending out rhizomes through the sludge, slender tillers marching bravely away, sweetgrass is a teacher of healing, a symbol of kindness and compassion. She reminded me that it is not the land that has been broken, but our relationship to it.

			Restoration is imperative for healing the earth, but reciprocity is imperative for long-lasting, successful restoration. Like other mindful practices, ecological restoration can be viewed as an act of reciprocity in which humans exercise their caregiving responsibility for the ecosystems that sustain them. We restore the land, and the land restores us. As writer Freeman House cautions, “We will continue to need the insights and methodologies of science, but if we allow the practice of restoration to become the exclusive domain of science, we will have lost its greatest promise, which is nothing less than a redefinition of human culture.”

			We may not be able to restore the Onondaga watershed to its preindustrial condition. The land, plants, animals, and their allies among the human people are making small steps, but ultimately it is the earth that will restore the structure and function, the ecosystem services. We might debate the authenticity of the desired reference ecosystem, but she will decide. We’re not in control. What we are in control of is our relationship to the earth. Nature herself is a moving target, especially in an era of rapid climate change. Species composition may change, but relationship endures. It is the most authentic facet of the restoration. Here is where our most challenging and most rewarding work lies, in restoring a relationship of respect, responsibility, and reciprocity. And love.

			A 1994 statement from the Indigenous Environmental Network puts it best:

			Western science and technology, while appropriate to the present scale of degradation, is a limited conceptual and methodological tool—it is the “head and hands” of restoration implementation. Native spirituality is the ‘heart’ that guides the head and hands . . . Cultural survival depends on healthy land and a healthy, responsible relationship between humans and the land. The traditional care-giving responsibilities which maintained healthy land need to be expanded to include restoration. Ecological restoration is inseparable from cultural and spiritual restoration, and is inseparable from the spiritual responsibilities of care-giving and world-renewal.

			What if we could fashion a restoration plan that grew from understanding multiple meanings of land? Land as sustainer. Land as identity. Land as grocery store and pharmacy. Land as connection to our ancestors. Land as moral obligation. Land as sacred. Land as self.

			When I first came to Syracuse as a student, I had a first—and only—date with a local fellow. We were going on a drive and I asked if we could go to fabled Onondaga Lake, which I had never seen. He reluctantly agreed, joking about the city’s famous landmark. But when we got there he wouldn’t get out of the car. “It stinks too much” he said, as ashamed as if he himself were the source of the foul odor. I’d never met anyone who hated his home before. My friend Catherine grew up here. She tells me that her weekly ride to Sunday school took the family along the lakeshore, past Crucible Steel and Allied Chemical, where even on the Lord’s day, black smoke filled the sky and pools of sludge lay on either side of the road. When the preacher talked of fire and brimstone and the sulfurous vents of hell, she was sure he meant Solvay. She thought she drove to church each week through the Valley of Death.

			Fear and loathing, our internal Haunted Hayride—the worst parts of our nature are all here on the lakeshore. Despair made people turn away, made them write off Onondaga Lake as a lost cause.

			It’s true that when you walk on the waste beds you can see the hand of destruction, but you can also see hope in the way a seed lands in a tiny crack and puts down a root and begins to build the soil again. The plants remind me of our neighbors at Onondaga Nation, Native people faced with daunting odds, great hostility, and an environment much changed from the rich land that first sustained them. But the plants and the people survive. Plant people and human people are still here and are still meeting their responsibilities.

			Despite numerous legal setbacks, the Onondaga have not turned their backs on the lake; rather, they are the authors of a new approach to healing it, put forward in their “Onondaga Nation Vision for a Clean Onondaga Lake.” This dream of restoration follows the ancient teachings of the Thanksgiving Address. Greeting in turn each element of Creation, the declaration offers vision and support for returning the lake to health and with it a mutual healing of lake and people. It is an exemplar of a new holistic approach, called biocultural or reciprocal restoration.

			In the indigenous worldview, a healthy landscape is understood to be whole and generous enough to be able to sustain its partners. It engages land not as a machine but as a community of respected nonhuman persons to whom we humans have a responsibility. Restoration requires renewing the capacity not only for “ecosystem services” but for “cultural services” as well. Renewal of relationships includes water that you can swim in and not be afraid to touch. Restoring relationship means that when the eagles return, it will be safe for them to eat the fish. People want that for themselves, too. Biocultural restoration raises the bar for environmental quality of the reference ecosystem, so that as we care for the land, it can once again care for us.

			Restoring land without restoring relationship is an empty exercise. It is relationship that will endure and relationship that will sustain the restored land. Therefore, reconnecting people and the landscape is as essential as reestablishing proper hydrology or cleaning up contaminants. It is medicine for the earth.


One day in late September, while earth-moving machinery dredged contaminated soils on the western shore of Onondaga Lake, another group of earth movers worked on the eastern shore—dancing. I watched their feet as they moved in a circle led by the water drum. Beaded moccasins, tassel-tie loafers, high-top sneakers, flip-flops, and patent-leather pumps all beat against the ground in a ceremonial dance to honor the water. All the participants carried vessels of clean water from their home places; their hopes for Onondaga Lake were held in these vessels. Work boots brought spring water from the high hills, green Converses carried city tap water, and red wooden sandals peeking from below a pink kimono carried sacred water all the way from Mount Fuji to blend that purity into Onondaga Lake. This ceremony is also restoration ecology, the healing of relationship and the stirring of emotion and spirit on behalf of the water. Singers, dancers, and speakers took the stage by the lake to call for restoration. Faithkeeper Oren Lyons, Clan Mother Audrey Shenandoah, and international activist Jane Goodall joined the community in this water communion to celebrate the sacredness of the lake and to renew the covenant between people and the water. There on the shore where the Tree of Peace once stood, we joined to plant another tree in commemoration of peacemaking with the lake. This should be on the restoration tour, too. Stop # 6: Land as Sacred, Land as Community.

			Naturalist E. O. Wilson writes, “There can be no purpose more inspiring than to begin the age of restoration, reweaving the wondrous diversity of life that still surrounds us.” The stories are piling up all around in scraps of land being restored: trout streams reclaimed from siltation, brownfields turned into community gardens, prairies reclaimed from soybeans, wolves howling in their old territories, schoolkids helping salamanders across the road. If your heart isn’t raised by the sight of whooping cranes restored to their ancient flyway, you must not have a pulse. It’s true that these victories are as small and fragile as origami cranes, but their power moves as inspiration. Your hands itch to pull out invasive species and replant the native flowers. Your finger trembles with a wish to detonate the explosion of an obsolete dam that would restore a salmon run. These are antidotes to the poison of despair.

			Joanna Macy speaks of the Great Turning, the “essential adventure of our time; the shift from the Industrial Growth Society to a lifesustaining civilization.” Restoration of land and relationship pushes that turning wheel. “Action on behalf of life transforms. Because the relationship between self and the world is reciprocal, it is not a question of first getting enlightened or saved and then acting. As we work to heal the earth, the earth heals us.”

			The last stop on the ride around the lake hasn’t been finished yet, but the scene is planned. In this tableau there will be kids swimming, families picnicking. People love this lake and take care of it. It’s a place for ceremony and celebration. The Haudenosaunee flag flies alongside the Stars and Stripes. Folks are fishing in the shallows and keeping their catch. Willow trees bend gracefully, their limbs full of birds. An eagle sits at the top of the Tree of Peace. Lakeshore wetlands are rich with muskrats and waterfowl. Native prairies green the lakeshore. The signpost at the scene reads Land as Home.





People of Corn, People of Light


			The story of our relationship to the earth is written more truthfully on the land than on the page. It lasts there. The land remembers what we said and what we did. Stories are among our most potent tools for restoring the land as well as our relationship to land. We need to unearth the old stories that live in a place and begin to create new ones, for we are storymakers, not just storytellers. All stories are connected, new ones woven from the threads of the old. One of the ancestor stories, that waits for us to listen again with new ears, is the Mayan story of Creation.


It is said that in the beginning there was emptiness. The divine beings, the great thinkers, imagined the world into existence simply by saying its name. The world was populated with a rich flora and fauna, called into being by words. But the divine beings were not satisfied. Among the wonderful beings they had created, none were articulate. They could sing and squawk and growl, but none had voice to tell the story of their creation nor praise it. So the gods set about to make humans.

			The first humans, the gods shaped of mud. But the gods were none too happy with the result. The people were not beautiful; they were ugly and ill formed. They could not talk—they could barely walk and certainly could not dance or sing the praises of the gods. They were so crumbly and clumsy and inadequate that they could not even reproduce and just melted away in the rain.

			So the gods tried again to make good people who would be givers of respect, givers of praise, providers and nurturers. To this end they carved a man from wood and a woman from the pith of a reed. Oh, these were beautiful people, lithe and strong; they could talk and dance and sing. Clever people, too: they learned to use the other beings, plants and animals, for their own purposes. They made many things, farms and pottery and houses, and nets to catch fish. As a result of their fine bodies and fine minds and hard work, these people reproduced and populated the world, filling it with their numbers.

			But after a time the all-seeing gods realized that these people’s hearts were empty of compassion and love. They could sing and talk, but their words were without gratitude for the sacred gifts that they had received. These clever people did not know thanks or caring and so endangered the rest of the Creation. The gods wished to end this failed experiment in humanity and so they sent great catastrophes to the world—they sent a flood, and earthquakes, and, most importantly, they loosed the retaliation of the other species. The previously mute trees and fish and clay were given voices for their grief and anger at the disrespect shown them by the humans made of wood. Trees raged against the humans for their sharp axes, the deer for their arrows, and even the pots made of earthen clay rose up in anger for the times they had been carelessly burnt. All of the misused members of Creation rallied together and destroyed the people made of wood in self-defense.

			Once again the gods tried to make human beings, but this time purely of light, the sacred energy of the sun. These humans were dazzling to behold, seven times the color of the sun, beautiful, smart, and very, very powerful. They knew so much that they believed they knew everything. Instead of being grateful to the creators for their gifts, they believed themselves to be the gods’ equals. The divine beings understood the danger posed by these people made of light and once more arranged for their demise.

			And so the gods tried again to fashion humans who would live right in the beautiful world they had created, in respect and gratitude and humility. From two baskets of corn, yellow and white, they ground a fine meal, mixed it with water, and shaped a people made of corn. They were fed on corn liquor and oh these were good people. They could dance and sing and they had words to tell stories and offer up prayers. Their hearts were filled with compassion for the rest of Creation. They were wise enough to be grateful. The gods had learned their lesson, so to protect the corn people from the overpowering arrogance of their predecessors, the people made of light, they passed a veil before the eyes of the corn people, clouding their vision as breath clouds a mirror. These people of corn are the ones who were respectful and grateful for the world that sustained them—and so they were the people who were sustained upon the earth.*

			* Adapted from oral tradition.


Of all the materials, why is it that people of corn would inherit the earth, rather than people of mud or wood or light? Could it be that people made of corn are beings transformed? For what is corn, after all, but light transformed by relationship? Corn owes its existence to all four elements: earth, air, fire, and water. And corn is the product of relationship not only with the physical world, but with people too. The sacred plant of our origin created people, and people created corn, a great agricultural innovation from its teosinthe ancestor. Corn cannot exist without us to sow it and tend its growth; our beings are joined in an obligate symbiosis. From these reciprocal acts of creation arise the elements that were missing from the other attempts to create sustainable humanity: gratitude, and a capacity for reciprocity.

			I’ve read and loved this story as a history of sorts—a recounting of how, in long-ago times just at the edge of knowing, people were made of maize and lived happily ever after. But in many indigenous ways of knowing, time is not a river, but a lake in which the past, the present, and the future exist. Creation, then, is an ongoing process and the story is not history alone—it is also prophecy. Have we already become people of corn? Or are we still people made of wood? Are we people made of light, in thrall to our own power? Are we not yet transformed by relationship to earth?

			Perhaps this story could be a user’s manual for understanding how we become people of corn. The Popul Vuh, the Mayan sacred text in which this story is contained, is perceived as more than just a chronicle. As David Suzuki notes in The Wisdom of the Elders, the Mayan stories are understood as an ilbal—a precious seeing instrument, or lens, with which to view our sacred relationships. He suggests that such stories may offer us a corrective lens. But while our indigenous stories are rich in wisdom, and we need to hear them, I do not advocate their wholesale appropriation. As the world changes, an immigrant culture must write its own new stories of relationship to place—a new ilbal, but tempered by the wisdom of those who were old on this land long before we came.

			So how, then, can science, art, and story give us a new lens to understand the relationship that people made of corn represent? Someone once said that sometimes a fact alone is a poem. Just so, the people of corn are embedded in a beautiful poem, written in the language of chemistry. The first stanza goes like this:

			Carbon dioxide plus water combined in the presence of light and chlorophyll in the beautiful membrane-bound machinery of life yields sugar and oxygen.

			Photosynthesis, in other words, in which air, light, and water are combined out of nothingness into sweet morsels of sugar—the stuff of redwoods and daffodils and corn. Straw spun to gold, water turned to wine, photosynthesis is the link between the inorganic realm and the living world, making the inanimate live. At the same time it gives us oxygen. Plants give us food and breath.

			Here is the second stanza, the same as the first, but recited backward:

			Sugar combined with oxygen in the beautiful membranebound machinery of life called the mitochondria yields us right back where we began—carbon dioxide and water.

			Respiration—the source of energy that lets us farm and dance and speak. The breath of plants gives life to animals and the breath of animals gives life to plants. My breath is your breath, your breath is mine. It’s the great poem of give and take, of reciprocity that animates the world. Isn’t that a story worth telling? Only when people understand the symbiotic relationships that sustain them can they become people of corn, capable of gratitude and reciprocity.

			The very facts of the world are a poem. Light is turned to sugar. Salamanders find their way to ancestral ponds following magnetic lines radiating from the earth. The saliva of grazing buffalo causes the grass to grow taller. Tobacco seeds germinate when they smell smoke. Microbes in industrial waste can destroy mercury. Aren’t these stories we should all know?

			Who is it who holds them? In long-ago times, it was the elders who carried them. In the twenty-first century, it is often scientists who first hear them. The stories of buffalo and salamanders belong to the land, but scientists are one of their translators and carry a large responsibility for conveying their stories to the world.

			And yet scientists mostly convey these stories in a language that excludes readers. Conventions for efficiency and precision make reading scientific papers very difficult for the rest of the world, and if the truth be known, for us as well. This has serious consequences for public dialogue about the environment and therefore for real democracy, especially the democracy of all species. For what good is knowing, unless it is coupled with caring? Science can give us knowing, but caring comes from someplace else.

			I think it’s fair to say that if the Western world has an ilbal, it is science. Science lets us see the dance of the chromosomes, the leaves of moss, and the farthest galaxy. But is it a sacred lens like the Popul Vuh? Does science allow us to perceive the sacred in the world, or does it bend light in such a way as to obscure it? A lens that brings the material world into focus but blurs the spiritual is the lens of a people made of wood. It is not more data that we need for our transformation to people of corn, but more wisdom.

			While science could be a source of and repository for knowledge, the scientific worldview is all too often an enemy of ecological compassion. It is important in thinking about this lens to separate two ideas that are too often synonymous in the mind of the public: the practice of science and the scientific worldview that it feeds. Science is the process of revealing the world through rational inquiry. The practice of doing real science brings the questioner into an unparalleled intimacy with nature fraught with wonder and creativity as we try to comprehend the mysteries of the more-than-human world. Trying to understand the life of another being or another system so unlike our own is often humbling and, for many scientists, is a deeply spiritual pursuit.

			Contrasting with this is the scientific worldview, in which a culture uses the process of interpreting science in a cultural context that uses science and technology to reinforce reductionist, materialist economic and political agendas. I maintain that the destructive lens of the people made of wood is not science itself, but the lens of the scientific worldview, the illusion of dominance and control, the separation of knowledge from responsibility.

			I dream of a world guided by a lens of stories rooted in the revelations of science and framed with an indigenous worldview—stories in which matter and spirit are both given voice.

			Scientists are particularly good at learning about the lives of other species. The stories they could tell convey the intrinsic values of the lives of other beings, lives every bit as interesting, maybe more so, as those of Homo sapiens. But while scientists are among those who are privy to these other intelligences, many seem to believe that the intelligence they access is only their own. They lack the fundamental ingredient: humility. After the gods experimented with arrogance, they gave the people of corn humility, and it takes humility to learn from other species.

			In the indigenous view, humans are viewed as somewhat lesser beings in the democracy of species. We are referred to as the younger brothers of Creation, so like younger brothers we must learn from our elders. Plants were here first and have had a long time to figure things out. They live both above and below ground and hold the earth in place. Plants know how to make food from light and water. Not only do they feed themselves, but they make enough to sustain the lives of all the rest of us. Plants are providers for the rest of the community and exemplify the virtue of generosity, always offering food. What if Western scientists saw plants as their teachers rather than their subjects? What if they told stories with that lens?


Many indigenous peoples share the understanding that we are each endowed with a particular gift, a unique ability. Birds to sing and stars to glitter, for instance. It is understood that these gifts have a dual nature, though: a gift is also a responsibility. If the bird’s gift is song, then it has a responsibility to greet the day with music. It is the duty of birds to sing and the rest of us receive the song as a gift.

			Asking what is our responsibility is perhaps also to ask, What is our gift? And how shall we use it? Stories like the one about the people of corn give us guidance, both to recognize the world as a gift and to think how we might respond. The people of mud and wood and light all lacked gratitude and the sense of reciprocity that flowed from it. It was only the people of corn, people transformed by awareness of their gifts and responsibilities, who were sustained on the earth. Gratitude comes first, but gratitude alone is not enough.

			Other beings are known to be especially gifted, with attributes that humans lack. Other beings can fly, see at night, rip open trees with their claws, make maple syrup. What can humans do?

			We may not have wings or leaves, but we humans do have words. Language is our gift and our responsibility. I’ve come to think of writing as an act of reciprocity with the living land. Words to remember old stories, words to tell new ones, stories that bring science and spirit back together to nurture our becoming people made of corn.





Collateral Damage


			The headlights throw two beams through the fog from a long way off as the car winds toward us. The rise and fall of the lights has become our signal to dash into the road, grabbing up one soft black body in each hand. The beams appear and disappear in the dips and curves as we shuttle back and forth with flashlight beams speckling the pavement. When we hear the engine we know there is only time for one last run before the car crests the hill and bears down upon us.

			Standing on the shoulder, I can see faces as the car draws near, greenish in the dashboard lights, looking right at us as the spray from the tires flies up. Our eyes meet and the brake lights flash red for just a heartbeat, lit up like momentary synapses in the driver’s brain. The light telegraphs a hint of thought for fellow humans in the rain on the side of a lonely country road. I’m waiting for them to roll down a window and ask if we need help, but they don’t stop. The driver looks back over his shoulder, brake lights dimming as he speeds away. If cars scarcely brake for Homo sapiens, what hope can we hold for Ambystoma maculata, our other neighbors who travel this road in the night?


Rain beats against my kitchen window in the falling dusk. I can hear geese outside, in low formation over the valley. Winter is letting go. Pausing by the stove with raincoats draped over my arm, I stop to stir a pot of pea soup, sending up clouds of steam that mist over the window. We’ll be glad for a warm cup during the night ahead.

			The six o’clock news comes on while I am headfirst in the closet, rounding up flashlights. It has begun—bombs are falling on Baghdad tonight. I stop in the middle of the floor, listening, with my hands full of boots, a red pair and a black. Somewhere another woman looks out her window, but the formation of dark shapes in her sky is not a skein of spring geese returning. Skies billowing with smoke, homes alight, sirens wailing. CNN reports the number of sorties and tons of ordnance like box scores in a baseball game. The level of collateral damage, they say, is as yet unknown.

			Collateral damage: shielding words to keep us from naming the consequences of a missile gone astray. The words ask us to turn our faces away, as if man-made destruction were an inescapable fact of nature. Collateral damage: measured in overturned soup pots and wailing children. Heavy with helplessness, I turn off the radio and call my family to supper. When the dishes are done, we slip into raincoats then out into the night, driving the back roads to Labrador Hollow.

			While it rains bombs on Baghdad, the first rain of spring falls on our valley. Soft and steady, it penetrates the forest floor, melting away the last of the ice crystals beneath the winter-weary blanket of leaves. The splatter and splash is a welcome sound after the long silence of snow. To a salamander beneath a log, the first heavy raindrops must sound like the knuckles of spring knocking hard on the door overhead. After six months of torpor, stiff limbs slowly flex, tails wiggle out of winter immobility, and within minutes, snouts nose upward and legs push away cold earth as the salamanders crawl up into the night. The rain washes away traces of clinging soil and polishes their smooth black skin. The land is waking up, rising to the call of rain.

			After we pull off the road and get out of the car, the quiet is stunning in the wake of swishing windshield wipers and the defroster going full tilt. The warm rain on cold earth has raised a ground fog, wrapping around the bare trees. Our voices are muffled in the mist. Our flashlights diffuse into warm halos.

			Here in upstate New York, flocks of geese mark the change of seasons, noisily making their way from winter safety to the breeding grounds of spring. Largely unseen, but equally dramatic, is the migration of salamanders from winter burrows to the vernal pools where they will meet their mates. The first warm rain of spring, a soaking rain coinciding with a temperature above forty-two degrees, sets the forest floor to rustling and stirring. En masse they rise from the hidden places, blink at the open air, and start on their way. This outpouring of animals is nearly invisible, unless you happen to be in a swamp on a rainy spring night. Salamanders move when darkness protects them from predators and rain keeps their skin moist. And they move by the thousands, like a herd of sluggish buffalo. Like the buffalo, too, their numbers diminish each year.

			Like its nearby cousins, the Finger Lakes, Labrador Pond lies in the bottom of a V-shaped valley flanked by two steep hills left behind by the last glacier. The forested slopes curve around the pond like the sides of a bowl, funneling amphibians from the woods of the entire watershed straight to the water. But their route is interrupted by a road that snakes through the hollow. The pond and surrounding hills are protected as state forest, but the road is a free-for-all.

			We walk down the deserted road, scanning our lights back and forth over the pavement. Salamanders aren’t the only ones on the move tonight: wood frogs, bullfrogs, green frogs, leopard frogs, and newts also hear the call and begin their annual journey. There are toads, peepers, red efts, and legions of tree frogs all with mating on their minds. The road is a circus of jumps and leaps flashing in and out of our flashlights. My beam catches the glittering gold of an eye. The peeper freezes as I approach and then hops away. Ahead of us, the road is alive with frogs leaping across, two here in my light, three over there, bounding toward the pond. With their prodigious leaps they cross the road in just a few seconds. Not so the heavy-bodied salamanders, who belly their way across the road. Their journey takes about two minutes, and in two minutes anything can happen.

			Spotting the lumbering forms among the frogs, we stop and pick them up one after the other, carefully setting them on the other side of the road. We walk back and forth between the passage of cars over the same small stretch, and each time we look there are more—the land seems to be releasing salamanders as numerous as the geese rising off a marsh.

			I run my light across the road and the center line reflects bright yellow against the rain-black asphalt. In the corner of my eye, there is something darker than dark, a break in reflection off the pavement that draws my light back to that spot. The shadow resolves into a big spotted salamander, Ambystoma maculata, black and yellow like the road. The shape is so primitive, with right-angle limbs jutting from the side and moving with a jerky, mechanical motion across the road, dragging a thick tail in a sinuous side-to-side wave behind it. When it stops in the circle of my light, I reach out to touch its skin, blue-black, like night congealed. The body is splotched with opaque yellow like drops of paint on a wet surface, blurred at the edges. Its wedge-shaped head swings from side to side, blunt snout with eyes so dark they disappear into its face. By its size—about seven inches long—and its swollen sides, I’d guess this is a female. I wonder what it feels like to drag that tender skin—with a smooth, soft belly made for sliding over wet leaves—across the asphalt.

			I stoop to pick her up, circling my two fingers just behind her front legs. There is surprisingly little resistance. It’s like picking up an overripe banana: my fingertips sink into her body, cold and soft and wet. I gently set her down on the shoulder and wipe my hands on my pants. Without a backward glance, she lunges over the embankment, down to the pond.

			The females are the first to arrive. Heavy with eggs, they will slide into the shallows and disappear among the decaying leaves on the bottom. They wait, fecund and sluggish in the cold water, for the males, who will make the same journey down from the hillsides a day or two later.

			They come out from under logs and across streams all pointed in the same direction: the pool where they were born. Their route is circuitous because they don’t have the ability to climb over obstacles. They follow along the edges of any log or rock until it ends and they are free to go forward, on to the pond. The natal pond may be as much as half a mile from their wintering spot, and yet they locate it unerringly. Salamanders have a guidance system easily as complex as the “smart bombs” winding their way to targets in Iraqi neighborhoods tonight. Without the benefit of satellite or microchip, salamanders navigate by a combination of magnetic and chemical signals that herpetologists are just beginning to understand.

			Part of their direction-finding ability relies on a precise reading of the lines in the earth’s magnetic field. A small organ in the brain processes magnetic data and guides the salamander to its pond. Though many other ponds and vernal pools lie along the route, they will not stop until they arrive at the birthplace, struggling mightily to get there. Once they are close, homing in salamanders seems to be similar to salmon identifying their home river: they smell their way with a nasal gland on their snouts. Following the earth’s magnetic signals gets them to the neighborhood and then scent takes over to guide them home. It’s like getting off an airplane and then finding your way to your childhood home by following the ineffable odor of Sunday dinner and your mother’s perfume.


On last year’s mission to the hollow, my daughter begged to follow the salamanders and see where they were going. We trailed behind by flashlight as the amphibians twined between scarlet stems of red osier and clambered over flattened tussocks of sedge. They stopped far short of the main pond, on the edges of a vernal pool, a small depression in the land that goes unnoticed in summer but reliably fills with snowmelt every spring, making a watery mosaic. Salamanders choose these temporary basins to lay eggs because they are too shallow and short-lived for fish, which would gobble up the salamander larvae, to inhabit. The pool’s evanescence is the newborn’s protection from fish.

			We followed the salamanders to the water’s edge, where platelets of ice still clung to the shore. They did not hesitate, but strode purposefully into the water and disappeared. My daughter was disappointed, expecting to see them loitering on the beach or doing belly flops into the pool. She searched the water’s surface with her flashlight, wanting to see what happened next, but there were only dappled leaves on the bottom of the pool, patches of light and dark. Nothing to see—until we realized that the patches of light and dark were not leaves at all, but the black and yellow spots of dozens of salamanders. Everywhere the light stopped there were salamanders, the bottom of the pool a blanket of animals. And they were moving, swirling about each other like a room full of dancers. Compared to their ponderous movement on land, they were fleet in the water, swimming as gracefully as seals. One flick of the tail and they were gone from the circle of light.

			The glassy surface of the pond was suddenly broken from below, like the upwelling of a surging spring, and the water started to churn as they moved together in a roiling crowd, yellow spots flashing. We stood in amazed witness to their mating ritual, a congress of salamanders. As many as fifty males and females danced and swirled together, a rapturous celebration after a long year of solitary, celibate existence eating bugs under a log. Bubbles rose from the bottom of the pond like champagne.

			Unlike most amphibians, Ambystoma maculata does not spill its eggs and sperm freely into the water for a frenzy of mass fertilization. The species has evolved a more probable scheme to ensure the meeting of egg and sperm. Males break away from the dancing swarm, take a gulp of air, and swim for the bottom of the pond, where they release a glistening spermatophore—a gelatinous sac of sperm with a stalk to attach it to a twig or a leaf. The females then leave the dance and seek out the quarter-inch sacs, which hover like shiny Mylar balloons bobbing in the water. They draw the spermatophores into an internal cavity where eggs are waiting. Safely inside, the sperm are then released from the sac and fertilize the pearly eggs.

			A few days later, each female will lay a mass of one hundred to two hundred eggs in a gelatinous mass. The expectant mother will linger nearby until the eggs hatch, but then she returns, alone, to the woods. The newborn salamanders stay behind in the safety of the pool for several months, metamorphosing until they are capable of life on land. By the time the pool has dried up and forced them out, their gills will be replaced by lungs and they are ready to forage on their own. The juvenile salamanders, or newts, are wanderers who will not return to the pond until they are sexually mature, four to five years later. Salamanders can be long-lived beings. Adults may make the mating migration through a lifetime as long as eighteen years, but only if they can cross the road.

			Amphibians are one of the most vulnerable groups on the planet. Subject to habitat loss as wetlands and forests disappear, amphibians are the collateral damage we blindly accept as the cost of development. And because amphibians breathe through their skin, they have little ability to filter out toxins at that moist membrane between animal and atmosphere. Even when their habitats are safe from industry, their atmosphere may not be. Toxins in the air and water, acid rain, heavy metals, and synthetic hormones all end up in the water in which they gestate. Developmental abnormalities like six-legged frogs and twisted salamanders are now found throughout the industrialized world.


Tonight the salamanders’ biggest threat is the cars that go speeding by, their occupants unaware of the spectacle that is taking place beneath their tires. From inside the car, listening to late-night radio, you just don’t know. But standing on the roadside, you can hear the pop of the body, hear the moment when a glistening being following magnetic trails toward love is reduced to red pulp on the pavement. We try to work faster, but there are so many, and we are so few.

			A green Dodge pickup I recognize races by and we stand back on the shoulder. It was one of my neighbors who has a dairy farm just up the road, but he doesn’t even see us. I suspect his thoughts are far away tonight, straining toward Baghdad. His son, Mitch, is stationed in Iraq. Mitch is a nice kid, the kind who, with a friendly wave, would always pull his slow tractor off to the roadside to let cars pass safely. I suppose he’s driving a tank now. The fate of salamanders crossing the road in his old hometown might seem completely unconnected to the scene he faces.

			Tonight, though, when the fog wraps us all in the same cold blanket, the edges seem to blur. The carnage on this dark country road and the broken bodies on the streets of Baghdad do seem connected. Salamanders, children, young farmers in uniform—they are not the enemy or the problem. We have not declared war on these innocents, and yet they die just as surely as if we had. They are all collateral damage. If it is oil that sends the sons to war, and oil that fuels the engines that roar down this hollow, then we are all complicit, soldiers, civilians, and salamanders connected in death by our appetite for oil.

			Cold and tired, we stop and pour out a cup of soup from the thermos. Its steam rises to mingle with the fog. We sip quietly and listen to the night. Suddenly I hear voices, but there are no houses nearby. Up around the curve I catch the strobes of other flashlights. I quickly shut off my light and close up the thermos. We back away into shadow and watch as the lights come nearer, a whole line of them. Who would be out on a night like this? Only someone out looking for trouble, and I don’t want to be it.

			Kids use this road sometimes as a drinking spot, a place to shoot beer cans. I once saw a pair of young men kicking a toad between them like a hacky sack. I shudder to think what brings them here. The lights are closer now, at least a dozen all scattered across the road like a patrol. The beams scan back and forth over the road. As they come closer, the pattern of their lights becomes oddly familiar. It is the very same pattern we’ve been making all night. And then I hear their voices through the fog.

			“Look, here’s another one—a female.”

			“Hey—I got two over here.”

			“Add three peepers.”

			Grinning in the dark, I switch on my light again and step out to meet them as they bend and carry the salamanders to safety. We are so glad to see each other and we pump each other’s hands as our voices rise in laughter around a virtual campfire made by flashlights. I pour out soup for everybody and we are all momentarily bound together with the giddiness of relief, both to know that the approaching lights are friend and not foe and to recognize that we are not alone in our efforts.

			We all introduce ourselves and get a look at the faces under the dripping hoods. Our fellow travelers are students from a herpetology class at the college. They all have clipboards and Rite in the Rain notebooks to record their observations. I feel embarrassed to have assumed that they were troublemakers. Ignorance makes it too easy to jump to conclusions about what we don’t understand.

			The class is here to study the effects of roads on amphibians. They tell us that frogs and toads take only about fifteen seconds to cross the road and mostly escape the cars. The spotted salamanders average eighty-eight seconds. They may have evaded countless predators, survived the summer drought, endured the winter without freezing, but it all comes down to eighty-eight seconds.

			The students’ efforts on behalf of Ambystoma go beyond roadside rescue. The highway department could install salamander crossings, special culverts that allow the animals to avoid the road, but they’re expensive and the authorities need to be convinced of their importance. The class mission tonight is to take a census of the amphibians crossing the road to estimate the total numbers of animals who move from the hills to the pond, and the number who die en route. If they can get adequate data to show that road deaths endanger the viability of this population, then they may be able to persuade the state to take action. There’s just one problem. In order to obtain accurate estimates of salamander mortality, they have to count both the animals who make it across the road and those who don’t.

			It turns out that tallying death is easy: they’ve developed a system for identifying the species of animal by the size of the blotch it leaves on the road, which is then scraped up to avoid counting it again on the next traverse of the road. Sometimes death occurs even without collision. Salamanders are so soft bodied that merely the pressure wave generated by a passing vehicle can be fatal. The missing number is the denominator of the death equation—the number of animals who do make it safely across. How can they take inventory of the successful crossings on a long stretch of road in total darkness?

			At widely spaced intervals along the road, drift fences have been installed. A drift fence is simply a length of snow fence about eight feet long, with a foot-high strip of aluminum roof flashing wired like a wall along its base. The salamanders can’t wiggle through. Confronting this obstacle, they edge along the drift fence as if it were a log or a rock. They attempt to follow it to its end, slithering along in the darkness, moving by feel of the fence against skin. Until suddenly the ground vanishes and they fall into a buried plastic bucket from which they cannot escape. The students come along every so often and count the animals in the bucket, record the species on their clipboards, and then gently release them on the other side of the fence, on their way to the pond. At night’s end, the number of animals caught by the drift fences provides an estimate of the number who safely crossed the road.

			These studies may provide the evidence that will save the salamanders, but there is a short-term cost to that long-term benefit. In order to do the research properly, no human intervention is allowed. When a car is coming, the students have to stand back, grit their teeth, and let it happen. Our well-intentioned salamander rescues have in fact biased the experiment tonight, as we decreased the number who normally would have been hit, causing an underestimate in the serious losses that occur. It poses an ethical dilemma for the students. The dead who could have been saved become the collateral damage of the study—a sacrifice that they hope will pay off in future protection for the species.

			This roadkill monitoring is the project of James Gibbs, an internationally renowned conservation biologist. He is a leader in conserving Galapagos tortoises and Tanzanian toads—but his concerns are also here in Labrador Hollow. He and his students set up the drift fences, patrol the road, and stay up all night counting. Gibbs confesses that sometimes, on rainy nights when he knows the salamanders are moving—and dying—he can’t sleep. He puts on a raincoat and goes out to carry them across. Aldo Leopold had it right: naturalists live in a world of wounds that only they can see.

			As night deepens, there are no more headlights twisting down the hollow. By midnight even the slowest salamander can cross in safety, so we trudge back to the car and head for home, driving at a snail’s pace until we’re out of the hollow lest our own wheels undo our work. We’re painfully careful, but I know we are as guilty as anyone.

			Driving home through the fog, we hear more war news on the radio. Columns of tanks and Bradley Fighting Vehicles are advancing over the Iraqi countryside, through a sandstorm as dense as the fog that shrouds us here. I wonder what is crushed beneath them as they pass. Cold and tired, I crank up the heater and the car fills with the smell of wet wool. I think back on our night’s work and the good people we met.

			What is it that drew us to the hollow tonight? What crazy kind of species is it that leaves a warm home on a rainy night to ferry salamanders across a road? It’s tempting to call it altruism, but it’s not. There is nothing selfless about it. This night heaps rewards on the givers as well as the recipients. We get to be there, to witness this amazing rite, and, for an evening, to enter into relationship with other beings, as different from ourselves as we can imagine.

			It has been said that people of the modern world suffer a great sadness, a “species loneliness”—estrangement from the rest of Creation. We have built this isolation with our fear, with our arrogance, and with our homes brightly lit against the night. For a moment as we walked this road, those barriers dissolved and we began to relieve the loneliness and know each other once again.

			Salamanders are so very much the “other,” cold, slimy creatures verging on repulsive to the warm-blooded Homo sapiens. Their startling otherness makes it all the more remarkable that we were here tonight in their defense. Amphibians offer few of the warm fuzzy feelings that fuel our protection of charismatic mammals that look back at us with Bambi’s grateful eyes. They bring us face to face with our innate xenophobia, sometimes directed at other species and sometimes directed at our own, whether in this hollow or in deserts halfway around the globe. Being with salamanders gives honor to otherness, offers an antidote to the poison of xenophobia. Each time we rescue slippery, spotted beings we attest to their right to be, to live in the sovereign territory of their own lives.

			Carrying salamanders to safety also helps us to remember the covenant of reciprocity, the mutual responsibility that we have for each other. As the perpetrators of the war zone on this road, are we not bound to heal the wounds that we inflict?

			The news makes me feel powerless. I can’t stop bombs from falling and I can’t stop cars from speeding down this road. It is beyond my power. But I can pick up salamanders. For one night I want to clear my name. What is it that draws us to this lonely hollow? Maybe it is love, the same thing that draws the salamanders from under their logs. Or maybe we walked this road tonight in search of absolution.


As the temperature drops, single voices—clear and hollow—replace the keening chorus: the ancient speech of frogs. One word becomes clear, as if spoken in English. “Hear! Hear! Hear! The world is more than your thoughtless commute. We, the collateral, are your wealth, your teachers, your security, your family. Your strange hunger for ease should not mean a death sentence for the rest of Creation.”

			“Hear!” calls a peeper in the headlights.

			“Hear! ” calls a young man trapped in a tank far from home.

			“Hear! ” calls a mother whose home is now a burnt-out ruin.

			There must be an end to this.

			By the time I get home it is late and I cannot sleep, so I walk up the hill to the pond behind my house. Here too the air is ringing with their calls. I want to light a sweetgrass smudge, to wash away the sadness in a cloud of smoke. But the fog is too heavy and the matches just bleed a red streak on the box. As it should be. There should be no washing away tonight; better to wear the grief like a sodden coat.

			“Weep! Weep!” calls a toad from the water’s edge. And I do. If grief can be a doorway to love, then let us all weep for the world we are breaking apart so we can love it back to wholeness again.





Shkitagen: People of the Seventh Fire


			So much depends upon the lighting of this fire, so neatly laid on the cold ground and circled round by stones. A platform of dry maple kindling, a floor of fine twiglets snapped from the underside of a fir, a nest of shredded bark ready for the coal over which broken pine branches are balanced to draw the flame upward. Plenty of fuel, plenty of oxygen. All the elements are in place. But without the spark it is only a pile of dead sticks. So much depends on the spark.


It was a point of pride in my family that we learned to light a fire with a single match. My father was our teacher, along with the woods themselves, and we learned without lessons, by playing and watching and wanting to emulate his comfort in wild places. He patiently showed us how to search out the right materials. Incrementally, we observed the architecture that would feed the flame. He put great store in a fine woodpile and many of our days in the woods were spent felling, hauling, and splitting. “Firewood warms you twice,” he would always say as we emerged from the woods hot and sweaty. In the doing of it, we learned to recognize the trees by their bark, by their wood, and by the way they burned for different purposes: pitchy pine for light, beech for a bed of coals, sugar maples to bake pies in the reflector oven.

			He never said so directly, but fire making was more than just a woodscraft skill—to build a good fire, a person had to work. There were high standards; no piece of half-rotten birch was permitted in his woodpile. “Punky,” he would say and toss it aside. Knowledge of the flora was a given, as was respectful treatment of the woods, so that you gathered without doing harm. There was always plenty of standing dead wood there for the taking, already dry and seasoned. Only natural materials went into a good fire—no paper or, heaven forbid, gasoline—and green wood was an affront to both aesthetics and ethics. No lighters allowed. We earned high praise for the ideal one-match fire, but plenty of encouragement if we needed a dozen. And at some point it became natural and easy, no feat at all. I found a secret that always worked for me: to sing to the fire as I touched the match to tinder.

			Woven into my dad’s fire teachings was appreciation for all the woods gave us and a sense of our responsibility for reciprocity. We never left a camping place without leaving a pile of wood for the next people on the trail. Paying attention, being prepared and patient, and doing it right the first time: the skill and the values were so closely entwined that fire making became for us an emblem of a certain kind of virtue.

			Once we mastered the one-match fire, then came the one-match fire in the rain. And the snow. With the right materials carefully assembled and respect for the ways of air and wood, you could always have a fire. The power of that simple act—with a single match you could make people feel safe and happy, convert a bunch of sodden individuals into a convivial group thinking of stew and songs. It was an amazing gift to carry in your pocket and a serious responsibility to be used well.


Fire building was a vital connection to those who came before. Potawatomi, or more accurately Bodwewadmi in our own language, means People of the Fire. It seemed only right that this was a skill we should master, a gift to share. I began to think that to really understand fire, I needed a bow drill in my hand. Now, I try to make a no-match fire, to conjure a coal in the old way, with bow and drill, a friction fire, rubbing two sticks together.

			Wewene, I say to myself: in a good time, in a good way. There are no shortcuts. It must unfold in the right way, when all the elements are present, mind and body harnessed in unison. When all the tools have been properly made and all the parts united in purpose, it is so easy. But if they’re not, it will be futile. Until there is balance and perfect reciprocity between the forces, you can try and fail and try and fail again. I know. And yet, despite the need, you must swallow your sense of urgency, calm your breathing so that the energy goes not to frustration, but to fire.

			After we were all grown up and fully fire-competent, my father made sure his grandchildren could also light a one-match fire. At eighty-three, he teaches fire building at our Native youth science camp, sharing the same lessons he gave us. They have a race to have their little blazes burn through a string stretched across the fire circle. One day, after the contest has been won, he sits on a stump poking at the fire. “Did you know,” he asks them, “that there are four kinds of fire?” I am expecting his lesson on hardwoods and softwoods, but there is something else on his mind.

			“Well, first, of course, there’s this campfire you made. You can cook on it, keep warm next to it. It’s a good place to sing—and it keeps the coyotes away.”

			“And toast marshmallows!” pipes up one of the kids.

			“You bet. And bake potatoes, make bannock, you can cook most anything on a campfire. Who knows the other kinds of fire?” he asks.

			“Forest fires?” one of the students tries tentatively.

			“Sure” he says, “what the people used to call Thunderbird fires, forest fires ignited by lightning. Sometimes they’d get put out by the rain, but sometimes they could turn into huge wildfires. They could be so hot they’d destroy everything for miles around. Nobody likes that kind of fire. But our people learned to set fires that were small and in just the right place and time so that they helped rather than hurt. The people set these fires on purpose, to take care of the land—to help the blueberries grow, or to make meadows for deer.” He holds up a sheet of birch bark. “In fact, look at all that birch bark you used in your fire. Young paper birches only grow up after fire, so our ancestors burned forests to create clearings for birch.” The symmetry of using fire to create fire-building materials was not lost on them. “They needed birch bark so they used their own fire science to create birch forests. Fires help out a lot of plants and animals. We’re told that’s why the Creator gave people the fire stick—to bring good things to the land. A lot of the time you hear people say that the best thing people can do for nature is to stay away from it and let it be. There are places where that’s absolutely true and our people respected that. But we were also given the responsibility to care for land. What people forget is that that means participating—that the natural world relies on us to do good things. You don’t show your love and care by putting what you love behind a fence. You have to be involved. You have to contribute to the well-being of the world.

			“The land gives us so many gifts; fire is a way we can give back. In modern times, the public thinks fire is only destructive, but they’ve forgotten, or simply never knew, how people used fire as a creative force. The fire stick was like a paintbrush on the landscape. Touch it here in a small dab and you’ve made a green meadow for elk; a light scatter there burns off the brush so the oaks make more acorns. Stipple it under the canopy and it thins the stand to prevent catastrophic fire. Draw the firebrush along the creek and the next spring it’s a thick stand of yellow willows. A wash over a grassy meadow turns it blue with camas. To make blueberries, let the paint dry for a few years and repeat. Our people were given the responsibility to use fire to make things beautiful and productive—it was our art and our science.”


The birch forests maintained by indigenous burning were a cornucopia of gifts: bark for canoes, sheathing for wigwams and tools and baskets, scrolls for writing, and, of course, tinder for fires. But these are only the obvious gifts. Both paper birch and yellow birch are hosts to the fungus Inonotus obliquus, which erupts through the bark to form sterile conks, a fruiting body that looks like a grainy black tumor the size of a softball. Its surface is cracked and crusted, studded with cinders as if it had been burnt. Known to people of the Siberian birch forests as chaga, it is a valued traditional medicine. Our people call it shkitagen.

			It takes some effort to find a black knob of shkitagen and then dislodge it from the tree. But cut open, the body of the conk is banded in glowing shades of gold and bronze, with the texture of spongy wood, all constructed of tiny threads and air-filled pores. Our ancestors discovered a remarkable property of this being, although some say it spoke its own use to us through its burnt exterior and golden heart. Shkitagen is a tinder fungus, a firekeeper, and a good friend to the People of the Fire. Once an ember meets shkitagen it will not go out but smolders slowly in the fungal matrix, holding its heat. Even the smallest spark, so fleeting and easily lost, will be held and nurtured if it lands on a cube of shkitagen. And yet, as forests are felled and fire suppression jeopardizes species that depend upon burned ground, it is getting harder and harder to find.


“Okay—what are the other kinds of fire?” my father asks as he adds a stick to the fire at his feet.

			Taiotoreke knows. “Sacred Fire, like for ceremonies.”

			“Of course,” my dad says. “The fires we use to carry prayers, for healing, for sweat lodges. That fire represents our life, the spiritual teachings that we’ve had from the very beginning. The Sacred Fire is the symbol of life and spirit, so we have special firekeepers to care for them.

			“You might not get to be around those other fires very often,” he says, “but there’s fire you must tend to every day. The hardest one to take care of is the one right here,” he says, tapping his finger against his chest. “Your own fire, your spirit. We all carry a piece of that sacred fire within us. We have to honor it and care for it. You are the firekeeper.”

			“Now remember that you’re responsible for all those kinds of fire,” he reminds them. “That’s our job, especially we men. In our way, there is balance between men and women: men are responsible for caring for fire, and women are responsible for water. Those two forces balance each other out. We need both to live. Now, here’s something you can’t forget about fire,” he says.


As he stands before the kids, I hear echoes of the first teachings, when Nanabozho received the same fire teachings from his father that my dad is passing on today, “You must always remember that fire has two sides. Both are very powerful. One side is the force of creation. Fire can be used for good—like on your hearth or in ceremony. Your own heart fire is also a force for good. But that same power can be turned to destruction. Fire can be good for the land, but it can also destroy. Your own fire can be used for ill, too. Human people can never forget to understand and respect both sides of this power. They are far stronger than we are. We must learn to be careful or they can destroy everything that has been created. We have to create balance.”


Fire has another meaning for Anishinaabe people as well, corresponding to the eras in the life of our nation. The “fires” refer to the places we have lived and the events and the teachings that surrounded them.

			Anishinaabe knowledge keepers—our historians and scholars— carry the narrative of the people from our earliest origin, long before the coming of the offshore people, the zaaganaash. They also carry what came after, for our histories are inevitably braided together with our futures. This story is known as the Seventh Fire Prophecy and it has been shared widely by Eddie Benton-Banai and other elders.

			The era of the First Fire found Anishinaabe people living in the dawn lands of the Atlantic shore. The people were given powerful spiritual teachings, which they were to follow for the good of the people and the land, for they are one. But a prophet foretold that the Anishinaabe would have to move to the west or else they would be destroyed in the changes that were to come. They were to search until they found the place “where the food grows on the water,” and there they would make their new home in safety. The leaders heeded the prophecy and led the nation west along the St. Lawrence River, far inland near what is now Montreal. There they rekindled the flame, carried with them on the journey in bowls of shkitagen.

			A new teacher arose among the people and counseled them to continue still farther west, where they would camp on the shore of a very big lake. Trusting in the vision, the people followed and the time of the Second Fire began as they made camp on the shores of Lake Huron near what is now Detroit. Soon, though, the Anishinaabe became divided into three groups—the Ojibwe, the Odawa, and the Potawatomi—who took different routes to seek their homes around the Great Lakes. The Potawatomi traveled to the south, from southern Michigan all the way to Wisconsin. As the prophecies foretold, however, the bands were reunited several generations later at Manitoulin Island, forming a union known as the Three Fires Confederacy that remains to this day. In the time of the Third Fire, they found the place foretold in prophecy, “where the food grows on the water,” and established their new homelands in the country of wild rice. The people lived well for a long time under the care of maples and birches, sturgeon and beaver, eagle and loon. The spiritual teachings that had guided them kept the people strong and together they flourished in the bosom of their nonhuman relatives.

			At the time of the Fourth Fire, the history of another people came to be braided into ours. Two prophets arose among the people, foretelling the coming of the light-skinned people in ships from the east, but their visions differed in what was to follow. The path was not clear, as it cannot be with the future. The first prophet said that if the offshore people, the zaaganaash, came in brotherhood, they would bring great knowledge. Combined with Anishinaabe ways of knowing, this would form a great new nation. But the second prophet sounded a warning: He said that what looks like the face of brotherhood might be the face of death. These new people might come with brotherhood, or they might come with greed for the riches of our land. How would we know which face is the true one? If the fish became poisoned and the water unfit to drink, we would know which face they wore. And for their actions the zaaganaash came to be known instead as chimokman—the long-knife people.

			The prophecies described what eventually became history. They warned the people of those who would come among them with black robes and black books, with promises of joy and salvation. The prophets said that if the people turned against their own sacred ways and followed this black-robe path, then the people would suffer for many generations. Indeed, the burial of our spiritual teachings in the time of the Fifth Fire nearly broke the hoop of the nation. People became separated from their homelands and from each other as they were forced onto reservations. Their children were taken from them to learn the zaaganaash ways. Forbidden by law to practice their own religion, they nearly lost an ancient worldview. Forbidden to speak their languages, a universe of knowing vanished in a generation. The land was fragmented, the people separated, the old ways blowing away in the wind; even the plants and animals began to turn their faces away from us. The time was foretold when the children would turn away from the elders; people would lose their way and their purpose in life. They prophesied that, in the time of the Sixth Fire, “the cup of life would almost become the cup of grief.” And yet, even after all of this, there is something that remains, a coal that has not been extinguished. At the First Fire, so long ago, the people were told that it is their spiritual lives that will keep them strong.

			They say that a prophet appeared with a strange and distant light in his eyes. The young man came to the people with the message that in the time of the seventh fire, a new people would emerge with a sacred purpose. It would not be easy for them. They would have to be strong and determined in their work, for they stood at a crossroads.

			The ancestors look to them from the flickering light of distant fires. In this time, the young would turn back to the elders for teachings and find that many had nothing to give. The people of the Seventh Fire do not yet walk forward; rather, they are told to turn around and retrace the steps of the ones who brought us here. Their sacred purpose is to walk back along the red road of our ancestors’ path and to gather up all the fragments that lay scattered along the trail. Fragments of land, tatters of language, bits of songs, stories, sacred teachings—all that was dropped along the way. Our elders say that we live in the time of the seventh fire. We are the ones the ancestors spoke of, the ones who will bend to the task of putting things back together to rekindle the flames of the sacred fire, to begin the rebirth of a nation.


And so it has come to pass that all over Indian Country there is a movement for revitalization of language and culture growing from the dedicated work of individuals who have the courage to breathe life into ceremonies, gather speakers to reteach the language, plant old seed varieties, restore native landscapes, bring the youth back to the land. The people of the Seventh Fire walk among us. They are using the fire stick of the original teachings to restore health to the people, to help them bloom again and bear fruit.

			The Seventh Fire prophecy presents a second vision for the time that is upon us. It tells that all the people of the earth will see that the path ahead is divided. They must make a choice in their path to the future. One of the roads is soft and green with new grass. You could walk barefoot there. The other path is scorched black, hard; the cinders would cut your feet. If the people choose the grassy path, then life will be sustained. But if they choose the cinder path, the damage they have wrought upon the earth will turn against them and bring suffering and death to earth’s people.

			We do indeed stand at the crossroads. Scientific evidence tells us we are close to the tipping point of climate change, the end of fossil fuels, the beginning of resource depletion. Ecologists estimate that we would need seven planets to sustain the lifeways we have created. And yet those lifeways, lacking balance, justice, and peace, have not brought us contentment. They have brought us the loss of our relatives in a great wave of extinction. Whether or not we want to admit it, we have a choice ahead, a crossroads.

			I don’t fully comprehend prophecy and its relation to history. But I know that metaphor is a way of telling truth far greater than scientific data. I know that when I close my eyes and envision the crossroads that our elders foresaw, it runs like a movie in my head.

			The fork in the road stands atop a hill. To the left the path is soft and green and spangled with dew. You want to go barefoot.

			The path to the right is ordinary pavement, deceptively smooth at first, but then it drops out of sight into the hazy distance. Just over the horizon, it is buckled with heat, broken to jagged shards.

			In the valleys below the hill, I see the people of the Seventh Fire walking toward the crossroads with all they have gathered. They carry in their bundles the precious seeds for a change of worldview. Not so they can return to some atavistic utopia, but to find the tools that allow us to walk into the future. So much has been forgotten, but it is not lost as long as the land endures and we cultivate people who have the humility and ability to listen and learn. And the people are not alone. All along the path, nonhuman people help. What knowledge the people have forgotten is remembered by the land. The others want to live, too. The path is lined with all the world’s people, in all colors of the medicine wheel—red, white, black, yellow—who understand the choice ahead, who share a vision of respect and reciprocity, of fellowship with the more-than-human world. Men with fire, women with water, to reestablish balance, to renew the world. Friends and allies all, they are falling in step, forming a great long line headed for the barefoot path. They are carrying shkitagen lanterns, tracing their path in light.

			But of course there is another road visible in the landscape, and from the high place I see the rooster tails of dust thrown up as its travelers speed ahead, engines roaring, drunk. They drive fast and blind, not even seeing who they are about to run over, or the good green world they speed through. Bullies swagger along the road with a can of gasoline and a lit torch. I worry who will get to the crossroads first, who will make the choices for us all. I recognize the melted road, the cinder path. I’ve seen it before.


I remember a night when my five-year-old woke afraid of the thunder. It was only as I held her and came fully awake that I thought to ask why there was thunder in January. Instead of stars, the light outside her window was wobbly orange and the air vibrated with the pulsing of fire.

			I dashed to get the baby from her crib and led us all outside wrapped in blankets. It was not the house on fire, but the sky. Waves of heat came billowing across the winter-bare fields, like a desert wind. The darkness was burned away in a massive blaze that filled the horizon. My thoughts raced: a plane crash? nuclear blast? I bundled the girls into the pickup and ran back in for the keys. Thinking only to get them away, to go to the river, to run. I spoke as calmly as I could, in measured tones as if fleeing an inferno in our pajamas was no cause for panic. “Mama? Are you afraid?” asked the small voice at my elbow as I tore down the road. “No, honey. Everything is going to be okay.” She was nobody’s fool. “Then Mama? Why are you talking so quietly?”

			We drove safely to our friends’ house ten miles away, knocking on their door for refuge in the middle of the night. The flare was dimmer from their back porch, but still flickering eerily. We put the children to bed with cocoa, poured ourselves a whiskey, and flipped on the news. A natural-gas pipeline had exploded less than a mile from our farm. Evacuations were underway and crews were on the scene.

			A few days later, when it was safe, we drove to the site. The hay fields were a crater. Two horse barns were incinerated. The road had melted away and in its absence there was a track of sharp cinders.


I was a climate refugee for just one night, but it was enough. The waves of heat we are feeling now as a result of climate change aren’t yet as crushing as the ones that rocked us that night, but they too are out of season. I never thought that night of what I might save from a burning house, but that is the question we all face in a time of climate change. What do you love too much to lose? Who and what will you carry to safety?

			I wouldn’t lie to my daughter now. I am afraid. As afraid today as I was then, for my children and for the good green world. We cannot comfort ourselves by saying it’s going to be okay. We need what’s in those bundles. We can’t escape by going to the neighbors’, and we can’t afford to talk quietly.

			My family could go home again the next day. But what about the Alaskan towns being swallowed alive by the rising Bering Sea? The Bangladeshi farmer whose fields are flooded? Oil burning in the Gulf? Everywhere you look, you see it coming. Coral reefs lost to warming oceans. Forest fires in Amazonia. The frozen Russian taiga an inferno vaporizing carbon stored there for ten thousand years. These are the fires of the scorched path. Let this not be the seventh fire. I pray we have not already passed the fork in the road.

			What does it mean to be the people of the seventh fire, to walk back along the ancestral road and pick up what was left behind? How do we recognize what we should reclaim and what is dangerous refuse? What is truly medicine for the living earth and what is a drug of deception? None of us can recognize every piece, let alone carry it all. We need each other, to take a song, a word, a story, a tool, a ceremony and put it in our bundles. Not for ourselves, but for the ones yet to be born, for all our relations. Collectively, we assemble from the wisdom of the past a vision for the future, a worldview shaped by mutual flourishing.

			Our spiritual leaders interpret this prophecy as the choice between the deadly road of materialism that threatens the land and the people, and the soft path of wisdom, respect, and reciprocity that is held in the teachings of the first fire. It is said that if the people choose the green path, then all races will go forward together to light the eighth and final fire of peace and brotherhood, forging the great nation that was foretold long ago.

			Supposing we are able to turn from destruction and choose the green path? What will it take to light the eighth fire? I don’t know, but our people have a long acquaintance with fire. Perhaps there are lessons in the building of a handmade fire that will help us now, teachings gleaned from the seventh fire. Fires do not make themselves. The earth provides the materials and the laws of thermodynamics. Humans must provide the work and the knowledge and the wisdom to use the power of fire for good. The spark itself is a mystery, but we know that before that fire can be lit, we have to gather the tinder, the thoughts, and the practices that will nurture the flame.


In making a handmade fire, so much depends on the plants, two pieces of cedar, a yielding board, a straight shaft, made for each other, male and female from the same tree. The bow a flexible wand of striped maple, a shapely grip to bear the bowstring twined of dogbane fiber. Stroking back and forth, back and forth, the shaft spinning, feeling its way into the bowl that burns to meet its shape.

			So much depends on the body, each joint at the right angle, left arm wrapped around knee and braced at the shin, left leg bent, back stretched, shoulders locked, left forearm bearing down, right arm pushes and pulls in one smooth draw without breaking the plane of the upright shin. So much depends on the architecture, stability in three dimensions and fluidity in the fourth.

			So much depends on the motion of the shaft against the board so that movement becomes friction, heat building and building, spinning and spinning the drill down on the bowl, burning its way into a black and shining space so smooth the pressure and heat burn from the wood a fine powder, which gathers together in its need for warmth until it forms into a coal that falls under its own weight through a notch in the board onto the waiting tinder.

			So much depends on the tinder, the flyaway bits of cattail fluff, the softened wads of cedar bark rubbed between hands until the fibers are loose and mingled with their own dust, the shreds of yellow birch bark torn like confetti and all formed into a ball like a warbler’s nest, a rough loose weave, a nest for a firebird where a coal will be laid, the whole wrapped in a sleeve of birch bark open at the ends for the entrance and exit of air.

			Time and again I get to this point, where the heat has built and the fragrant smoke from the burning cedar bowl begins to rise around my face. Almost, I think, almost, and then my hand slips and the spindle goes flying and the coal breaks apart and I’m left with no fire and an aching arm. My struggle with the bow drill is a struggle to achieve reciprocity, to find a way that knowledge, body, mind, and spirit can all be brought into harmony, to harness human gifts to create a gift for the earth. It’s not that the tools are lacking—the pieces are all there, but something is missing. I do not have it. I hear again the teachings of the seventh fire: turn back along the path and gather up what has been left beside the trail.

			And I remember shkitagen, the firekeeper fungus, the holder of the spark that cannot be extinguished. I go back to where the wisdom lives, in the woods, and humbly ask for help. I lay down my gift, in return for all that is given, and start again.

			So much depends on the spark that is nurtured by shkitagen gold and kindled by a song. So much depends on the air, its passage through the tinder nest, strong enough to make it glow, not so strong as to blow it out, breath of wind and not of man, bundle swung back and forth through Creator’s breath to make it grow, embracing bark and dust propagating heat on heat, oxygen is fuel for fuel until smoke plumes billow in sweet fragrance, light erupts, and you hold in your hand a fire.


As the seventh fire people walk the path, we should also be looking for shkitagen, the ones who hold the spark that cannot be extinguished. We find the firekeepers all along the path and greet them with gratitude and humility that against all odds, they have carried the ember forward, waiting to be breathed into life. In seeking the shkitagen of the forest and the shkitagen of the spirit, we ask for open eyes and open minds, hearts open enough to embrace our more-than-human kin, a willingness to engage intelligences not our own. We’ll need trust in the generosity of the good green earth to provide this gift and trust in human people to reciprocate.

			I don’t know how the eighth fire will be lit. But I do know we can gather the tinder that will nurture the flame, that we can be shkitagen to carry the fire, as it was carried to us. Is this not a holy thing, the kindling of this fire? So much depends on the spark.





Defeating Windigo


			In the spring I walk across the meadow toward my medicine woods, where the plants give their gifts with unstinting generosity. It is mine not by deed, but by care. I’ve come here for decades to be with them, to listen, to learn, and to gather.

			The woods are a drift of white trillium where the snow was, but still I feel a chill. The light is somehow different. I cross the ridge where unrecognizable footprints followed mine in last winter’s blizzard. I should have known what those tracks meant. Where they were I now find the deeprutted prints of trucks headed across the field. The flowers are there, as they have been beyond memory, but the trees are gone. My neighbor brought in the loggers over the winter.

			There are so many ways to harvest honorably, but he chose otherwise, leaving only diseased beech and a few old hemlocks, worthless to the mill. The trillium, bloodroot, hepatica, bellwort, trout lily, ginger, and wild leeks are all smiling their last into the spring sun, which will burn them out when summer comes to a forest without trees. They trusted that the maples would be there, but the maples are gone. And they trusted me. Next year this will all be brambles—garlic mustard and buckthorn, the invasive species that follow Windigo footprints.

			I fear that a world made of gifts cannot coexist with a world made of commodities. I fear that I have no power to protect what I love against the Windigo.

			. . . .

			In days of legend, the people were so terrorized by the specter of Windigos that they tried to devise ways of defeating them. Given the rampant destruction wrought by our contemporary Windigo-mind, I wondered if our ancient stories contained some wisdom that might guide us today.

			There are stories of banishment that we might emulate, making pariahs of the destroyers and divesting ourselves of complicity with their enterprises. There are stories of attempted drownings, burnings, and assorted murders, but the Windigo always comes back. There are endless tales of brave men on snowshoes, fighting through blizzards to track and kill the Windigo before it preyed again, but the beast almost always slips away in the storm.

			Some folks argue that we need do nothing at all—that the unholy coupling of greed and growth and carbon will make the world hot enough to melt the Windigo heart once and for all. Climate change will unequivocally defeat economies that are based on constant taking without giving in return. But before the Windigo dies, it will take so much that we love along with it. We can wait for climate change to turn the world and the Windigo into a puddle of red-tinged meltwater, or we can strap on our snowshoes and track him down.

			In our stories, when humans alone could not conquer them, the people called upon their champion, Nanabozho, to be light against darkness, a song against the shriek of the Windigo. Basil Johnston tells the story of an epic battle fought for many days with legions of warriors, led by their hero. There was fierce fighting, many weapons, trickery, and courage as they sought to surround the monster in his lair. But I noticed something in the background of this story different from any Windigo tale I’d ever heard: You can smell flowers. There was no snow, no blizzard; the only ice was in the heart of the Windigo. Nanabozho had chosen to hunt down the monster in the summer. The warriors paddled across ice-free lakes to the island where the Windigo had his summer refuge. The Windigo is most powerful in the Hungry Time, in winter. With the warm breezes his power wanes.

			Summer in our language is niibin—the time of plenty—and it was in niibin that Nanabozho faced down the Windigo and defeated him. Here is the arrow that weakens the monster of overconsumption, a medicine that heals the sickness: its name is plenty. In winter, when scarcity is at its zenith, the Windigo rages beyond control, but when abundance reigns the hunger fades away and with it the power of the monster.

			In an essay describing hunter-gatherer peoples with few possessions as the original affluent society, anthropologist Marshall Sahlins reminds us that, “modern capitalist societies, however richly endowed, dedicate themselves to the proposition of scarcity. Inadequacy of economic means is the first principle of the world’s wealthiest peoples.” The shortage is due not to how much material wealth there actually is, but to the way in which it is exchanged or circulated. The market system artificially creates scarcity by blocking the flow between the source and the consumer. Grain may rot in the warehouse while hungry people starve because they cannot pay for it. The result is famine for some and diseases of excess for others. The very earth that sustains us is being destroyed to fuel injustice. An economy that grants personhood to corporations but denies it to the more-than-human beings: this is a Windigo economy.

			What is the alternative? And how do we get there? I don’t know for certain, but I believe the answer is contained within our teachings of “One Bowl and One Spoon,” which holds that the gifts of the earth are all in one bowl, all to be shared from a single spoon. This is the vision of the economy of the commons, wherein resources fundamental to our well-being, like water and land and forests, are commonly held rather than commodified. Properly managed, the commons approach maintains abundance, not scarcity. These contemporary economic alternatives strongly echo the indigenous worldview in which the earth exists not as private property, but as a commons, to be tended with respect and reciprocity for the benefit of all.

			And yet, while creating an alternative to destructive economic structures is imperative, it is not enough. It is not just changes in policies that we need, but also changes to the heart. Scarcity and plenty are as much qualities of the mind and spirit as they are of the economy. Gratitude plants the seed for abundance.

			Each of us comes from people who were once indigenous. We can reclaim our membership in the cultures of gratitude that formed our old relationships with the living earth. Gratitude is a powerful antidote to Windigo psychosis. A deep awareness of the gifts of the earth and of each other is medicine. The practice of gratitude lets us hear the badgering of marketers as the stomach grumblings of a Windigo. It celebrates cultures of regenerative reciprocity, where wealth is understood to be having enough to share and riches are counted in mutually beneficial relationships. Besides, it makes us happy.

			Gratitude for all the earth has given us lends us courage to turn and face the Windigo that stalks us, to refuse to participate in an economy that destroys the beloved earth to line the pockets of the greedy, to demand an economy that is aligned with life, not stacked against it. It’s easy to write that, harder to do.


I throw myself on the ground, pounding my fists and grieving the assault on my medicine woods. I don’t know how to defeat the monster. I have no arsenal of weapons, no legions of fighters like those who followed Nanabozho into battle. I am not a warrior. I was raised by Strawberries, who even now are budding at my feet. Amid the Violets. And Yarrow. And Asters and Goldenrod that are just emerging, and the blades of Sweetgrass shining in the sun. In that moment, I know that I am not alone. I lie in the meadow surrounded by the legions who do stand with me. I may not know what to do, but they do, giving of their medicine gifts as they always do, to sustain the world. We are not powerless against the Windigo, they say. Remember that we already have everything we need. And so—we conspire.

			When I get to my feet, Nanabozho has appeared beside me, with resolute eyes and a trickster grin. “You have to think like the monster to defeat him,” he says. “Like dissolves like.” He points with his eyes to a line of dense shrubs at the edge of the woods. “Give him a taste of his own medicine,” he says with a smirk. He walks into the gray thicket and laughter overtakes him as he disappears.

			I’ve never gathered buckthorn before; the blue-black berries stain my fingers. I’ve tried to stay away from it, but it follows you. It is a rampant invader of disturbed places. It takes over the forest, starving other plants of light and space. Buckthorn also poisons the soil, preventing the growth of any species but itself, creating a floristic desert. You have to acknowledge that it’s a winner in the free market, a success story built on efficiency, monopoly, and the creation of scarcity. It is a botanical imperialist, stealing land from the native species.

			I gather all summer, sitting with each species that offers itself to the cause, listening and learning its gifts. I’ve always made teas for colds, salves for skin, but never this. Making medicine is not undertaken lightly. It is a sacred responsibility. The beams in my house are hung with drying plants, shelves filled with jars of roots and leaves. Waiting for winter.

			When it comes, I walk the woods in my snowshoes, leaving an unmistakable trail toward home. A braid of sweetgrass hangs by my door. The three shining strands represent the unity of mind, body, and spirit that makes us whole. In the Windigo, the braid is unraveled; that is the disease that drives him to destruction. That braid reminds me that when we braid the hair of Mother Earth we remember all that is given to us and our responsibility to care for those gifts in return. In this way the gifts are sustained and all are fed. No one goes hungry.

			Last night, my house was full of food and friends, the laughter and light spilling out on the snow. I thought I saw him pass by the window, gazing in with hunger. But tonight I am alone and the wind is rising.

			I heft my cast-iron kettle, the biggest pot I have, onto the stove and set the water to boil. I add to it a good handful of dried berries. And then another. The berries dissolve to a syrupy liquid, blue-black and inky. Remembering Nanabozho’s counsel, I say a prayer and empty in the rest of the jar.

			Into a second pot I pour a pitcher of purest spring water and onto its surface I scatter a pinch of petals from one jar, bark shreds from another. All carefully chosen, each to its purpose. I add a length of root, a handful of leaves, and a spoonful of berries to the golden tea, tinged with rosy pink. I set it to simmer and sit by the fire to wait.

			The snow hisses against the window, the wind moans in the trees. He has come, followed my tracks home just as I knew he would. I put the sweetgrass in my pocket, take a deep breath, and open the door. I’m afraid to do this, but more afraid of what happens if I don’t.

			He looms above me, wild red eyes blazing against the hoar frost of his face. He bares his yellow fangs and reaches for me with his bony hands. My own hands tremble as I thrust into his bloodstained fingers a cup of scalding buckthorn tea. He slurps it down at once and starts to howl for more—devoured by the pain of emptiness, he always wants more. He pulls the whole iron kettle from me and drinks it in greedy gulps, the syrup freezing to his chin in dripping black icicles. Throwing the empty pot aside, he reaches for me again, but before his fingers can surround my neck he turns from the door and staggers backward out into the snow.

			I see him doubled over, overcome with violent retching. The carrion stench of his breath mixes with the reek of shit as the buckthorn loosens his bowels. A small dose of buckthorn is a laxative. A strong dose is a purgative, and a whole kettle, an emetic. It is Windigo nature: he wanted every last drop. So now he is vomiting up coins and coal slurry, clumps of sawdust from my woods, clots of tar sand, and the little bones of birds. He spews Solvay waste, gags on an entire oil slick. When he’s done, his stomach continues to heave but all that comes up is the thin liquid of loneliness.

			He lies spent in the snow, a stinking carcass, but still dangerous when the hunger rises to fill the new emptiness. I run back in the house for the second pot and carry it to his side, where the snow has melted around him. His eyes are glazed over but I hear his stomach rumble so I hold the cup to his lips. He turns his head away as if it were poison. I take a sip, to reassure him and because he is not the only one who needs it. I feel the medicines standing beside me. And then he drinks, just a sip at a time of the golden-pink tea, tea of Willow to quell the fever of want and Strawberries to mend the heart. With the nourishing broth of the Three Sisters and infused with savory Wild Leeks, the medicines enter his bloodstream: White Pine for unity, justice from Pecans, the humility of Spruce roots. He drinks down the compassion of Witch Hazel, the respect of Cedars, a blessing of Silverbells, all sweetened with the Maple of gratitude. You can’t know reciprocity until you know the gift. He is helpless before their power.

			His head falls back, leaving the cup still full. He closes his eyes. There is just one more part of the medicine. I am no longer afraid. I sit down beside him on the newly greening grass. “Let me tell you a story,” I say as the ice melts away. “She fell like a maple seed, pirouetting from the autumn sky.”





Epilogue: Returning the Gift


			Red over green, raspberries bead the thicket on a summer afternoon. The blue jay picking on the other side of this patch has a beak as redstained as my fingers, which go to my mouth as often as to the bowl. I reach under the brambles for a dangling cluster and there in the dappled shade is a grinning turtle, shin deep in fallen fruit, stretching his neck up for more. I’ll let his berries be. The earth has plenty and offers us abundance, spreading her gifts over the green: strawberries, raspberries, blueberries, cherries, currants—that we might fill our bowls. Niibin, we call summer in Potawatomi, “the time of plenty,” and also time for our tribal gathering, for powwows and ceremony.

			Red over green, the blankets spread on the grass beneath the arbor are piled high with gifts. Basketballs and furled umbrellas, peyotestitched key chains and Ziploc bags of wild rice. Everybody lines up to choose a gift while the hosts stand by, beaming. The teenagers are dispatched to carry choice items to elders seated in the circle, too frail to navigate the crowd. Megwech, megwech—the thank yous circle among us. Ahead of me a toddler, besotted with abundance, grabs a whole armload. Her mother bends and whispers in her ear. She stands indecisive for a moment and lays it all back down, save a neon-yellow squirt gun.

			And then we dance. The drum begins the giveaway song and everyone joins the circle in regalia of swaying fringe, nodding feathers, rainbow shawls, T-shirts, and jeans. The ground resonates with the fall of moccasined feet. Each time the song circles around to the honor beats, we dance in place and raise the gifts above our heads, waving necklaces, baskets, and stuffed animals, whooping to honor the gifts and the givers. Amid the laughter and the singing, everyone belongs.

			This is our traditional giveaway, the minidewak, an old ceremony well loved by our people and a frequent feature of powwows. In the outside world, people who are celebrating life events can look forward to receiving presents in their honor. In the Potawatomi way, this expectation is turned upside down. It is the honored one who gives the gifts, who piles the blanket high to share good fortune with everyone in the circle.

			Often, if the giveaway is small and personal, every gift will be handmade. Sometimes a whole community might work all year long to fashion the presents for guests they do not even know. For a big intertribal gathering with hundreds of people, the blanket is likely to be a blue plastic tarp strewn with gleanings from the discount bins at Walmart. No matter what the gift is, a black ash basket or a pot holder, the sentiment is the same. The ceremonial giveaway is an echo of our oldest teachings.

			Generosity is simultaneously a moral and a material imperative, especially among people who live close to the land and know its waves of plenty and scarcity. Where the well-being of one is linked to the wellbeing of all. Wealth among traditional people is measured by having enough to give away. Hoarding the gift, we become constipated with wealth, bloated with possessions, too heavy to join the dance.

			Sometimes there’s someone, maybe even a whole family, who doesn’t understand and takes too much. They heap up their acquisitions beside their lawn chairs. Maybe they need it. Maybe not. They don’t dance, but sit alone, guarding their stuff.

			In a culture of gratitude, everyone knows that gifts will follow the circle of reciprocity and flow back to you again. This time you give and next time you receive. Both the honor of giving and the humility of receiving are necessary halves of the equation. The grass in the ring is trodden down in a path from gratitude to reciprocity. We dance in a circle, not in a line.

			After the dance, a little boy in a grass dance outfit tosses down his new toy truck, already tired of it. His dad makes him pick it up and then sits him down. A gift is different from something you buy, possessed of meaning outside its material boundaries. You never dishonor the gift. A gift asks something of you. To take care of it. And something more.

			I don’t know the origin of the giveaway, but I think that we learned it from watching the plants, especially the berries who offer up their gifts all wrapped in red and blue. We may forget the teacher, but our language remembers: our word for the giveaway, minidewak, means “they give from the heart.” At the word’s center lives the word min. Min is a root word for gift, but it is also the word for berry. In the poetry of our language, might speaking of minidewak remind us to be as the berries?

			The berries are always present at our ceremonies. They join us in a wooden bowl. One big bowl and one big spoon, which are passed around the circle, so that each person can taste the sweetness, remember the gifts, and say thank you. They carry the lesson, passed to us by our ancestors, that the generosity of the land comes to us as one bowl, one spoon. We are all fed from the same bowl that Mother Earth has filled for us. It’s not just about the berries, but also about the bowl. The gifts of the earth are to be shared, but gifts are not limitless. The generosity of the earth is not an invitation to take it all. Every bowl has a bottom. When it’s empty, it’s empty. And there is but one spoon, the same size for everyone.

			How do we refill the empty bowl? Is gratitude alone enough? Berries teach us otherwise. When berries spread out their giveaway blanket, offering their sweetness to birds and bears and boys alike, the transaction does not end there. Something beyond gratitude is asked of us. The berries trust that we will uphold our end of the bargain and disperse their seeds to new places to grow, which is good for berries and for boys. They remind us that all flourishing is mutual. We need the berries and the berries need us. Their gifts multiply by our care for them, and dwindle from our neglect. We are bound in a covenant of reciprocity, a pact of mutual responsibility to sustain those who sustain us. And so the empty bowl is filled.

			Somewhere along the line, though, people have abandoned berry teachings. Instead of sowing richness, we diminish the possibilities for the future at every turn. But the uncertain path to the future could be illuminated by language. In Potawatomi, we speak of the land as emingoyak: that which has been given to us. In English, we speak of the land as “natural resources” or “ecosystem services,” as if the lives of other beings were our property. As if the earth were not a bowl of berries, but an open pit mine, and the spoon a gouging shovel.

			Imagine that while our neighbors were holding a giveaway, someone broke into their home to take whatever he wanted. We would be outraged at the moral trespass. So it should be for the earth. The earth gives away for free the power of wind and sun and water, but instead we break open the earth to take fossil fuels. Had we taken only that which is given to us, had we reciprocated the gift, we would not have to fear our own atmosphere today.

			We are all bound by a covenant of reciprocity: plant breath for animal breath, winter and summer, predator and prey, grass and fire, night and day, living and dying. Water knows this, clouds know this. Soil and rocks know they are dancing in a continuous giveaway of making, unmaking, and making again the earth.

			Our elders say that ceremony is the way we can remember to remember. In the dance of the giveaway, remember that the earth is a gift that we must pass on, just as it came to us. When we forget, the dances we’ll need will be for mourning. For the passing of polar bears, the silence of cranes, for the death of rivers and the memory of snow.

			When I close my eyes and wait for my heartbeat to match the drum, I envision people recognizing, for perhaps the first time, the dazzling gifts of the world, seeing them with new eyes, just as they teeter on the cusp of undoing. Maybe just in time. Or maybe too late. Spread on the grass, green over brown, they will honor at last the giveaway from Mother Earth. Blankets of moss, robes of feathers, baskets of corn, and vials of healing herbs. Silver salmon, agate beaches, sand dunes. Thunderheads and snowdrifts, cords of wood and herds of elk. Tulips. Potatoes. Luna moths and snow geese. And berries. More than anything, I want to hear a great song of thanks rise on the wind. I think that song might save us. And then, as the drum begins, we will dance, wearing regalia in celebration of the living earth: a waving fringe of tallgrass prairie, a whirl of butterfly shawls, with nodding plumes of egrets, jeweled with the glitter of a phosphorescent wave. When the song pauses for the honor beats, we’ll hold high our gifts and ululate their praises, a shining fish, a branch of blossoms, and a starlit night.

			The moral covenant of reciprocity calls us to honor our responsibilities for all we have been given, for all that we have taken. It’s our turn now, long overdue. Let us hold a giveaway for Mother Earth, spread our blankets out for her and pile them high with gifts of our own making. Imagine the books, the paintings, the poems, the clever machines, the compassionate acts, the transcendent ideas, the perfect tools. The fierce defense of all that has been given. Gifts of mind, hands, heart, voice, and vision all offered up on behalf of the earth. Whatever our gift, we are called to give it and to dance for the renewal of the world.

			In return for the privilege of breath.





A Note on the Treatment of Plant Names


			We accept with nary a thought that the names of people are capitalized. To write “george washington” would be to strip that man of his special status as a human. It would be laughable to write “Mosquito” if it were in reference to a flying insect, but acceptable if we were discussing a brand of boat. Capitalization conveys a certain distinction, the elevated position of humans and their creations in the hierarchy of beings. Biologists have widely adopted the convention of not capitalizing the common names of plants and animals unless they include the name of a human being or an official place name. Thus, the first blossoms of the spring woods are written as bloodroot and the pink star of a California woodland is Kellogg’s tiger lily. This seemingly trivial grammatical rulemaking in fact expresses deeply held assumptions about human exceptionalism, that we are somehow different and indeed better than the other species who surround us. Indigenous ways of understanding recognize the personhood of all beings as equally important, not in a hierarchy but a circle. So in this book as in my life, I break with those grammatical blinders to write freely of Maple, Heron, and Wally when I mean a person, human or not; and of maple, heron, and human when I mean a category or concept.





A Note on the Treatment of Indigenous Language

			The Potawatomi and Anishinaabe languages are a reflection of the land and the people. They are a living, oral tradition, which had not been written down in their long history until fairly recently. A number of writing systems have emerged to try and capture the language in regularized orthography, but there is no firm agreement on the preeminence of any one among the many variants of a large and living language. Potawatomi elder, fluent speaker, and teacher Stewart King has kindly sorted through my rudimentary use of the language, confirming meanings and advising on consistency in spelling and usage. I am most appreciative for his guidance in my understanding of language and culture. The Fiero system’s double vowel orthography for writing the language has been widely adopted by many Anishinaabe speakers. Most Potawatomi, however— known as the “vowel droppers”—do not use Fiero. With respect for speakers and teachers with these different perspectives, I have tried to use the words in the way that they were originally given to me.





A Note on Indigenous Stories

			I am a listener and have been listening to stories told around me for longer than I care to admit. I mean to honor my teachers by passing on the stories that they have passed on to me.

			We are told that stories are living beings, they grow, they develop, they remember, they change not in their essence, but sometimes in their dress. They are shared and shaped by the land and the culture and the teller, so that one story may be told widely and differently. Sometimes only a fragment is shared, showing just one face of a many faceted story, depending on its purpose. So it is with the stories shared here.

			Traditional stories are the collective treasures of a people and can’t easily be attributed with a literature citation to an individual source. Many are not to be publicly shared and these I have not included, but many are freely disseminated so that they may do their work in the wider world. For these stories, which exist in many versions, I have chosen to cite a published source as a reference, while acknowledging that the version I share has been enriched by hearing it multiple times in different tellings. For some, I do not know of a published source for a story passed on in the oral tradition. Chi megwech to the storytellers.





Sources


			Allen, Paula Gunn. Grandmothers of the Light: A Medicine Woman’s Sourcebook. Boston: Beacon Press, 1991.

			Awiakta, Marilou. Selu: Seeking the Corn-Mother’s Wisdom. Golden: Fulcrum, 1993.

			Benton-Banai, Edward. The Mishomis Book: The Voice of the Ojibway. Red School House, 1988.

			Berkes, Fikret. Sacred Ecology, 2nd ed. New York: Routledge, 2008. Caduto, Michael J. and Joseph Bruchac. Keepers of Life: Discovering Plants through Native American Stories and Earth Activities for Children. Golden: Fulcrum, 1995.

			Cajete, Gregory. Look to the Mountain: An Ecology of Indigenous Education. Asheville: Kivaki Press, 1994.

			Hyde, Lewis. The Gift: Imagination and the Erotic Life of Property. New York: Random House, 1979.

			Johnston, Basil. The Manitous: The Spiritual World of the Ojibway. Saint Paul: Minnesota Historical Society, 2001.

			LaDuke, Winona. Recovering the Sacred: The Power of Naming and Claiming. Cambridge: South End Press, 2005.

			Macy, Joanna. World as Lover, World as Self: Courage for Global Justice and Ecological Renewal. Berkeley: Parallax Press, 2007.

			Moore, Kathleen Dean and Michael P. Nelson, eds. Moral Ground: Ethical Action for a Planet in Peril. San Antonio: Trinity University Press, 2011.

			Nelson, Melissa K., ed. Original Instructions: Indigenous Teachings for a Sustainable Future. Rochester: Bear and Company, 2008.

			Porter, Tom. Kanatsiohareke: Traditional Mohawk Indians Return to Their Ancestral Homeland. Greenfield Center: Bowman Books, 1998.

			Ritzenthaler, R. E. and P. Ritzenthaler. The Woodland Indians of the Western Great Lakes. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 1983. Shenandoah, Joanne and Douglas M. George. Skywoman: Legends of the Iroquois. Santa Fe: Clear Light Publishers, 1988.

			Stewart, Hilary and Bill Reid. Cedar: Tree of Life to the Northwest Coast Indians. Douglas and MacIntyre, Ltd., 2003.

			Stokes, John and Kanawahienton. Thanksgiving Address: Greetings to the Natural World. Six Nations Indian Museum and The Tracking Project, 1993.

			Suzuki, David and Peter Knudtson. Wisdom of the Elders: Sacred Native Stories of Nature. New York: Bantam Books, 1992.

			Treuer, Anton S. Living Our Language: Ojibwe Tales and Oral Histories: A Bilingual Anthology. Saint Paul: Minnesota Historical Society, 2001.





Acknowledgments


			I owe a debt of gratitude for the lap of my Sitka Spruce grandma, the shelter of White Willow, the Balsam Fir beneath my sleeping bag, and that patch of Blueberry in Katherine’s Bay. For the White Pine that sings me to sleep, and the one that woke me up, for the Goldthread tea, for June Strawberries and the Bird on the Wing Orchids, to the Maples that frame my door, for the last Raspberries of fall and the first Leeks of spring, for Cattail, Paper Birch, Spruce root who care for me body and soul and Black Ash who holds my thoughts, for Daffodils and dewy Violets and for Goldenrod and Asters who still leave me breathless.

			For the best people I know: my parents Robert Wasay ankwat and Patricia Wawaskonesen Wall, who have given me lifelong love and encouragement, who carried the spark and fanned the flames, and my daughters Larkin Lee Kimmerer and Linden Lee Lane, for the inspiration of their beings and for their gracious permission to weave their stories into mine. There are not thanks enough for the love with which I have been showered, in which all things are possible. Megwech kine gego.

			I have been blessed with the guidance of wise and generous teachers who have contributed much to these stories, whether they know it or not. I say Chi Megwech to those to whom I have been listening and learning through their teachings and their lived examples, including my Anishinaabe relations Stewart King, Barbara Wall, Wally Meshigaud, Jim Thunder, Justin Neely, Kevin Finney, Big Bear Johnson, Dick Johnson, and the Pigeon Family. Nya wenha to my Haudenosaunee neighbors, friends and colleagues Oren Lyons, Irving Powless, Jeanne Shenandoah, Audrey Shenandoah, Freida Jacques, Tom Porter, Dan Longboat, Dave Arquette, Noah Point, Neil Patterson, Bob Stevenson, Theresa Burns, Lionel LaCroix, and Dean George. And to those myriad teachers along the way at conferences, cultural gatherings, fires, and kitchen tables whose names are forgotten, but whose lessons remain: igwien. Your words and actions have fallen like seeds on the fertile ground, and my intention is to nurture them with care and respect. I accept full responsibility for the unknowing errors that I will undoubtedly make from my own ignorance.

			Writing is a solitary practice, yet we do not write alone. The kinship of a writing community that inspires, supports, and listens deeply is such a gift. Many thanks to Kathleen Dean Moore, Libby Roderick, Charles Goodrich, Alison Hawthorne Deming, Carolyn Servid, Robert Michael Pyle, Jesse Ford, Michael Nelson, Janine Debaise, Nan Gartner, Joyce Homan, Dick Pearson, Bev Adams, Richard Weiskopf, Harsey Leonard, and others who have offered their encouragement and critique. To my friends and family who have kept me going, your warmth is written into every page. I owe special gratitude to my dear students throughout the years who are so frequently my teachers and who give me faith in the future.

			Many of these pages were filled during the tender care of writers’ residencies at the Blue Mountain Center, The Sitka Center for Art and Ecology, and the Mesa Refuge. They were also inspired by time at the Spring Creek Project and the Long Term Ecological Reflections residency at the H. J. Andrews Experimental Forest. Many thanks to those who make these times of solitude and support possible.

			Waewaenen and special thanks are offered to my welcoming hosts at the College of the Menominee Nation: Mike Dockry, Melissa Cook, Jeff Grignon, and the wonderful students there who created an inspiring and motivational environment in which to complete this work.

			Special thanks to my editor, Patrick Thomas, for believing in this work and for his care, skill, and patience with me in shepherding these pages from manuscript to book.
PREFACE

LOVING OURSELVES INTO HEALING

Many years ago, I read a moving article by a hospice caregiver whohad accompanied thousands of people during their final weeks. One phrase in particular has stayed with me. After countless hours listening to the thoughts of the dying, the caregiver summed up their greatest regret with these words: “I wish I’d had the courage to live a life true to myself.”

• • •

I started asking myself questions like these: What does it mean to live true to yourself? Do you feel that your life is aligned with what matters to your heart? Are you living true to yourself—today? Right now? A

few months later, I began asking the same questions of my meditation students.

What I found is that this regret of the dying is also true for many of the rest of us. My students tell me that being true to themselves means being loving, present, and authentic. They speak of being honest, serving others, serving the world. They talk about expressing their creativity, believing in their own worthiness, and working at what they love. And about having the strength to grow beyond their insecurities and to reconcile troubled relationships.

They also say that almost daily they lose sight of these aspirations and intentions. Instead, they get caught up in reactivity—selfjudgment, blaming others, pettiness, selfishness, living on autopilot. As one student said, “Each day there’s a big gap between what’s possible and how I’m actually living my life. And with that comes an ever-lurking sense of personal failure.”

I know that feeling of failure intimately. For many years, the

“trance of unworthiness” kept me feeling deficient as friend and daughter, partner and parent. It fueled doubt about my capability as therapist and teacher. And when I faced severe physical illness, it initially triggered self-blame: “What did I do wrong to get so sick?”

• • •

Yet this very suffering—feeling deficient and disconnected—has also been my most fertile ground for waking up. It has led me to a spiritual path and practices that I cherish. And when I get stuck in painful emotions, it brings me to a repeating realization, an insight that has profoundly changed my life: I have to love myself into healing. The only path that can carry me home is the path of self-compassion.

It doesn’t matter if I’m caught in anger, fear of failing at something important, a sense of self-doubt, or loneliness. And it doesn’t matter if I’m facing yet again challenges to physical mobility and well-being. The healing medicine always has some flavor of care, compassion, or forgiveness. On some level, I’m telling myself, “Please, be kind.” This turning toward loving presence is the gateway to living true to ourselves.

“Radical compassion” means including the vulnerability of this life —all life—in our heart. It means having the courage to love ourselves, each other, and our world. Radical compassion is rooted in mindful, embodied presence, and it is expressed actively through caring that includes all beings.

• • •

There’s an image I love that shows mindfulness and compassion as inseparable dimensions of awakening. It depicts awareness as a bird with two wings: When both wings are unfurled in their fullness and beauty, the bird can fly and be free.

I’m writing this book to share a practice of radical compassion that brings alive the wings of mindfulness and compassion when we most need them. It helps heal and release the painful beliefs and emotions that keep us from living true to ourselves. This practice is called RAIN.

The name is an acronym that stands for the four steps of Recognize, Allow, Investigate, and Nurture. Working with these four steps has given me—and can give you—a reliable way to find healing and freedom right where you are in the midst of emotional pain.

As you’ll see, these steps are easy to learn, and they can be a lifeline in moments when you feel stressed, fearful, reactive, and confused. These same steps, revisited again and again, build internal resilience and trust in your own wise, awakening heart. They will help you respond to life in a way that expresses the truth and depth and spirit of who you are. This is the gift of RAIN: living from your full potential.

• • •

I was not the first to use the acronym RAIN. As some readers may already know, it was originally introduced as a meditation guide by the senior Buddhist teacher Michele McDonald in the 1980s, and since then it has been adopted and adapted in various ways by mindfulness teachers. Over the past fifteen years, I’ve evolved my own approach to RAIN, adding a step (N-Nurture) that directly awakens selfcompassion. With this crucial emphasis, RAIN cultivates the synchronistic power of mindfulness and heartfulness—both wings of awareness. I’ve now shared this version with hundreds of thousands of people. The response has been tremendous, with people from around the world reporting how RAIN has brought a mindful, caring presence directly to the tangles of their daily lives, increasing their capacity for intimacy, releasing them from addictive behavior, empowering them

in their work in the world, and supporting them in times of crisis. They tell me they can finally hold themselves with compassion and bring

this same compassion to others. And they talk about the gift of inner freedom, of realizing who they are, beyond any story of self.

• • •

This book will develop your capacity for radical compassion. You’ll learn to work with RAIN through a weave of stories and direct teaching, guided meditations, and many opportunities for selfreflection. You’ll see how insights from modern neuroscience help

explain the profound and enduring impact of RAIN. You’ll also hear responses to the questions my students ask, and the many creative ways they’ve found to customize their practice. As we begin our journey together, here’s a brief look ahead.

Part 1 is an overview of each step of RAIN. I’ll offer examples that can help you to begin working with the steps right away. Even a few minutes with RAIN can interrupt the cutoff state I call “living in trance” and enable us to be more present with ourselves and others. Using RAIN, we can also begin to break through the various ways we say no to life, and to glimpse the true potential of our awakened heart. Part 2 guides you in bringing RAIN to your inner life. Drawing on situations my students and I have worked on together, it describes how to refine and apply the four steps to a wide range of challenging circumstances, from shame and disabling fears to discovering your deepest longing. It also offers specific techniques for recruiting and cultivating your inner strengths.

Part 3 takes our journey into the field of relationships. These chapters include practices that awaken your capacity for forgiveness, help you to see past the mask of “unreal others” and wisely navigate conflict, unseen bias, and difference. In time, your deepening mindfulness and kindness will include all those you reflect on, all those whose lives you touch. You will discover the blessing of radical compassion, of loving without holding back.

• • •

I’ve had the privilege of witnessing countless people heal with the radical compassion that is nourished by RAIN. What strikes me again and again is how RAIN cultivates a trust in our own basic goodness and by extension helps us recognize and trust that same light shining through all beings. Seeing so many students, friends, and family discover this openhearted awareness, this reverence for life, nourishes my faith in our potential.

It also gives me hope for our world. From an evolutionary perspective, our species’ brain development correlates with a growing capacity for self-awareness, rational thinking, empathy, compassion, and mindfulness. No question, our very human fears and grasping,

combined with our cognitive ability, also make us the greatest danger on earth to ourselves and all other species. But we are not at the end of our evolutionary story. We have the tools that can awaken mindfulness and compassion in ourselves and guide us in relating wisely and lovingly with others.

Your dedication to awakening your heart is an essential part of the healing of our precious world. The global expressions of suffering— violence, the oppression of nondominant populations, the unsustainable and addictive consuming that threatens this earth—all arise out of fear and are rooted in feelings of separation and otherness. Radical compassion expresses the truth of our interdependence and mutual belonging. Living true to ourselves becomes, in its fullness, living true to our collective path of healing and freedom, our shared yearning for a peaceful, loving world.

Please remember and trust we’re on this journey of awakening together. May you find true happiness and freedom on the path.

With loving blessings, Tara

PART I

How Attention Heals





ONE


RAIN Creates a Clearing

Do not try to save the whole world or do anything grandiose. Instead, create a clearing in the dense forest of your life.

• MARTHA POSTLEWAITE

W e all get lost in the dense forest of our lives, entangled in incessantworry and planning, in judgments of others, and in our busy striving to meet demands and solve problems. When we’re caught in that thicket, it’s easy to lose sight of what matters most. We forget how much we long to be kind and openhearted. We forget our ties to this sacred earth and to all living beings. And in a deep way, we forget who we are.

This forgetting is a part of being in trance—a partially unconscious state that, like a dream, is disconnected from the whole of reality. When we’re in trance, our minds are narrowed, fixated, and usually immersed in thought. Our hearts are often defended, anxious, or numb. Once you recognize the signs of trance, you will begin to see it everywhere, in yourself and others. You are in trance when you are living on autopilot, when you feel walled off and separate from those around you, when you are caught up in feeling fearful, angry, victimized, or deficient.

The good news is that we all have the capacity to free ourselves. When we are lost in the forest, we can create a clearing simply by pausing and turning from our clamoring thoughts to become aware of our moment-to-moment experience. I call this wakeful and immediate awareness “presence.” It is also referred to as consciousness, spirit, Buddha nature, true nature, the awakened heartmind, and many other names. When we’ve reconnected fully to presence, we can open to

what is going on inside us—the changing flow of sensations, feelings, and thoughts—without any resistance. This allows us to live our life moments with clarity and compassion. The shift from being lost in unconscious mental and emotional reactivity to inhabiting our full presence is an awakening from trance.

As we begin our journey together, the four steps of RAIN— Recognize, Allow, Investigate, Nurture—will be our tool for arriving in presence. Simply put, RAIN awakens mindfulness and compassion, applies them to the places where we are stuck, and untangles emotional suffering. It is easy to learn the basics, and you can begin to use the steps right away. RAIN creates a clearing in the dense forest, and in this clearing you can recover your full heart and spirit.

In this chapter, I’ll walk you briefly through each step of RAIN and offer a simple form of the practice—a warm-up—that you can apply in everyday situations. But first, the story of an afternoon when I needed RAIN.

“NOT ENOUGH TIME”

My dense forest hums with a background mantra: There’s not enough time. I know I’m not alone; many of us speed through the day, anxiously crossing tasks off the list. This often comes hand in hand with feeling beleaguered, annoyed at interruptions, and worried about what’s around the corner.

My anxiety escalates when I’m preparing for an upcoming teaching event. I remember an afternoon some years ago when I was in lastminute mode. I was madly searching through my very disorganized electronic files, trying to find material for a talk I’d be giving that evening on loving kindness. Much like the files, my mind was stirred up and muddy. At one point, my eighty-three-year-old mother, who had come to live with my husband, Jonathan, and me, popped into my office. She started to tell me about an article she liked from The New Yorker. But seeing me glued to the computer screen (and probably frowning), she quietly placed the magazine on my desk and left. As I turned to watch her retreat, something in me just stopped. She often came by for a casual chat, and now I was struck by the reality that she

wouldn’t always be around for these companionable moments. And then I was struck again: Here I was, ignoring my mom and mentally scurrying around to compose a talk on love!

This wasn’t the first time I was jarred by forgetting what mattered. During that first year my mom lived with us, I repeatedly felt squeezed by the additional demands on my time. Often when we had dinner together, I’d be looking for the break in the conversation when I could excuse myself and get back to work. Or we’d be on errands or going to one of her doctor’s appointments, and rather than enjoying her company, I’d be fixated on how quickly we could get everything done. Our time together often felt obligatory: She was lonely, and I was the main person around. While she didn’t guilt-trip me—she was grateful for whatever time I offered—I felt guilty. And then when I’d slow down some, I also felt deep sadness.

That afternoon in my office, I decided to take a time-out and call on RAIN to help me deal with my anxiety about being prepared. I left my desk, went to a comfortable chair, and took a few moments to settle myself before beginning.

The first step was simply to Recognize (R) what was going on inside me—the circling of anxious thoughts and guilty feelings.

The second step was to Allow (A) what was happening by breathing and letting be. Even though I didn’t like what I was feeling, my intention was not to fix or change anything and, just as important, not to judge myself for feeling anxious or guilty.

Allowing made it possible to collect and deepen my attention before starting the third step: to Investigate (I) what felt most difficult. Now, with interest, I directed my attention to the feelings of anxiety in my body—a physical tightness, pulling and pressure around my heart. I asked the anxious part of me what it was believing, and the answer

was deeply familiar: It believed I was going to fail. If I didn’t have

every teaching and story fleshed out in advance, I’d do a bad job and

let people down. But that same anxiety made me unavailable to my mother, so I was also failing someone I loved dearly. As I became conscious of these pulls of guilt and fear, I continued to Investigate. Contacting that torn, anxious part of myself, I asked, “What do you most need right now?” I could immediately sense that it needed care and reassurance that I was not going to fail in any real way. It needed

to trust that the teachings would flow through me, and to trust the love that flows between my mother and me.

I’d arrived at the fourth step of RAIN, Nurture (N), and I sent a gentle message inward, directly to that anxious part: “It’s okay, sweetheart. You’ll be all right; we’ve been through this so many times before . . . trying to come through on all fronts.” I could feel a warm, comforting energy spreading through my body. Then there was a distinct shift: My heart softened a bit, my shoulders relaxed, and my mind felt more clear and open.

I sat still for another minute or two and let myself rest in this clearing, rather than quickly jumping back into work.

My pause for RAIN took only a few minutes, but it made a big difference. When I returned to my desk, I was no longer caught inside the story line that something bad was around the corner. Now that I wasn’t tight with anxiety, my thoughts and notes began to flow, and I remembered a story that was perfect for the talk. Pausing for RAIN

had enabled me to reengage with the clarity and openheartedness that I hoped to talk about that evening. And later that afternoon, my mom and I took a short, sweet walk in the woods, arms linked.

Since then, I’ve done a brief version of RAIN with anxiety countless times. My anxiety hasn’t gone away, but something fundamental has changed. The anxiety doesn’t take over. I don’t get lost in the dense forest of trance. Instead, when I pause and then shift my attention from my story about getting things done to my actual experience in my body and heart, there’s a spontaneous shift to increased presence and kindness. Often I’ll keep working, but sometimes I decide to change gears, to step outside and play with my pup, make some tea, or water the plants. There’s more choice.

OUR PATHWAY OUT OF TRANCE: TAKING A U-TURN

When I’m in the trance of busily speeding through the day, I’m typically lost in thoughts, disconnected from my body, and cut off from my heart. RAIN provides a way out of trance through what I call a “Uturn” in attention.

We are taking a U-turn whenever we shift our attention from an outward fixation—another person, our thoughts, or our emotionally driven stories about what’s going on—to the real, living experience in our body. It’s like being at a scary movie where we’re totally gripped by the story on the screen and then suddenly become aware: Okay, it’s just a movie. I’m watching it with hundreds of other people. I can feel the seat under me, feel myself breathing. And we’re back again, aware of our own presence, grounded in our real life.

Only by purposefully bringing attention to our inner experience can we move from trance toward healing. We need to become aware of the circling anxious thoughts, the habitual tightness in our shoulders, the pressure from being in a rush. Then we can begin to turn from our stories—about someone else’s wrongness, about our own deficiencies, about trouble around the corner—to directly feel our fears, hurts, and vulnerability, and ultimately the tender wakefulness of our heart. This all-important shift unfolds progressively through the steps of RAIN. But the key is, we have to first realize we’re in trance!

AM I IN TRANCE OR IN PRESENCE?

In teaching about awareness, I often use an image created by Joseph Campbell: a circle with a line through it.

Above the line is everything we are conscious of, and below the line is everything outside our conscious awareness—a hidden world of fears, aversion, conditioning, and beliefs. To the degree that we’re living below the line, we’re in trance.

Being in trance is like being in a dream.We’re unaware that there’s a larger, living reality. And awakening from trance is like waking from a dream. We become self-aware, directly experiencing our inner life, the world we belong to, and the space of awareness itself. Living above the line is living in presence.





Presence has three primary characteristics: wakefulness, openness,

and tenderness or love. Many spiritual traditions describe presence as

an open, sunlit sky. When presence is full, like the sky it is luminous and boundless, and it provides warmth and nourishment for life. All kinds of weather systems pass through it—happiness, sorrow, fear, excitement, grief—but like the sky itself, presence can hold them all. We’ve all touched presence. We’re resting in presence in the moments before sleep when we become still and relaxed, listening to the rain on the roof. There’s a background of presence when we gaze in wonder at a star-filled sky. We open to presence in gratitude for someone’s unexpected kindness. We may never forget the presence we feel as we witness a birth or a death. Past and future recede, thoughts quiet, and we’re aware of being right here, right now.

In contrast, trance encloses us in a virtual reality of thoughts and emotionally charged stories. We’re trying to solve problems, satisfy desires, get rid of discomfort, or make our way to a future when things might be better. We are at the mercy of unconscious beliefs, feelings, and memories that drive our decisions and reactions to life. Not only that, but our unconscious wants and fears shape our deepest sense of who we are. When we’re in trance, we usually feel separate or alone, threatened, and/or incomplete.

Our daily trance can feel ordinary and familiar, wrapping us in a cocoon of habit. It can carry us in pleasurable fantasy, immerse us in obsessive thinking, and tumble us in waves of painful emotion. But whatever the content of our trance, we are cut off from ourselves and cut off from our capacity to connect authentically with those around

us. We’re just not all there!

How do we know when we’re in trance? We often don’t know. But I’ve heard many people describe how they woke up to their particular versions of being under the line, in trance.

FLAGS OF TRANCE

I realize I’ve just gone through a whole bag of trail mix.

Everybody’s the bad guy today—my kids, my boss, my partner—I’m finding fault with the world.

I catch myself sizing up other men to see who’s the most dominant.

Even the small stuff feels like “just too much.”

I’m listening to someone and planning how to get outside for a cigarette.

I lose an hour following links online.



My neck starts hurting, and I realize my shoulders are up and knotted and that I’ve been anxious for hours.

I notice the inner voice (my mother’s) saying, “Can’t you do anything right?” I’m walking through a store and suddenly realize I’m comparing my body with every other woman’s I see.

I’m rushing around trying to get things done, and I hurt myself or break something or make a stupid mistake.

Recognizing our flags helps us to step out of trance. For me, this means that when I catch myself anxiously rerunning my to-do list, or feeling guilty about letting someone down, I become more alert. These wake-up calls help bring into consciousness my fear of falling short and the physical tension I’m carrying. Then I can remember that my fearful beliefs aren’t truth and that I have more choice as to how to spend my time.





TRANCE


PRESENCE


unconscious—below the line asleep, in a dream

caught or possessed by emotions dissociated

heart defended or numb

reactive to experiences

grasping or resisting

conscious—above the line wakeful, lucid, aware

emotions witnessed mindfully

in contact with feelings

heart caring and tender responsive to experiences balanced, open, and discerning



Ask yourself, “Right now, what is my experience of presence?” or “Is there anything between me and presence?” Even these simple inquiries can alert you to trance and begin to awaken your awareness. Or look back on your day and scan for the times when you were under the line. Can you identify some of the flags of trance for you? Sometimes in trance there’s just enough consciousness to recognize that you’re struggling, conflicted, shut down, or anxious. These wakeup calls let you know you need the healing—the sunlit sky—that is available above the line. This is when you call on RAIN.

LOVE SHINES THROUGH THE CLEARING

Four years after moving in with Jonathan and me, my mother was diagnosed with lung cancer. One afternoon six months later—about three weeks before her death—I sat by her bedside reading from a

book of short stories we both love. She fell asleep as I was reading, and I sat there watching her resting easily. After some minutes, she woke up and mumbled, “Oh, I thought you’d be gone; you have so much to do.” I leaned over, kissed her cheek, and continued to sit with her. She fell back to sleep, a slight smile on her lips.

I did have a lot to do. I always have a lot to do. I flashed on being too busy to pause and talk about that New Yorker article, and all those times I’d rushed through our shared dinners, felt dutiful about spending time together and guilty when I saw her walking outside alone. But my practice of RAIN had changed something. In our final years together, I was able to pause and really be there. I was there for making our supersized salads, for walking our dogs by the river, for watching the news, for chatting long after we’d finished a meal.

Twenty minutes later, my mother woke up again and whispered, “You’re still here.” I took her hand and she soon drifted off. I began crying silently, and something in her was attuned because she squeezed my hand. Oh, I’d miss her terribly. But my tears were also tears of gratitude for all the moments we lived together. And for the clearings that made this possible. On the day of her death, I was filled with immense sorrow and love, but no regrets.

Learning to create a clearing gives us our life. It is what opens us to the unfolding of radical compassion. When we’re in trance, we can’t really listen as our child shares excitedly about what happened at school. We can’t pick up that a colleague is acting uptight because they are struggling with self-doubt and fear. We miss out on sunsets, chances to play, openings for intimacy, attunement to our own loneliness or longings. The practice of RAIN brings us above the line and lets us reconnect with presence and our naturally caring hearts.

REFLECTION: THE U-TURN TO PRESENCE

You might consider this a warm-up to practicing RAIN, something you can explore when you’re stressed, rushing, and anxious. This

simple reflection can reconnect you with a sense of inner resourcefulness, self-compassion, and choice as to how you live your days.



Experiment with the U-turn at a time when you realize you’ve been lost in thought—perhaps obsessive worrying or planning, judging or fantasizing. Begin by pausing, sitting comfortably, and allowing your eyes to close. Take a few deep breaths, and with each exhale let go of any obvious tension in your mind and body.

Now shift your attention fully away from any remaining stories or thoughts, and notice your actual present-moment experience. What sensations are you aware of in your body? Are there any strong emotions present? Do you feel anxious or restless as you try to step out of your mental stories? Do you feel pulled to resume your activity? Can you simply stay right here, for just these few moments, and be with whatever is unfolding inside you? What happens if you intentionally regard your experience with kindness?

When you resume activity, notice if you sense any shift in the quality of your presence, energy, and mood.

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES





Is it possible to experience presence when you’re angry?


Yes! You are in a state of presence (above the line) when you’re aware of the blaming thoughts and physical experience of anger. During these moments, in addition to the anger, there’s a sense of witnessing the anger and some choice in how you respond. In contrast, you’re in trance if you’re lost inside the cycling thoughts and feelings of blame, with no sense of choice or control.





Do you have to follow a particular spiritual path to work with RAIN?


RAIN is a tool that can be used by anyone seeking to deepen self-understanding, self-compassion, compassion for others, and emotional healing and spiritual awakening. There is no requirement to hold a particular set of religious or spiritual

beliefs. Whatever your beliefs, RAIN will enhance your direct experience of being awake and open, present and kind.





I have a regular mindfulness practice. Is RAIN a substitute for this? Or do they fit together?


They naturally weave together. The first two steps of RAIN, Recognize and Allow, are the foundation of mindful awareness and compassion. The second two steps, Investigate and Nurture, deepen mindfulness and directly activate compassion.

RAIN can be your tool for bringing mindfulness and compassion to a particular challenge. To explore this, continue with your regular mindfulness practice until you feel caught in a difficult emotion. In that moment, call on RAIN to guide you in systematically offering a mindful and kind attention directly to

the emotional tangle. Once the tangle has loosened, return to your regular practice of moment-to-moment mindfulness.

In addition to including RAIN in the midst of a meditation sitting, you can pause anytime during the day when you feel stuck or challenged and call on RAIN to assist you.





Sometimes when I’m doing yoga, strong emotions like fear, anger, and self-doubt will come up. Can RAIN help at these times?


It’s quite natural to experience strong emotions during a range of body-mind practices like yoga, tai chi, chi gung, breathwork, Reiki, guided imagery, and biofeedback. Many people have found that integrating a pause for RAIN opens the way to profound emotional healing and brings a powerful synergy to their path.





TWO


RAIN Says Yes to Life

The First Two Steps of RAIN

Between the stimulus and the response there is a space, and in that space is your power and your freedom.

• VIKTOR FRANKL

T he deepest transformations in our lives come down to somethingvery simple: We learn to respond, not react, to what is going on inside us. What happens, for example, when something triggers our anger or anxiety? If our habit is to react by turning on ourselves, or by blaming or hurting other people, or by feeling victimized, we are adding to the suffering of trance. But if instead we awaken a mindful presence with the first two steps of RAIN—Recognize and Allow—we are on a path that frees our hearts.

HAVING TEA WITH MARA

One of the greatest myths from the Buddhist tradition shows how we can walk this path in the face of difficulty.

You may be familiar with images of the Buddha meditating all night long under the Bodhi tree until he experienced full liberation. The shadow god Mara (who represents the universal energies of greed, hatred, and delusion) tried everything he knew to make him fail— sending violent storms, beautiful temptresses, raging demons, and massive armies to distract him. Siddhartha met them all with an

awake and compassionate presence, and as the morning star appeared in the sky, he became a Buddha, a fully realized being.

But this was not the end of his relationship with Mara!

In the five decades following his enlightenment, the Buddha traveled throughout northern India teaching all who were interested the path of presence, compassion, and freedom. In fields and forest groves, in villages and along riverbanks, farmers and tradesmen, townspeople and nobles, monks and nuns, all gathered to hear his

wise teachings.

And as the Zen master Thich Nhat Hanh tells the story, Mara sometimes appeared as well. The Buddha’s loyal attendant Ananda would spot him lurking furtively around the edge of a gathering and race to the Buddha with alarm. “Terrible news, the Evil One has returned! We’ve got to do something!” And each time, the Buddha would regard Ananda with great kindness. “Not so, Ananda,” he’d reply. Then he’d stroll over to Mara and with a firm yet gentle voice say, “I see you, Mara. . . . Come, let’s have tea.” And the Buddha himself would serve Mara as an honored guest.

This is what’s possible for us. Just imagine that Mara appears in your life as a surge of fear about failure, or hurt about another’s neglect or disrespect. Now, what if your response were to pause and say, “I see you, Mara”—Recognizing. And “Let’s have tea”—Allowing. Instead of avoiding your feelings, instead of lashing out in anger or turning on yourself with self-judgment, you are responding to life with more clarity and graciousness, kindness and ease. By taking these first two steps of RAIN, you have entered the path of freedom.

I consider this story of the Buddha good news for all of us. Even for the Buddha, the painful energies of Mara continued to arise. We’re not the only ones who have to keep reengaging with storms of confusion, with conflicting desires, with arrows of fear or hurt or anger. And we have a liberating practice that can awaken us in the midst!

Ask yourself, “When has Mara recently appeared?” What would it be like at one of these times to say, “I see you, Mara. . . . Let’s have tea”?

“NO” IS A HABIT

In inviting Mara to tea, the Buddha was saying yes to the present moment and yes to all of life.

In contrast, our habitual ways of saying no—of resisting or avoiding our experience—create more suffering. Consider what happens when Mara appears in the shape of fear, hatred, anger, or hurt. Our mind says no by immediately assuming that something is wrong, finding something or someone to blame, and trying to eliminate the problem. Our body says no by tensing or numbing; our heart says no by becoming defensive or closing down. Meanwhile, our behaviors say no when we lash out or withdraw or become preoccupied. And while we might be somewhat aware of our “no,” for the most part we are below the line, lost in our unconscious efforts to control life.

Saying yes is unfamiliar and disorienting and feels potentially risky. When we perceive a threat, our primal conditioning is to contract and say no. In workshops, I often ask students to reflect on a difficult situation and then encourage them to watch the many different ways their body and mind resist the raw emotions going on inside them. They see, often with sadness, how their efforts to protect themselves are actually adding more pain to their lives.

One man, who had been bullied as a child, now had a critical supervisor who regularly threatened him with poor reports. As he replayed a recent confrontation, he could feel his stomach clenching in fear and his heart pounding. Instead of taking time afterward to open to his own experience (saying yes), he’d go right into blaming himself for feeling intimidated and mentally rage against his supervisor. Then he’d plunge back into activity, moving paperwork along faster while making more errors and communicating less clearly. His “no” perpetuated a familiar sense of himself as deficient and victimized.

An older woman who was estranged from her adult son traced her unconscious “no” to his occasional emails. She’d read his terse message, ask herself tearfully, “What did I do to deserve this?” and then begin to obsess about her daughter-in-law, whom she blamed for the problem. Inevitably, she realized, her resentment toward her daughter-in-law would leak into her return email. For her, “no” kept her trapped in feeling disliked and rejected.

Whatever form our “no” takes, it is a way of tensing against reality and trying to avoid the raw pain of emotional suffering. But “no” can

also become a flag that tells us we’re in trance and need to deepen our attention. The more quickly we become aware of our “no,” the better we can respond to Mara. The difficult situations that evoke a habitual “no” are perfect opportunities to experiment with the profound “yes” that is expressed by Recognize and Allow, our entry into RAIN.

WHEN MARA IS ANGRY

Roger, a top executive at an IT company, had a reputation for being impatient, irritable, and lightning quick to pounce on anyone who fell short on the job. He was even harder on his family. He’d rage at his teenage sons for dishes in the sink, loud music, or arriving home late. He’d lash out at his wife when she didn’t do things exactly his way. Roger was caught in a reactive “no.”

Finally, at his wife’s insistence, Roger went to see a psychologist, who recommended meditation as a way to become more mindful and less reactive, and he became a regular at my weekly classes. After several months, Roger joined a daylong workshop on healing difficult emotions and asked to speak with me during the lunch break. He told me he had been meditating ten to twenty minutes a day but that his temper was still out of control. “I hate myself for losing it. I hate who I become,” he said with disgust. “But it keeps happening again and again.”

We found a quiet spot, and I introduced Roger to the R (Recognize) and the A (Allow) of RAIN. These ways of paying attention were already familiar to him from meditation class. Recognizing and Allowing—noticing what’s happening in the present moment and, without judgment, letting it be—are the foundation of mindfulness. But now I would show him how to apply them directly to his habitual reactions.

We began by focusing on an incident from earlier in the week. A staff member had arrived at a meeting with an incomplete report, and Roger had exploded, berating him in front of the group. I suggested he close his eyes and follow his breath for a few moments, just as he did when he sat down to meditate. Once he’d collected his attention, I asked him to bring to mind the most upsetting part of the situation

and then to ask himself the key question for the Recognition step: What is happening inside me? I guided him as he sat with his eyes closed: “Just witness the whole mix of thoughts, feelings, and sensations . . . and note what stands out. You might mentally whisper to yourself, ‘Blaming . . . anger, anger,’ or name the feelings in your body: ‘heat . . . pressure . . . exploding.’” He was quiet for a few moments and then nodded.

Now I introduced the step of Allowing by suggesting a second key question: Can I be with this? or Can I let this be? Again I guided him. “With Allowing, you’re agreeing to pause . . . to stay and feel your

direct experience, even though it’s really uncomfortable . . . even though you’d do almost anything not to feel it. See if you can whisper yes to the experience . . . and pause, letting whatever is there be as it is. That doesn’t mean you’re saying these feelings and thoughts are okay. You’re just saying yes to the reality that they are here right now.” I noticed he was hardly breathing, so I added, “It can really help to be mindful of your breath . . . your breath will help you stay present with the feelings in your body.”

Once I saw he was breathing more fully, I waited about ten seconds and then suggested he take a few more conscious breaths and open his eyes. He looked at me for a moment and raised his brows quizzically. “That’s it? Name anger and—just like we tell the kids—count to ten?!?” We both laughed.

“Well, not quite, but try it out,” I said. “Of course, you won’t be closing your eyes if you’re with other people, and there will probably

be times when you forget and just get mad. But keep trying to remember, note what’s going on inside, and Allow . . . breathe with your feelings . . . and sure, count to ten!”

Roger was game and curious. I told him his daily meditation practice would support his efforts to apply Recognize and Allow, and I invited him to email to tell me how it was going. As we parted, I said, “You can do this . . . and it will make a real difference.” He gave me a thumbs-up.

WHAT YOU PRACTICE GETS STRONGER

I like to tell students the story of a man who went to a mindfulness retreat because his therapist said he’d feel better if he learned to meditate. The retreat turned out to be a real roller coaster. Yes, there were moments of calm, but he also plunged deeply into fear, anger, and grief. The next time he saw his therapist, he told him he’d suffered horribly. “How could you have promised I’d feel better?” Nodding sagely, the therapist replied, “You are feeling better . . . you’re feeling your fear better, feeling your anger better, feeling your grief better!” This always gets a laugh of recognition. Mindfulness meditation, the Recognize and Allow of RAIN, trains us to wake up out of distracting thoughts and make the U-turn, bringing a full, embodied attention to our moment-to-moment experience. We inevitably encounter everything we’ve been avoiding—the loneliness, hurts, and fears. And yet if we practice regularly, we discover that we can maintain a balanced, openhearted presence in the midst of the storm. Thanks to current understandings of neuroplasticity, we now know that our brains can change throughout our lives. This means that even the most deeply rooted and harmful habits can be deconditioned. The phrase that sums this up is this: “Neurons that fire together, wire together.” Our habits are sustained by repeating patterns of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that have created and reinforced neural networks in our brain. By changing our patterns of thinking, feeling, and behaving, we can change these neural networks.

Many research studies have shown that mindfulness directly and positively impacts the structure and function of the brain. If we go into trance when we encounter stress—rushing around, worrying, judging —we reinforce the fear-based ruts in our mind. If instead we become mindful in times of stress, learning to pause and to Recognize and Allow our experience, something different is possible. Instead of reacting from our passing wants and fears, we can respond to our circumstances from a deeper intelligence, creativity, and care. This creates new patterning, new neural pathways in the brain that correlate with true well-being and peace.

The more you say yes to experience, the more the openness and presence of that “yes” will be embodied in living cells and shape your entire life experience.

RECOGNIZE AND ALLOW: A CLOSER LOOK

I introduced the steps of Recognize and Allow in chapter 1, but I want to say more here because these core elements of mindfulness are the foundation of RAIN.

Recognition starts the minute you focus your attention on whatever thoughts, emotions, feelings, or sensations you are experiencing right now. The key question here is this: “What is happening inside me?” See if you can take the perspective of a nonjudging witness, and be curious! Take some time to notice whatever attracts your attention. There may be distressing thoughts, anxious feelings, hurt, confusion, or sorrow. Try to let go of any preconceived ideas and just listen in a kind, receptive way to your body and heart. You don’t have to search. Simply become still and notice whatever is going on.

Sometimes you’ll discover a whole swirl of experiences: confusion, anger, racing thoughts, anxiety. That’s fine, just note any part of the cluster that stands out. There are other times when you may start out feeling numb or empty. In fact, these are emotional states, too. Simply name them: “empty,” “numb.”

Recognizing is the first step of awakening from trance. It may take only a few moments, but it is crucial. You’re lifting your head above

the waves of fear or anger; you’re becoming a witnessing presence. Allowing, the next step, asks you to “let be” whatever thoughts, emotions, feelings, or sensations you have just recognized. You initiate it by gently asking, “Can I be with this?” or “Can I let this be?” It’s natural to feel resistance at this point—you wish some of those feelings would go away! Allowing can include the reality of your “no”—the fact that you really hate the way you’re feeling.

Pause as the thoughts and emotions continue to unfold, without trying to control them or doing anything to resolve them. You may feel a strong urge to start analyzing and fixing things. You need to let that be as well. This is a time to let your awareness include everything that is going on inside you.

TWO KEY QUESTIONS OF MINDFULNESS



Ask yourself, “What is happening inside me?”

Now ask, “Can I be with this?” or “Can I let this be?”



Many students I work with help themselves “let be” by mentally whispering an encouraging word or phrase. You might feel the grip of fear or the swelling of deep grief and whisper yes. You might say, “This too” or “It’s okay.”

There are degrees of Allowing. At first, you may feel you’re just going through the motions, “putting up” with unpleasant sensations. Or you may realize you’ve made a secret bargain—“I’ll say yes to shame, and it will magically disappear.” Yet even simply whispering yes begins to give you a sense of more space, more room for what is there. Your entire being is not so rallied in resistance. As you continue to practice, your defenses will ease up. You may feel a physical sense of yielding or relaxing and opening to waves of experience.

While Allowing doesn’t necessarily reduce unpleasantness, it radically shifts our relationship to pain in a way that reduces suffering. Imagine the difference between pouring a cup of dye into a sink full of water and pouring the same amount into a lake. Allowing expands us in a way that enables us to include, not fight, physical and emotional pain. Psychologists call this “affect tolerance.”

Remembering this potential for healing helps you say yes to the reality of this moment. Together, Recognizing and Allowing enable a shift from a constricting trance to a more awake, spacious presence that can eventually include all of life. It is from this mindful awareness that you will discover fresh, creative, and more compassionate responses to life’s challenges.

THE POWER OF YES

After several months, Roger emailed me a progress report. He’d been meditating before work each morning, and he found those times of stillness to be very calming and centering. What happened later in the day was less predictable. According to his calculations, when his anger was triggered, he managed to pause about one in four times.

Sometimes the Recognizing and Allowing defused only a bit of his anger, and he still lashed out in ways he regretted. But at other times, it was starting to make a difference. His email ended with this story:

I met with one of my project managers last Monday. He

admitted his team was behind schedule on one of our major projects, that he had personally let a few things fall between the cracks.

I almost let loose on him, but remembered to stop . . . to

breathe, to ask what was happening, to name “anger” and to let

it be there. He was telling me how there was no way around late delivery. Well, there I was, pausing, breathing, and something in

me started shifting because instead of focusing on him screwing

up, I was taking in how dedicated, how honest this guy was.

How thoughtful. So I surprised both of us and said, “Look I

know you’re doing the best you can.”

He suddenly had tears in his eyes. That’s when he told me his wife had been diagnosed with stage-4 breast cancer, that (like

me) he has two teens, that it’s been really tough.

Tara, we hugged, both of us with tears. A few months ago, I would have unwittingly added to this man’s burden. And there

we were hugging. It was one of my saddest and best

moments . . . it was like I had found my way back to being a real human being.

Our deeply grooved habits of “no,” our angry reactivity, anxious worry, defensiveness, addictive behavior, and self-blame, keep us from living true to ourselves. When we interrupt these habits with a mindful, allowing presence, we begin to access our full human potential. This is the power and freedom inherent in “yes.” It may help us end a prolonged conflict and find a way to reconciliation. We may become able to speak a difficult truth that has kept us from authenticity. We may let go of overconsuming or oversleeping and live in a more healthy way. Whatever the pattern of “no,” practicing these first steps of RAIN opens up the possibility for change.

When we encounter strong emotions, we often need to deepen mindfulness and self-compassion by moving on to the second two

steps of RAIN, Investigate and Nurture. This is when having tea with Mara becomes lively and profoundly transformative! As you will see in chapter 3, the full practice of RAIN is critical in healing more deeply entrenched patterns.

REFLECTION: SAYING YES— AWAKENING MINDFULNESS

Take a few moments to sit quietly, collecting your attention by resting in the movement of your breath.

Bring to mind a situation that elicits a moderately strong emotional reaction of hurt, anger, fear, or shame (not one that might trigger trauma). It might involve a conflict within your family or with friends, an addictive behavior, or something difficult at work. Review that situation as if you were watching a movie until you get to the part that most activates strong emotions. Freeze the frame, and deepen your attention to whatever is going on that most disturbs you.

Ask yourself, “What is happening inside me?” and notice whatever feelings are most painful or intense.

Now, become aware of your attitude toward those feelings, all the ways you might be saying no to your experience. Are you thinking something is wrong, this shouldn’t be happening, wishing it would go away, blaming yourself, blaming another—trying to change it or push

it away? To experiment, send the word and energy of “no” directly into the place inside that most distresses you. Sense what happens to your body, heart, and mind when you reject what you’re feeling. And notice if you often feel this way, if it seems to be a familiar part of yourself. Now take a few full breaths. Then remind yourself again of the most difficult part of this situation and recall the feelings that are most painful. But this time, ask yourself, “Can I be with this?” Or

alternately, “Can I let this be?” Sense that you have the space of awareness to include everything you’ve discovered, that you can fully allow it to be as it is. You can even say yes to the parts of you that are saying no and resisting what’s happening.

Experiment by directing the word and energy of “yes” to whatever you are feeling most intensely. What does it feel like in your body

when you say yes? How does “yes” affect your heart? Your mind? Let

the “yes” be as full and unconditional as possible. What is your sense

of your own being when you are saying yes?

Imagine the days and weeks to come. What would it be like if this situation arises again and you could name the difficult emotions,

pause fully, and Allow them to be as they are? What possibilities might open up if you could pause and say yes to your inner life?

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES





I’m concerned about saying yes when I’ve hurt someone, or when someone’s hurt me. Isn’t it



important to say no to harmful behavior?


When you are saying yes, you are honestly acknowledging and opening to the reality of the present moment—your actual feelings and sensations. But you are in no way saying yes to harmful behaviors—your own or others’. If someone has been emotionally abusive and you say yes to your feelings of fear or anger, your “yes” does not include what that person has said or done. In fact, when you recognize and allow your inner experience, you’ll find you can say no and set boundaries with greater courage and clarity.





But won’t saying yes to my anger just inflame me more, make it more likely that I’ll take it out on



others?


Saying yes to anger—to the energetic heat and explosiveness in your body—is different from saying yes to the content of your angry thoughts. “Yes” to the energy of anger is not a confirmation of the “rightness” of thoughts. We are not agreeing that “yes, soand-so really is bad or wrong,” or “yes, I’m going to get back at him.” We are simply acknowledging the reality of our anger. In fact, if our habit has been to lash out when we’re hurt, saying yes enables us to pause and make the U-turn, staying present with

our experience instead of reacting. In that pause, we might find what is buried under the anger. And, like Roger, we might also discover that we can choose other ways to respond. We are no longer trapped in an old pattern of hurt and blame.





When I’m judging myself for being a “bad” person, saying yes feels as if I were just confirming that



I’m really flawed.


Just as with angry thoughts, when there are judging thoughts, “yes” simply Recognizes and Allows them to be there. It in no way affirms that the judgment itself (“I’m bad”) is the truth. Like working with anger, when you Recognize and Allow judging, it becomes possible to make the U-turn and uncover the fear or shame that often accompanies the judgment you’re feeling. This brings you above the line. You are increasingly able to respond to your own inner critic with more perspective, wisdom, and compassion.





What if saying yes—Recognizing and Allowing—makes my fear or shame even more intense? What if they are too much to handle?


Every emotion has an arc—it arises, peaks, and passes—unless we are continuously fueling it with thoughts. You may connect with an emotion when it is just arising and, by saying yes, Allow it to express its full intensity. If this is tolerable, it serves healing: The emotion is free to naturally arise and pass, and you are strengthening your capacity to rest in an open, witnessing presence. But if you feel that the intensity might be overwhelming, then this is not the time to say yes. The following chapters (particularly chapter 6, on fear) will show you many ways to seek support, strengthen your resilience, and develop other resources to rely on before you return to the practice of RAIN.





THREE


RAIN Reveals Your True Self

Steps Three and Four of RAIN

Life is this simple: we are living in a world that is absolutely transparent and the divine is shining through it all the time. This is not just a nice story or a fable, it is true.

• THOMAS MERTON

I n the mid-1950s, a new highway in Bangkok was routed through anancient temple, and the monks were forced to relocate a massive clay statue of the Buddha that had been loved and venerated for many generations. A crane was brought in, but as they began to lift the Buddha, its huge weight shifted, and the clay began to crack. They quickly lowered the statue to the ground and, knowing a storm was coming, covered it with a tarp.

Later that evening, the abbot went to inspect the damage and make sure the statue wasn’t getting wet. As he shone his flashlight under the tarp, he noticed a gleam of reflected light coming from the largest crack. When he looked more closely, he wondered if there was something underneath the thick clay. He ran to wake the other monks, and together, with chisels and hammers, they began chipping along the cracks. The gleam became brighter and brighter, until finally, after long hours of work, the monks stepped back and stared in awe at the sight before them: a Buddha of solid gold.

Historians believe that several hundred years earlier, the temple monks themselves had covered the statue with clay. Anticipating an attack by a neighboring army, they hoped to protect their precious

Buddha from being looted or destroyed. The monks were all killed in the ensuing battle, but the Buddha survived intact.

When monks today share this story, they say that in the face of threats or challenges each of us has a habitual way of covering the gold. Our suffering comes when we identify with our protective covering and forget the loving awareness that is intrinsic to our being.

REMEMBERING THE GOLD

I read about the Golden Buddha a month or so after my first husband and I agreed to end our marriage. Because Alex and I had shared a spiritual practice for ten years, we’d expected to navigate divorce with friendship and respect. Yet here we were, caught in a hostile standoff over finances, child-care schedules, and many other details of creating two households. We were both seeing red, not gold!

Hoping that we could get past some of the bitterness, I’d postponed telling Narayan, our five-year-old son, about our plans to separate. But now, with the image of the Golden Buddha in my mind, I started to see our blame and mistrust as clay coverings. That helped me remember the way Alex adored our son, his healing hands, how wonderful he was with plants and animals and small children. It helped me remember the love still there beneath my own fear and anger.

Over the next few days, the image of the Golden Buddha kept arising, and each time I felt more at peace with the reality that this was a tough season but that we’d come through, friendship intact.

One evening about a week later, I shared the story of the Golden Buddha with Narayan. Then I told him his dad and I wouldn’t be living together anymore and explained how we’d both still love and care for him. His first response was “Okay,” and then after some thoughtful moments he added, “But you still love each other, right?” I was able to say yes truthfully and really feel it. “Loving is the gold,” I told him, “and that doesn’t change.”

If I could have fast-forwarded twenty-seven years, I’d have seen Alex looking on joyfully as Narayan and his wife, Nicole, cuddled with their new baby girl. I’d have seen myself walking on the beach, little

Mia wrapped on my chest, with my husband, Jonathan, at my side. All of us are radiating gold.

WHO ARE WE, REALLY?

I often refer to our protective coverings as our “ego space suit.” This space suit is made of all the strategies and defenses we develop to meet our needs for safety, approval, and love as we navigate through the hurts and conflicts of our families and culture. But as necessary as some of these defenses may be, they can also create suffering. When

we cover over our innocence and purity, our vulnerability and tenderness, we lose sight of our essential being. Our identity becomes linked to our ego space suit, and we forget the gold.

If we widen our lens, we can see that this narrowing of identity is a natural part of our evolutionary unfolding. The primary activity of every living creature is to cling to life and avoid threats. We have a membrane or scales or skin or shell to protect us. We have reflexes and skills and strategies to make our way. Our brains are designed to perceive separateness and react to danger. When we humans emerged as life-forms on this planet, we were already organized around a wanting, fearful self and by extension around the small group or tribe we belonged to. But our story doesn’t end here.

Because we are Homo sapiens sapiens (beings who know that they know), we are self-aware. The most recently evolved part of our brain, the prefrontal cortex, gives us our capacity to witness and feel compassion for whatever’s going on inside us—and in others. As neuroscientists have discovered, learning to deepen our attention with meditation activates the parts of the brain that correlate with selfawareness. We can become aware of our unconscious fears and limiting beliefs; we can recognize how our unmet needs keep us armored or grasping. And we can begin to see how the whole sense of who we are has been confined and obscured by these ego coverings. The mindfulness and compassion of RAIN allow us to awaken from this imprisoning trance right in the middle of our daily lives. Each

time we bring a gentle RAIN to the thick clay of our covering, it

becomes slightly more transparent as our fear and grasping dissolve. Increasingly, the light of our gold shines through.

THE SECOND TWO STEPS OF RAIN: INVESTIGATE AND NURTURE

Sophia’s world had collapsed when her boyfriend broke up with her at the beginning of her junior year of college. She and Zach had been together since freshman year, and Sophia had assumed they’d be life partners. He was everything she wanted—caring, bright, funny, and, when she was insecure, totally affirming. But now he was with someone else. Overwhelmed by anxiety and depression, she fell behind in her work and, on her counselor’s advice, withdrew from school for the semester.

After being at home and working with a therapist for a number of months, Sophia had days when she felt more calm and hopeful. But then she’d imagine going back to school and be flung into panic. There she’d be facing all the stressors alone and, worse, running into Zach and his girlfriend. After Sophia spent a day shut in her bedroom, her mother—a regular at my Wednesday night class—asked if I would see her.

At first Sophia responded politely but briefly to my questions. But when I asked about her special interests at school, she began to tell me about her internship at an inner-city clinic for troubled youth and immediately came to life. She’d been teaching the kids yoga, she said, and co-leading a group on the basics of emotional intelligence. “I love being with them,” she told me, “even when they’re difficult. I get that if they’re causing trouble, it’s because they’re hurting.” She added wistfully, “I miss them more than anything else about being at

college.”

Then Sophia slumped, her eyes downcast. “I sometimes get really anxious; parties are just torture. I’m nervous around my professors, so they probably think I’m ignoring them, and I’m always obsessing

about the next paper or exam. . . . I’m afraid that when I go back, it’s going to get worse again.” Then she added, “It’s like without Zach, I’ve lost my safety net.”

When I began to introduce RAIN, Sophia easily Recognized the self-critical voice in her head that took over when she thought about Zach: “I saw his girlfriend on Facebook . . . she is petite and blond and”—she gestured at her belly—“I probably put on ten pounds since we broke up. That voice tells me he never really loved me, he was just trying to be a hero . . . to save poor, pathetic me.” She started to tear

up and then impatiently dabbed at her eyes.

“Sophia,” I said gently, “for now, can you name what this voice is saying as ‘critical thoughts’ and then just let them be there for a few minutes?” She nodded, and I explained that this step was called Allowing. We’ve Recognized our feelings, sensations, and thoughts, and we’ve stopped pushing them away or fighting them.

Then, after a pause, I guided Sophia into Investigate, the I of RAIN. “Now try to go inside your body—under your thoughts—and notice what you’re most aware of.”

“It’s dark and heavy in there,” she said, “and tight—squeezing.” “Can you tell me where that dark, heavy, tight feeling is the worst?” One hand immediately went to her heart, and I invited her to keep it there. “If that dark, heavy, tight place could communicate, what would it be expressing?”

After some moments of silence, Sophia said, “I see a little girl . . . she’s me . . . crouched inside the darkness.”

“Can you tell what she is believing?”

After a long pause, Sophia said, “That they will see something’s wrong with her, she’s bad in some way . . . and then they will stop loving her.”

“Sophia, what’s it like right now for you to sense this young part of yourself who’s so lonely, so afraid of losing love?” Now Sophia put her face in her hands and began weeping. When she quieted, I gave her some tissues and water.

After a long while, she spoke. “She’s just a child . . . she didn’t do anything wrong . . . it’s so, so sad.”

I nodded and asked, “What does she most need from you?”

Sophia took a deep breath and then sighed. “She wants me to see her and know she’s there . . . she wants to know that I care no matter what.”

We were now about to move into the N of RAIN, Nurturing. I asked Sophia to take a few moments to breathe and then to call on her

wisest, kindest self—the part of her that was able to see that little girl and feel her sadness and tenderness.

“Some people think of this part as their ‘high self’ or ‘future self,’” I explained. “Maybe you experienced this wise and kind place when you were with the children at the clinic, so interested in them, caring about them.”

Sophia opened her eyes and spoke softly. “It’s true . . . that’s how I feel sometimes—those kids are so young . . . having such a hard

time . . . and it’s not their fault.” She paused. “I like that way of putting it . . . my future self.”

She closed her eyes again, and we continued: “Sophia, now try placing your hand on your heart, and just as you might comfort one of those children, send care from your future self to your own younger self . . . and try calling her by her name.”

A few moments later, she began to pat her heart slowly and gently. Then she whispered, “I’m here, Sophia, I want to be with you, I’m

sorry it’s so hard. I care. . . . I really care.”

After a minute or so, I could see her breath become deep and full, and a few moments later she opened her eyes. I asked her how she was feeling. “When I comforted her, something shifted. I actually feel lighter—sad and light and more relaxed. Just now when I was sitting quietly, I felt more like . . . myself . . . who I want to be.”

In our next meeting, I would tell Sophia the story of the Golden Buddha and how we get caught in the protective coverings and forget our goodness. But for now I gave her a simple assignment—to practice RAIN whenever that self-critical voice started in on her, judging and stirring up anxiety. It didn’t matter how long she practiced. What mattered was making the U-turn—turning from her thoughts to Investigate what was going on inside her body and then offering compassion to whatever she found.

As she was leaving, Sophia said, “The only way I can imagine returning to school is if my future self goes in my place.”

I laughed. Then I shared one of my favorite things about RAIN: “The more you Nurture yourself, the more you’ll find you’re living

from your future self—the best of who you are.”

“AFTER THE RAIN”: GLIMPSING THE GOLD

After completing the steps of RAIN and sitting quietly for a short time, Sophia had felt more like herself, who she wanted to be. Those moments of resting and sensing the fullness of our own presence are what I call “After the RAIN.” Just as there’s freshness and clearing

after a real rain, the first fruits of RAIN often appear right after we complete the four steps. Yet in our busy lives, it’s all too easy to miss these precious moments. Instead of moving on immediately, we need to pause and rest in presence. Then we may notice that our sense of who we are has enlarged. We’re no longer inside some limiting story, identified with a fearful or deficient self. We become aware of our natural openness, wakefulness, and tenderness. This is a precious taste of the gold, of our basic goodness.

For Sophia, connecting with this openhearted presence was the beginning of trusting herself. After she returned to college, she wrote me several emails. One began, “I used to think Zach was ‘my safety net.’ Now I realize my future self is always there to hold me.” Then she went on to tell me about a nine-year-old girl at the clinic where she

was interning. The girl had been abused in a foster home, and initially she wouldn’t talk or even make eye contact with the staff. But then, on Sophia’s third visit, the little girl asked her when she was coming back. “I told her next week, and then I asked her if we could have a good-bye hug. She nodded shyly and was pretty stiff, but when we hugged, I knew she didn’t want to let go.”

• • •

There’s a calling within each of us to connect with the gold and live from the gold. We want to manifest our true nature, whether we call it our future self, high self, awakened heart, Buddha nature, Great Spirit, Christ consciousness, or the Divine. While identifying with the ego coverings is a universal part of our evolutionary path, the awakening

of radical compassion frees us from this confining trance. RAIN can guide us home to the luminous and loving awareness that is our essence, and we can live from that compassionate presence. In part 2,

we’ll explore how to bring a healing RAIN directly to the places of fear and woundedness that most often block this inner radiance.

In the chapters to come, you’ll also find suggestions for adapting your RAIN practice to a wide variety of situations. Here is a summary of the foundational steps that you can return to for review at any point.

MEDITATION: RAIN STEP-BY-STEP

Sitting quietly, close your eyes and take a few full breaths. Bring to mind a current situation in which you feel stuck, one that elicits a difficult reaction, such as anger or fear, shame or hopelessness. It may be a conflict with a family member, a chronic sickness, a failure at work, the pain of an addiction, a conversation you now regret. Take some moments to enter the experience—visualizing the scene or situation, remembering the words spoken, sensing the most distressing moments. Contacting the charged essence of the story is the starting place for exploring the healing presence of RAIN.

R: Recognize What Is Happening

As you reflect on this situation, ask yourself, “What is happening

inside me right now?” What sensations are you most aware of? What emotions? Is your mind filled with churning thoughts? Take a moment to become aware of whatever is predominant, or the overall emotional tone of the situation.

A: Allow Life to Be Just as It Is

Send a message to your heart to “let be” this entire experience. Find in yourself the willingness to pause and accept that in these moments “what is . . . is.” You can experiment with mentally whispering words like “yes,” “I consent,” or “let be.”

You might find yourself saying yes to a huge inner “no,” to a body and mind painfully contracted in resistance. You might be saying yes to the part of you that is saying, “I hate this!” That’s a natural part of

the process. At this point in RAIN, you are simply noticing what is true and intending not to judge, push away, or control anything you find.

I: Investigate with a Gentle, Curious Attention

Bring an interested and kind attention to your experience. Some of the following questions may be helpful. Feel free to experiment with them, varying the sequence and content.

What is the worst part of this; what most wants my attention? What is the most difficult/painful thing I am believing?

What emotions does this bring up (fear, anger, grief)?

Where are my feelings about this strongest in my body?

(Note: It’s helpful to scan the throat, chest, and belly.)

What are the feelings like (that is, the felt sense or sensations, such as clenched, raw, hot)?

When I assume the facial expression and body posture that

best reflect these feelings and emotions, what do I notice?

Are these feelings familiar, something I’ve experienced earlier

in my life?

If the most vulnerable hurting part of me could communicate, what would it express (words, feelings, images)?

How does this part want me to be with it?

What does this part most need (from me or from some larger source of love and wisdom)?

A final note: Many students initially see “Investigate” as an invitation to fire up their cognitive skills—analyzing the situation or themselves, identifying the many possible roots of their suffering. This is a common misunderstanding, and it can distract from the essence of Investigation—awakening our somatic awareness. While mental exploration may enhance our understanding, opening to our embodied experience is the gateway to healing and freedom.

Instead of thinking about what’s going on, keep bringing your attention to your body, directly contacting the felt sense and

sensations of your most vulnerable place. Once you are fully present, listen for what this place truly needs to begin healing.

N: Nurture with Loving Presence

As you sense what is needed, what is your natural response? Calling on the most wise and compassionate part of your being, you might offer yourself a loving message or send a tender embrace inward. You might gently place your hand on your heart. You might visualize a young part of you surrounded in soft, luminous light. You might imagine someone you trust—a parent or pet, a teacher or spiritual figure—holding you with love. Feel free to experiment with ways of befriending your inner life—whether through words or touch, images or energy. Discover

what best allows you to feel nurturing, what best allows the part of you that is most vulnerable to feel loved, seen, and/or safe. Spend as much time as you need, offering care inwardly and letting it be received.

After the RAIN

The four steps of RAIN involve active ways of directing our attention. In After the RAIN, we shift from doing to being. The invitation is to relax and let go into the heartspace that has emerged. Rest in this awareness and become familiar with it; this is your true home. Now, paying attention to the quality of your presence—the openness, wakefulness, tenderness—ask yourself:

In these moments, what is the sense of my being, of who I

am?

How has this shifted from when I began the meditation?

Note: If you are still feeling raw, or a new difficulty comes up, include these feelings with kindness.

MEDITATION: CALLING ON YOUR FUTURE SELF

As you enter this meditation for future self, please feel free to substitute “wise self,” “high self,” “awakened heart,” “awakened mind,” or any other words that express your most evolved being.



Find a comfortable posture, close your eyes, and come into

stillness. Take several long, deep breaths to collect your attention. See if with each out breath you can release any tension that has accumulated in your body.

Scan your current life, and let your attention go to a situation where you feel stuck in emotional reactivity—in fear, hurt, or anger.

Now gaze into the future ten or twenty years from now, and visualize your future self’s home. Where in this home do you see your future self? Are you inside or outside? In a certain room? Are there pictures, furnishings, or plants nearby that hold a special meaning for you? How does your future self look—your clothing, your hair, your facial expression? What is the expression in your future self’s eyes?

Can you sense kindness? A caring welcome?

Take some moments to connect with the place where you feel most stuck and vulnerable, and then share your current difficulty with your future self.

Now imagine that your future self is offering healing attention and care to your current self. You might feel that you are receiving some touch of kindness, maybe an energetic embrace. You might receive a message of guidance, of reassurance. See how fully you can take in that warmth and care and wisdom. Feel your future self holding you and filling you with loving presence. Sense that whatever is most difficult right now—even the deepest fears and grief—can be included in this open and nurturing presence. Relax into your future self’s embrace until you sense that you are fully merging with—at one with—your future self.

Take some moments to sense how the love and wisdom of your most evolved being lives in you now and always. Trust that with practice you can access this awakened, compassionate heartspace with more and more ease.

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES





What if I can’t get in touch with a future or high self?


Many people ask this because all of us, at times, feel cut off. When you’re caught in emotional reactivity, the parts of you that hold generosity or kindness may seem worlds away, even nonexistent. It’s not true; they are here! However, calling on the most evolved expression of your being is a life practice, and it becomes more powerful each time you reach out. Here are two approaches that can help you.

Become alert to expressions of your awakening heart and mind as they appear in your daily life. You might be gazing at the night sky and fill with a sense of wonder. You might hug a friend who is hurting and feel very tender. You might be breathing mindfully and touch an inner stillness. You might hear someone you love judging themselves harshly and deeply wish they could see themselves through your eyes. Your awakened self is present at such times. Take a moment to recognize and explore the felt sense of your experience. This heartspace, this loving awareness, is your true nature. Become familiar with it. Perhaps whisper to yourself, “Remember this.” Then, when you are stuck and reaching out, recall these moments. They will help you connect with the gold that is always and already here.

When you feel stuck, act “as if” your future self were available, close by, listening, and aware of you. Even if it feels like going through the motions, mentally whisper your prayer or wish to know that caring presence in an intimate way. With practice, you’ll discover that simply turning toward your future self brings you closer to that awake and kind presence.





How do I know if I’m deluding myself about my wise or future self?


Students often worry that they’re just fantasizing, conjuring up whoever they wish they could be. This may be the case if your future self is a Nobel Prize winner, president, pope . . . or all

three! But “future self” does not have to do with external

accomplishments. Rather, it expresses who you are and how you live when your heart is open and your mind clear and awake.

You can imagine yourself in the future as wise and compassionate, because those capacities are already a part of you. Far from deluding yourself, you are actually calling forth your own potential when you reflect on your wise or future self. And the more you conjure up the qualities you most value, the more they become an ongoing, accessible part of your being.





What if RAIN’s not working for me?


We’ve often spent decades living with persistent fears and emotional reactivity, and these painful tangles take time to unravel. It’s quite natural to feel that what you’re doing isn’t working! There will be times when you try RAIN and end up feeling worse as you sense the potency of the old patterning. Or you might get stuck on any of the steps:

Recognize: You might feel agitated and confused, and when you try to pause and Recognize what’s going on, you continue to feel swamped and unclear.

Allow: You might become aware of a deep sense of shame but not feel able to Allow it to be there.

Investigate: You might get in touch with irritation, Investigate, and have it explode into anger, get pulled into your angry stories, and instead of completing the practice, go back into your day carrying around that anger. Or you might Recognize anxiety, Allow it to be there for a few moments, start to Investigate, and then feel so anxious that you decide to go online and distract yourself.

Nurture: You might get in touch with self-judgment and selfhate and not find any way to Nurture the parts of your being that feel unlovable.

After the RAIN: You might think you’ve gone through the steps of RAIN, but then when you try to simply rest quietly in presence, you find you’re restless, distracted, or anxious.

In any of these situations, you might conclude that RAIN didn’t work. The truth is that any intentional movement toward presence, even when you relapse into trance, interrupts old

patterning and serves your healing. Even if you get distracted, you can trust that you’re experiencing the anxiety, shame, or anger with somewhat more presence. And trusting this will help you resume the practice when you are ready and continue the process of healing with RAIN.

As with all practices of healing and awakening, RAIN requires that you be patient, flexible, and willing to experiment.

You may have a richer experience when you explore the

steps of RAIN with a teacher or therapist or when you

listen to a guided RAIN meditation. You might also find

that RAIN comes alive when you do it with a friend. (See RAIN Partners, this page.)

You may benefit most when you’ve had a good night’s

sleep, or when you haven’t just eaten (a lot of food, rich

food, sweet food), or when you exercise or meditate

before you practice with RAIN.

You may need a certain setting that feels safe.

You might find that a change in medication (adding, increasing, decreasing, eliminating) makes it easier to

relate to your inner life.

If you put aside self-judgment, stay curious, and keep practicing, you’ll find the approach to RAIN that best serves you on the path.





When I’m freaked out, I can’t even remember my Social Security number. How am I supposed to remember the steps of RAIN?


It’s true that the more entangled we get in emotional reactivity, the less we remember the way out. Many people find that the following reminders (which build on the first two questions, introduced in chapter 2) give them direct access to the steps:

What is happening inside me? (R, Recognize)

Can I be with this? (A, Allow)

What is REALLY happening inside me? (I, Investigate)

Can I be with this . . . with kindness? (N, Nurture)

Whenever you find yourself lost or confused, these questions can help you step back on the path.

PART II

Bringing RAIN to Your Inner Life





FOUR


Releasing Negative Self-Beliefs

We speak about losing our minds as if it is a bad thing. I say, lose your mind. Do it purposefully. Find out who you really are beyond your thoughts and beliefs.

• VIRONIKA TUGALEVA

O ne of the great blocks to realizing the gold of who we are is ourconviction that “something is wrong with me.” When I teach about the trance of unworthiness, I’m often asked, “Why do we hold on so tightly to our belief in our own deficiency? Why are we so loyal to our suffering, so addicted to our self-judgment?”

While we might long to accept and trust ourselves, trying to release our negative self-beliefs can feel as if we were trying to exorcise something buried deep inside our body. And in a way we are.

Our beliefs live not only in our mind but in a constellation of feelings and emotions embedded in our bodies. As a favorite saying goes, “Our issues are in our tissues.” They are deeply familiar. They feel like “me.” Most are rooted in interpretations of reality we formed in early childhood, and we rely on them for guidance and protection. They tell us who we are and what we can expect from ourselves, from others, and from the world.

Our most potent negative self-beliefs arise from early experiences of fear and wounding. Due to a survival-driven negativity bias, we remember painful events much more readily than pleasant ones. We remember the critical comment more than something affirming, the dog bite more than the beautiful sunset. As the psychologist Rick Hanson puts it, “The brain is Velcro for negative experiences, but Teflon for positive ones.”

This fixation on what might be threatening is compounded by another tendency, called the confirmation bias, which leads us to focus on information that matches or reinforces our existing beliefs— particularly in the case of charged issues like our value as a person.

The upshot: We make an airtight case for our belief in personal deficiency.

We keep the feelings of deficiency alive in daily life through our incessant inner dialogue. If you watch your thoughts, you may

discover the Judge in the background, continually asking, “How am I doing?” and condemning the gap between some ideal standard and what is. You may also notice worry thoughts about how falling short is right around the corner, or how you’ll be rejected for your flaws.

As long as we continue our fear-based thinking, our beliefs will maintain their potency. Writer Carlos Castaneda says that we maintain our world with our inner dialogue and that our world will change as soon as we stop talking to ourselves.

A traditional story from Polynesia captures the ultimate cost of obeying our fears and self-doubt.

In ancient times, a revered tribal leader went regularly to the river to shed her skin, each time returning to her village renewed and invigorated. But one day things changed. Instead of floating away, her old skin got caught in a bit of driftwood. And when she returned home, her daughter ran away from her in fear, because this raw-skinned new person no longer looked like her familiar self.

Finally, unable to comfort her daughter, the woman went back to the river, found her old skin, and put it back on. And from that time

on, the story tells us, humans lost their power to rejuvenate, to live

and love fully. They became mere mortals, entangled in fears of failure and the need to cover over their flaws.

AWAKENING FROM THE TRANCE OF UNWORTHINESS

The old skin that is most difficult to shed is our core belief that something is wrong with us—that we are deficient or flawed. In my work with meditation students and clients over the last decades, I’ve seen how this belief has stopped people from having intimate

relationships, generated ongoing anxiety and depression, fueled addictive behavior, and caused harm to their loved ones. The philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche writes, “The snake that cannot shed

its skin perishes.” To flourish, we need to release the belief that something is wrong with us.

To examine the hook of negative self-beliefs, scan an arena in your life where you are down on yourself. Take a few moments to focus on what about the situation feels so bad. Now ask yourself:

What am I believing about myself? Is it that you’re falling short? That you’re bad for being hurtful to others? That you will be rejected? That you’ll never get the intimacy or success you long for? That you are unlovable?

Now ask yourself this:

What is wrong with letting go of this belief? Or What bad might

happen if I let go of this self-judgment? When I ask this question in workshops or with individuals, I hear answers like these:

“I’ll never change and become who I want to be.”

“I’m afraid I’d be even worse.”

“I’d be powerless; there’d be no way to watch out for myself,

protect myself.”

“Others would judge me more, and I wouldn’t be prepared for

their criticism.”

“I wouldn’t know who I am.”

“I wouldn’t know how to live.”

As we continue to investigate these beliefs together, some people also mention their fear of how others would react if they changed. Like the woman who went back to the river to soothe her daughter’s upset, we keep our old skin to fit others’ expectations. The experience of a flawed self can be comfortable in its familiarity. Often we build relationships with others around our shared insecurity. We develop dependent relationships from the role of the “deficient” or weak one. The youngest child in the family is always “the baby,” the one who has struggled with drug abuse is “the addict,” the domineering and aggressive one, “the alpha.” Our self-identity is reinforced by what

others believe about us, and we collude by staying the same. We’d rather protect the current relationship than risk rocking the boat. Students often tell me that they need their self-judgments, that if they don’t remember what’s wrong with them, others will remind them. They tell me, “I’m not the only one who thinks I’m falling short; everyone else tells me that too.” And for them, it feels dangerous to shed the protective skin of old beliefs; they don’t want to be caught unawares.

So, our negative self-beliefs, even when deeply painful, often give us a sense of certainty, orientation, and control. We can easily stay entranced for years and decades, perpetuating our sense of unworthiness with a habitual narrative of self-judgment and fearbased thinking. It is only when we directly open ourselves to the suffering of this trance—how it cuts us off from others and from our own heart and spirit, how we don’t have to believe we’re flawed—that we begin to intuit the freedom possible in shedding old skin.

REAL BUT NOT TRUE

Janice, a single mom, was a friend who had started coming to my weekly meditation class. In addition to having a demanding job, she felt caught between the needs of Bruce, her fifteen-year-old son, who was struggling with social anxiety, and the needs of her dad, who lived for her visits. Twice a week, she’d leave work early and spend forty-five minutes navigating the evening rush hour to get to her dad’s assistedliving facility. He always lit up when she arrived, and then, when she got up to leave, he’d anxiously ask when she was coming back. She resented him for making her feel guilty, resented the time away from work and her son, and, most deeply, resented herself for not being more openhearted and gracious.

Janice had begun to practice RAIN, but so far this tangle of resentment hadn’t budged. Then, during one of our walks, she asked for my help. So I put on my meditation-teacher hat and asked her what she was believing about herself. She responded immediately, “I’m falling short on the most important fronts.” Then, shaking her head

with resignation, she went on: “You know, Tara, I’m failing them

and . . . this is awful to say . . . but I’m just not a loving person.”

When we hear such painful self-judgments from a friend, it’s tempting to jump in with reassurance. “Of course you’re a loving person. . . . Remember the time . . . ?” But instead I asked Janice something she didn’t expect, a question the author Byron Katie uses in her work: “Is it true? Is it true that you’re failing, and that you’re not a loving person?”

She responded impatiently, “All the evidence points that way.”

I asked again, “Are you certain that you’re failing, that you’re not a loving enough person? Is it really true?” This time she slowed down before replying.

“Okay, it really feels true, Tara. I’m not liking myself very much these days . . . but no . . . I guess I’m not certain.” We walked in silence for a bit, and when I glanced at her, Janice looked thoughtful and sad but not so grim.

Then I shared a phrase I’d learned from one of my teachers: “real but not true.” Yes, our beliefs and the feelings under them are real; they exist in our body and mind and have tremendous power over us. But we need to ask ourselves this: Do they match the actual, living, changing stuff of our experience in the world? In other words, are they true?

Our thoughts are sound bites and/or images that form a map of reality in our mind. Some maps are useful. For instance, I may have a thought that if I drink too much caffeine, I won’t be present with others. This can help guide my behavior. Other maps are harmful, for instance, the belief that if I say no to a friend, it proves that I’m a bad person.

In either case, we need to realize that these thoughts or beliefs are, as the Zen teachings say, like the finger pointing to the moon, not the moon itself.

In the following week’s meditation class (without mentioning Janice), I came back to this idea. Our beliefs are real because we experience them mentally, emotionally, and physically. And they have real impact on our lives! As Gandhi put it, they lead to action, create our character, and shape our destiny. But these beliefs—even the ones

that feel most true—are only mental representations or symbols of our experience.

It can be life changing to realize “I don’t have to believe my

thoughts . . . they are just thoughts!” Any story you have about yourself is not the same as the unfolding reality of what you are: the ongoing life of your senses, the tenderness of your heart, the consciousness that right now is seeing or hearing these words. Yet because our beliefs are continuously filtering and interpreting reality, we mistake our stories about ourselves and the world for reality itself. Understanding “real but not true” can free us from this prison.

In the weeks to come, these teachings created a tiny but important opening for Janice. She became more hopeful, more willing to deepen her attention. I’ve seen this over and over. When we have enough perspective to realize “I’m not my thoughts” or “This is just a belief,” we are unhooking from the inner dialogue. This gives us choice. It enables us to wake up to a larger awareness.

RELEASING BELIEFS WITH RAIN

RAIN is a crucial help at this point, because it offers us a systematic way to loosen the grip of fear-based beliefs. Janice and I met again to go over the steps of RAIN together, and she began to practice daily, sometimes for only a few minutes, sometimes longer. Several weeks later, she shared an experience with me.

One afternoon, after she’d parked her car at her father’s nursing home, she decided to do RAIN before going inside to visit. She

reclined her seat, closed her eyes, and asked herself, “What is happening inside me?” A familiar voice in her head said, “This is the last thing I want to be doing right now. I just don’t have the time.” Her jaw was clenched. When she thought of her father, she felt dutiful, resentful, guilty, tight.

Janice was making the U-turn, turning her attention inward, and this was her starting place: She Recognized that cluster of feelings, and instead of judging herself for them, she simply Allowed herself to feel how painful they were without pushing them away. Then, after a few breaths, she leaned in, beginning to Investigate with interest, trying to

get a better sense of what was going on. She gently asked herself, “What is the worst part about this?” and her attention went right to

her chest. She felt heat, tightness, and pressure. “Ah,” she said to herself, “I’m angry.” And as she let the anger be there, it began to change shape. It morphed into a sense of powerlessness. There was no way she could live up to what was expected of her—with her father, with her son, at work. She was falling short; she would always fail. And now, along with that feeling of helplessness came self-condemnation: “I just don’t like who I am. I don’t like this grim, angry, closed-hearted, helpless self.”

Investigating had connected her with what she had been running away from: the deep belief that she was failing and was an unloving person. She then recalled the question we had explored together: “Is it possible these beliefs are real but not true?” Asking this gave her enough space to stay present with what was unfolding.

She then asked, “When I’m believing this, what is my experience inside?” Her heart felt raw, tightly bound, and filled with a very childlike sense of helplessness and shame. She also felt an oppressive wave of fatigue. As she contacted this deep emotional pain in her body, she realized that these feelings had been buried within her for as long as she could remember. A natural response of sorrow and selfcompassion arose.

Janice had reached the N of RAIN, Nurture, and with tears and

with tenderness she began to whisper to herself, just as she would to a young child: “This is really difficult, and you’re doing your best. You love Dad; you love Bruce. Now that you’re here, you can relax. It’s enough just to be with Dad now, love him now. It’s okay.”

She did relax, as if letting go into the arms of a wise, kind parent. She sat still for another five minutes or so, letting in and resting in the warmth and openness of this new space before she went inside. And when she peeked into her father’s room, he was just waking from a nap.

He beamed at her and said, “I just had a dream about you as a little girl trying to ride Rosie.” They laughed and began to share memories

of Rosie, a much-loved dog, which led to more memories of good

times. As she was leaving, Janice promised that for her next visit she’d bring some childhood pictures she had digitized. And when she got to

her car, she realized that her father hadn’t asked when she was coming back. She was back, and he wasn’t so lonely.

RAIN had enabled Janice to reconnect with a very natural, openhearted sense of herself, but this didn’t mean that her resentments, guilt, and negative beliefs magically disappeared. RAIN is rarely a one-shot experience; well-grooved beliefs and feelings continue to arise. The difference was, after weeks of practicing RAIN, Janice could see clearly that her beliefs weren’t reality; they didn’t have to confine her life experience and her sense of her own being. Before Janice drifted off to sleep on the night of that visit, she reflected on how long she’d been hounded by a sense of her own deficiency. Then she asked herself one of the inquiries we’d discussed that can deepen the experience of After the RAIN: “Who would I be if I didn’t believe this about myself?” The response was a spontaneous feeling of spaciousness, buoyancy, and warmth. Her spirit, she realized, was beyond any thought or belief. Trusting this gave Janice a true taste of peace.

WHO WE ARE BEYOND OUR BELIEFS

While it may take numerous rounds, the four steps of RAIN can loosen the grip of even the most toxic, lifelong beliefs and reveal the freedom beyond a confining self-identity. If you pay attention to your experience during After the RAIN, you may discover the two fundamental flavors of this freedom:

The first is what Buddhist psychology calls the realization of

“no self” or emptiness. This refers to the lack of any confining sense of self-centeredness, self-solidity, or self-permanence.

We are free from a limiting identity as a fearful or deficient or separate self.

The second dimension of freedom is realizing the purity and fullness of awareness itself. We experience this boundless, wakeful, and tender presence as our very essence.

In the words of the Indian spiritual master Sri Nisargadatta, these radical expressions of freedom are inseparable:

Wisdom tells me I’m nothing.

Love tells me I am everything.

And between the two my life flows.

During After the RAIN, a simple inquiry can help you experience your own awareness. Like Janice, you might ask, “Who am I if I no longer believe [limiting belief]?” Or alternately, “Who am I if nothing is wrong with me?” Even a glimpse of “no self” and/or oneness is a taste of the gold.

JUDGING OURSELVES, JUDGING OTHERS

Bruce was changing along with his mom. For several years, Janice had been worried that her son’s anxiety kept him from finding friends and doing well in school. But as she began to relax her sense of personal failure, she started relaxing about Bruce too. Now, at dinnertime, she found herself enjoying his wry humor and quick observations, and listening from her office later in the evenings, she was impressed with his guitar playing. She became more confident he’d find his way, and something rubbed off. He began playing music with two boys in his class and seemed more at ease with himself.

One day during spring break, he asked to go with her to visit Granddad and play him a few songs on his new guitar. This was a major shift; he’d always refused. From then on, until her dad’s death a year later, they’d go together every few weeks—a ritual of strumming, singing, and chatting enjoyed by all three. Releasing the grip of her own beliefs directly increased the well-being of the dear ones in Janice’s life.

When we’re convinced we’re selfish, we’re inclined to suspect the same of others. If we hate ourselves for being needy, we may feel repelled or frightened by neediness in others. And if we feel we’re failing, we may look for signs of failure in those we’re close to. Our

negative self-beliefs become a powerful lens that shapes our experience of others; we can’t see who’s really there.

Stepping out of our old skin gives us a fresh and clear view. Not only are we able to sense the sincerity and benevolence of our own heart and being, but we are more able to see the gold shining through others. This growing trust in basic goodness is one of the gifts of the practice of RAIN.

TAKING “THE EXQUISITE RISK”

At this point you may be thinking, “Yes, I’d love to drop my judgments and feelings of failure . . . but they’re so persistent!”

True, and it’s important to respect how deeply rooted that sense of “something is wrong with me” can be. I used to despair of just how deep! It helped when I began to think in evolutionary terms. The fear of falling short is rooted in our survival brain, which has been shaping our existence for millions of years. This ancient fear keeps us holding on to the defensive skin of negative beliefs. Yet there’s also a powerful urge toward our full potential—an urge to emerge as a more

integrated, intelligent, compassionate being.

Because RAIN offers an attentive care to the fears arising from our survival brain, it brings us above the line, enabling us to heed the call of our future self. Yet these conflicting pulls continue to create a very natural tension in each of us.

When we shed our old skin, when we loosen the protective covering of our convictions, when we step free from our negative beliefs about ourselves and others, we are taking what the poet Mark Nepo calls “the exquisite risk.” It’s a risk because, as with all growth, we are exposing ourselves to the unknown, to danger, and to loss. It’s exquisite because the natural beauty, sensitivity, and responsiveness of our being are awakened and revealed.

All individual and collective transformation requires willingly engaging with this risk. Our negative self-beliefs can keep us constricted, small-minded, disconnected from our heart, and

suffering. Or we can take them as a call to Investigate, a call to take the exquisite risk with the mindfulness and radical compassion of RAIN.

When we do, we begin to discover who we are beyond any thoughts or beliefs. And we begin to manifest our unlimited capacity for openhearted awareness.

MEDITATION: UPROOTING PAINFUL BELIEFS WITH RAIN

The Investigation step in this version of the RAIN meditation is particularly geared to unpack and loosen the grip of beliefs that cause suffering.



Sitting comfortably, collect your attention with a few long, deep breaths. Take some moments to scan your body and relax any obvious areas of tension.

Bring to mind a belief that causes suffering in your life. Or if you are suffering right now, ask yourself, “What am I believing?” Is it something about yourself—that you’re undeserving, a failure, too damaged to ever be happy or loved, always falling short? Do you hear someone else’s voice—“weird,” “loser,” “you can never trust anybody”? To connect fully with this belief, you might remind yourself of a particular situation that brought it up—or one that is likely to. Visualize the situation as clearly as possible. What do you see around you? Who else is there? What were you thinking and feeling? Recognize: Your thoughts and feelings express a belief. What are you believing right now?

Allow: Pause for a few moments, and simply let the belief and accompanying feelings be there.

Investigate: Begin by asking, “Is this really true?” or “Am I certain this is true?”

Then ask, “What is it like to live with this belief?” You can deepen your Investigation by making the U-turn, turning from your thoughts to bring your attention to your body. What feelings and sensations are strong? Are particular emotions associated with this belief? Do you sense fear or shame, anger or self-hatred?

Widen the investigation by asking, “How has living with this belief affected my life?” Can you see its impact on how you relate to yourself and others, on your creativity, your capacity to serve, your ability to enjoy experience, your inner growth?

At this point, you might pause and ask yourself, “What is it like to honestly see and feel how this belief has shaped my life?”

Now turn your attention back to your body. Investigate the hurts and fears that live under the belief and drive it. And connecting with whatever feels most vulnerable right now, ask, “What do you most need?”

Nurture: Now bring your wisest and most loving self—your future self, your awake heart—to witness and feel your vulnerability. What message, touch, energy, or image might bring the most healing to the wounds inside you? Offer that, and let the place of vulnerability receive and be bathed in that nurturing energy.

After the RAIN: Notice the quality of presence that has unfolded, and rest in this space of awareness. After some moments, ask yourself, “What would my life be like without this belief?” and/or “Who would I become if I no longer lived with this belief?”

Whatever arises, rest in that experience. Let it fill you and get familiar with it.

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES





What if this belief has proven true in my life again and again?


The nature of strong beliefs is that they directly influence our feelings and behaviors and consequently the way our life unfolds. For example, if you are insecure about being desirable or lovable, you’re likely either to grasp onto potential partners out of your need for connection or to hide your vulnerability out of your fear of rejection. The belief sets you up for another failed relationship and traps you in a repeating loop of belief-action-failure-belief. You might ask yourself, “Do I know for sure that I’ll always be rejected?” Do you? No matter what our past experience, the nature of neuroplasticity is that we have potential for change. When you loosen the grip of your belief, you make room for an alternate future.

This holds true in our beliefs about the outside world. You might believe that you could never feel close to someone who has a different political ideology, or team up and work together toward a shared goal. But do we really know this for sure? If we challenge this kind of belief, we open ourselves to the dialogues between parties, races, genders, and religions that are necessary to awaken compassion and heal our world.

In your personal life, even a bit of openness about the future will allow you to bring more curiosity and gentleness to the present. You will be able to contact the wounds that give rise to the belief. Attending to this vulnerability will allow you to heal the roots of the belief, and you will begin to navigate your relationships with more confidence, flexibility, and freedom.





I see my negative side pretty clearly. If I dismiss my faults as “beliefs,” won’t I just indulge them even more?


Every one of us has parts of our character or ego covering that we would like to change. We act in ways we call selfish,

aggressive, addictive, insensitive, neglectful—and on and on. And yes, depending on the severity of our unmet needs, these actions may cause harm to ourselves and others. We need to recognize how these behaviors bring suffering and create distance in our lives with others.

But there’s a world of difference between the wisdom of discernment and the aversion of judgment. Discernment tells us, “When I insist on having things my way, my partner withdraws and becomes cold and distant.” Judgment says, “Wanting things my own way means I’m selfish—a bad person.” Judgment brands our fundamental being.

Recall the Golden Buddha in chapter 3. What’s important is realizing the difference between the covering and the gold. You may act in selfish ways, but you are not intrinsically selfish. You are a being like most of us—spirit, awareness, love—with conditioned layers of selfishness. Identifying with the coverings (“I am a selfish person”) only reinforces your self-beliefs and obscures the gold.

When you bring RAIN directly to the experience of any fault or flaw, you’ll discover the vulnerability that drives it, and you’ll

awaken your capacity for self-compassion. This will naturally loosen the grip of selfishness or any other covering that limits you. You will be able to shed that old skin and renew your life.





FIVE


Freeing Yourself from Shame

You, Beloved, put your lips on my forehead . . . and lit a Holy Lamp inside my heart.

• HAFIZ, “KEEPING WATCH”

I n almost every spiritual and religious tradition, the word “home”refers to the sacred space where we experience connection or belonging. Chronic shame severs that life-giving belonging. It covers over the gold of our spirit and sends us into exile, from ourselves and from others.

Not all shame is toxic. Shame wants us to survive, which for early humans meant having a group to protect them. The basic message from our survival brain is “I’ve done something wrong. If people find out, they’ll send me away.” Shame arises when our behavior has

veered from societal norms, and with shame comes fear—the fear of being seen and banished. When shame is healthy, it spurs us to change our behavior in a positive way or to make amends so that we are part

of the group again, and our shame recedes.

But shame turns toxic when it says, “There’s something wrong with me. I can’t belong as I am.” Then it’s no longer a passing emotion, and we become identified as a “bad” or “deficient” self. We are easily taken over by negative self-beliefs, and we may become so sunk in selfaversion that offering kindness and care to ourselves feels impossible. That is why this chapter will focus on the Nurture step of RAIN and on the many creative ways practitioners have found to access it. I’ll enter this terrain through one of the best-known shame stories from the Bible, a Rembrandt painting, and the spiritual awakening of a contemporary Catholic priest.

THE PRODIGAL SON: LEAVING AND RETURNING HOME

A prosperous man has two sons, and the younger goes to his father

and asks to have his portion of their inheritance early. When his father agrees, he leaves home, goes into another country, and squanders his inheritance in “riotous living.” Then a famine comes, and he is reduced to herding pigs and eating their feed. Destitute and starving, he

realizes that even his father’s servants have more to eat, and he

decides to return home and call on the mercy of his father.

Much to his relief, his father receives him with forgiveness, love, and great celebration for his homecoming. Seeing this, the older brother confronts his father with anger and jealousy. He had been obedient through the years. Why was he not the focus of this joyful celebration? The father proclaims his unconditional love—“My son, you are with me always and all I have is yours. But it was only right that we should celebrate and rejoice, because your brother here was dead and has come to life; he was lost and is found.”

Rembrandt’s famous painting shows the prodigal son, filthy and in tatters, kneeling before his father, his head bowed in shame. The old man bends over to bless him, his powerful left hand on his son’s shoulder, holding him as if to say, “I see you and you belong. I see who you are.” His right hand rests gently on his son’s back, caressing, nourishing, maternal. He is the embodiment of wisdom and compassion, the sacred masculine and the sacred feminine. And there, off to one side, standing in shadow, is the older brother, rigid with resentment and judgment.

EMBRACING THE DIFFERENT FACES OF SHAME

Three centuries later this painting changed the course of spiritual life for the Dutch Catholic priest and author Henri Nouwen. As he recounts in his book The Return of the Prodigal Son, his first realization was how fully he identified with the younger brother’s shame. He too had left his family home and sought to fill an inner vacuum by grasping at things outside himself—approval, success,

renown. But as he reflected deeply on the painting, he experienced a further insight: He was also the older brother, the one whose

judgment and blame had blocked him from feeling spiritually at home. His deep self-aversion and his anger, envy, and resentment of others had kept him from receiving the nurturing embrace from the father—a larger source of loving.

Finally, the pain and longing aroused in honestly facing these parts of himself shifted something: Nouwen surrendered his armor and became receptive to the father’s forgiveness, compassion, and love. And in letting in that love, he began awakening beyond the

constricting identity of a flawed, separate self. He wrote:

Then both sons in me can gradually be transformed into the compassionate father. This transformation leads me to the fulfillment of the deepest desire of my restless heart. Because

what greater joy can there be for me than to stretch out my tired arms and let my hands rest in a blessing on the shoulders of my home-coming children?

LETTING IN LOVE

I’ve had many encounters with the grasping of the younger brother and the aversive shaming of the elder. While my self-compassion has grown, there have been times of feeling entirely cut off from my heart. One of these times stands out because it opened a pathway to feeling nurtured—letting in love—that has been central to my practice ever since.

One winter about eight years ago, after a dense stretch of teaching and family visiting for the holidays, I entered the silence of a two-week retreat. Within twenty-four hours, I was swamped by guilt and regret. How come I didn’t get around to having that talk with my brother? Why had I sniped at my sister over the timing of our get-togethers? Was I really present at that solstice event? I kept seeing more ways I was inattentive, preoccupied, and selfish. Here I was again, in a state I knew all too well—mucking around in the trance of unworthiness.

“Okay,” I told myself, “it’s time for RAIN.” After I Recognized and Allowed my feelings of guilt, I started Investigation by naming the belief behind those feelings: “I should be a better, more loving, generous person.” Then, as my attention dropped into my body, I contacted a familiar sinking feeling and a hollow, achy darkness in my chest and belly.

Then I tried to offer myself Nurture with a touch on my heart and some words of care, but some angry part of me dug in its heels. “But it’s really not okay. I’m not okay. I’m selfish and unloving, and I don’t want to be this way!”

Then the anger turned to helplessness and I began crying. I was hating how I was and afraid I’d never change. Now a deeper core belief emerged: “I am unlovable.”

When I asked what this deep place of feeling unlovable most needed, I suddenly found myself whispering out loud, “Please love me.” Over and over, the plea, “Please love me.”

And then I became aware of a very intimate presence—a field of sentience and light that surrounded me, a presence that was entirely tender and compassionate. I bowed my head slightly and sensed a kiss on my brow—a blessing of pure acceptance and care. Something in me opened, and I was bathed in loving light.

The more light I let in, the more any sense of separation fell away. Whatever arose—sounds of the wind outside, a tingling in my body, a memory of a friend who’d died, a wave of sorrow at how self-judging persists—all was held in this luminous, open heartspace. I heard the whispered words of an Indian teacher, “Love is always loving you,”

and knew them to be true.

Since that experience, at times of difficulty, I’ve often called on that intimate presence. I sense the blessing at my brow and then feel

myself held in compassion. But I’ve also learned not to wait for difficulty. Now there are many moments—between emails, in the shower, before giving a talk—when I pause, turn toward presence, let in love, and become that field of loving.

With daily repetition, this pathway to Nurturing has become ever more alive, intimate, and familiar. The more I bathe in the experience of loving and being loved, the more accessible it becomes in daily life. Yes, the old patterns—the selfishness, self-judgments, and fears—keep

arising, but they are now held in a heartspace that is all-inclusive and tender.

REACHING OUT FOR LOVE AND BELONGING

The core feeling of shame is a sense of personal badness, and with shame comes self-aversion, fear, and the urge to hide. We are isolated, no longer a part of the circle of life. The medicine for shame is radical compassion, the loving presence that helps us trust our belonging and essential goodness.

That afternoon when I called out, “Please love me,” I didn’t have a name for what I was doing. I now understand it as a way of accessing our inner sources of Nurturing—of loving and feeling loved—that are not available through the “doings” of the small self.

When we’re infants, we depend on those around us as sources of love and care. And as developmental psychologists have shown, we humans have the inborn capacity to internalize that loving with remarkable speed. If all goes well, we build inner resources of love, safety, happiness, belonging, and strength that we can draw on throughout life.

But here we’re exploring another crucial fact: Even if those positive inner states were not created early, or even if emotions like shame have cut us off from them, we can still find ways to Nurture and develop those resources. At any time in our lives, we can cultivate our access to the inner experience of love and belonging. Through the Nurture step of RAIN, we can learn to trust our essential goodness.

RESOURCE ANCHORS: ACCESS TO SOURCES OF NURTURING

When we can’t access self-compassion, it’s time to find other sources of Nurture. We look outside ourselves for living experiences and exemplars of kindness that have particular meaning for us and then call on them to nourish our hearts. I call these resource anchors because they build and stabilize the inner resources we are developing.

Here are some resource anchors that students have shared with me:



I visualize sitting with my grandmother at her kitchen table, put my hand on my heart, and imagine her kindness is pouring in.

I carry around a photo of my son when he was two years old, sleeping with his head on our old golden retriever. When I’m stuck, I look at it and feel the loving

I’ve forgotten.

I visualize the Dalai Lama, imagine he’s looking right at me, caring about me, including me in his heart.

I curl up with my dog, or if she isn’t around, imagine how excited she is every time

I get home, how she sleeps pressed against my legs.

I say ‘Please love me’ and imagine the trees and birds, the flowers, rocks, and all creatures are sending me love.

I imagine my future self—totally fearless, welcoming, warm, compassionate—and ask him for help.

I call on Kwan Yin, the bodhisattva of compassion, and visualize a radiance surrounding me and imagine it entering and filling me with her mercy and kindness.

I ask my partner to hold me, and if she isn’t there, imagine her arms around me.

I wear a bracelet—a beaded lapis mala—and when I take it off and feel each bead carefully, there’s a link to Buddha nature, to compassion, to presence.

I softly recite a short Jewish prayer my grandfather taught me, and it reminds me of his loving heart, and of the love in the universe.

I lie down on the earth, or lean against a large old oak tree behind our home. I let my sorrows be held by the vastness of the earth and sky. And if I’m in my windowless cubicle twelve stories up, I imagine all of that.

I put my hand on my heart and repeat phrases of loving kindness for myself and others—May I be happy, free from danger, at peace. May you be happy, free from danger, at peace.

I remember other people I know who are suffering as I am, feel us as a community of beings, the shared humanness of it.

CUSTOMIZING YOUR PATH OF NURTURING

In the chapters to come, I’ll offer other approaches to building our resources, many of them based on experiences shared by my students. Here are two examples of how relationships with a seemingly outside source brought deep healing to shame.

A young woman, Brenda, relapsed after five years in recovery from alcoholism. She regained her sobriety, but months later, and even with the support of her AA group, she was consumed by shame and selfhatred. Whenever she made any attempt to access self-compassion, she hit a wall of anger and despair.

Then Brenda learned “Calling on Your Future Self,” the meditation taught in chapter 3. She began to build a picture of herself as a forgiving, wise, and vibrant middle-aged woman, standing with her

two dogs in a beautiful field. This image became a resource anchor and a part of her daily practice: She’d imagine her future self’s clear blue eyes and welcoming smile and feel a sense of inner comfort and ease. Then, after some weeks, she intentionally brought her sense of shame and failure to her future self and asked for help. In response, she heard a whisper: “You are more than this addiction . . . trust your caring heart.” Warmth and light filled her, and she felt that her future self

was already with her, inside her.

Brenda’s shame and harshness toward herself didn’t just vanish. But after six months of practice she told me, “Having my future self inside me feels more like the truth of who I am than any of the

negative stories I still tell myself.”

Sean had lost his job during the 2008 recession, and after sixteen months of looking and dozens of rejections, he spiraled into depression. When he came to one of my weekly meditation classes, he was honest about the deep shame he was feeling and about how he was isolating himself. He’d tried RAIN, but the Nurture step stumped him. “I feel like a loser, and I can’t dig up an iota of self-compassion,” he told me.

When I asked Sean if anyone related to him with care or understanding, he mentioned his wife, who had been consistently

kind. But he couldn’t accept her reassurances, because, as he put it, “I’m supposed to support my family. I’m not holding up my end.” Then, after a long pause, he mentioned his long-standing men’s group. I suggested that in addition to their in-person support he could make the group a resource anchor, one that he could access at any time. “Try to visualize the faces of the guys who really get how tough it is,” I suggested, “and then let their care and concern sink in.” Sean became very quiet.

After a while, I asked him what he was feeling. “It’s hard to put into words,” he said, “but they make me feel like they respect me, job or no job. That I matter just as a human being.” And then he choked up a

bit: “We’re in it together . . . connected. It warms me up; I feel more alive.”

I urged Sean to pay attention to that warm sense of connection and to let it really fill his body. He was accessing the healing of Nurturing, and now, during After the RAIN, he could let this healing deepen. “Sense what is important to you about these feelings, and try to memorize them,” I said. “The more often you think of your friends and bring these feelings alive inside you, the more your inner resources

will be there for you when you need them.”

CALLING ON THE EARTH GODDESS

Reaching toward a larger source of loving is a natural and powerful pathway of Nurturing our inner resources, one that has been used by countless beings, including the Buddha-to-be.

In chapter 2, I shared the broad strokes of the Buddha’s enlightenment, how Siddhartha spent the entire night meditating under the Bodhi tree, even as the god Mara sent his demons to shake his resolve. Now I’ll add a key piece that was essential to his, and is to our, freedom: While Siddhartha met the demons with compassion and mindfulness, he was not yet completely liberated. As night began to fade, Mara issued his greatest challenge: By what right did Siddhartha aspire to Buddhahood? In other words, “Who do you think you are?” And Mara demanded that Siddhartha produce a witness to confirm his awakening.

Then Siddhartha reached out his right hand and touched the earth. And the earth goddess rose up, responding with a roar: “I am your witness.” The earth shook, and Mara vanished. And as dawn broke, Siddhartha became the Buddha.

Even the Buddha-to-be faced doubt and challenges to his worth. By calling on a larger presence, he realized and affirmed his true belonging to all of life and freed his heart from doubt. We too can

learn to touch the ground and call on an outer source of Nurturing. We too can cultivate the inner resources of love and belonging that heal

the pain of shame.

MEDITATION: LETTING IN LOVE

Sitting comfortably with your eyes closed, take a few moments to breathe, feel into your body, and relax obvious areas of tension.

Bring to mind a situation where you are filled with self-judgment or self-aversion and unable to hold yourself with compassion. Visualize what’s going on, and remind yourself of the worst part of this

situation, what really makes you feel that “something is wrong with me.”

Allow yourself to contact the vulnerable place in your body that

feels that you are bad, unlovable, or unworthy. Try to open to the felt sense of shame by paying particular attention to your throat, heart,

and belly. You might find that breathing in and out of that vulnerable place helps to sustain your attention.

From this inner place, imagine the kind of Nurture that would feel most comforting, most healing. Would it be words that affirm your goodness and worth? A hug? A tender and accepting presence?

Now sense who you most wish would be the source of that Nurture. Whose love would feel most healing? Whose care would you most trust? You might imagine a dear friend, a child, a dog, a tree, a grandparent—even one who’s no longer alive. You might bring to mind a teacher or a spiritual figure, such as the Buddha, Kwan Yin, the

Great Mother, Jesus. You might experience a formless presence of

your own high self, your future or realized being.

Feel how much you long to be truly seen, loved, held. Then, either silently or in a whisper, call on the source of loving you have chosen. You might say, “Please love me,” “Please hold me,” or “Please take care of me,” and repeat softly whatever words most fully express your longing.

Imagine being heard. Imagine that your vulnerability and longing are felt by that presence. If the being has eyes, imagine them looking at you, receiving you, with total love, understanding, and care.

Sense their love as an energetic presence that surrounds you and soaks into you. Be like an absorbent sponge, letting it in. You might

feel the love filling your body like a warm glow, or visualize it as a flow of golden nectar, penetrating into the hollows and crevices, soothing and healing the most wounded places inside you.

Allow yourself to bathe in this loving . . . to surrender and let go into the loving more and more fully . . . to dissolve into oneness with that loving presence. Become the tender field that your small self is floating in, the loving awareness that is holding your life. As you get to know this heartspace, it will increasingly feel like home.

Before ending the meditation, take some moments to listen. Is there a message from this heartspace, something to remember, that feels important?

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES





When I’m stuck in shame, how can I find self-compassion? I get to the Nurture step, but I feel



unworthy of any care. Going through the motions just highlights how bad I feel about myself.


What you describe makes sense: When we’re at war with ourselves, our entire mind-set and our biochemistry are at odds with self-compassion. So how do we begin to shift? Our hearts start to soften as we deepen our attention to the suffering within us. Instead, all too often, we judge our feelings, thinking, “I shouldn’t be feeling this shame, this anger at myself, this fear of what others think.” We also compare our situation with those of others and tell ourselves, “They have it worse.” And so we decide we don’t deserve kindness.

It helps to “start where you are,” which means starting RAIN fresh. Recognize and Allow how bad you feel about yourself, and then Investigate. Notice what it feels like in your body to be so caught in shame, the unpleasantness of that. You might sense

how long you’ve lived this way—believing something’s wrong with you, that you don’t deserve care—and how that has kept you from living fully. Take some time to connect with the suffering of shame—how it affects your body, heart, and mind. The moment you can honestly say, “Oh, this is painful . . . I’m hurting,” you will sense a natural arising of sorrow and self-compassion.





What if I can’t find any larger source of loving affirmation?


When we feel cut off and ashamed, many of us find it hard to trust that there is any loving available anywhere. This is especially so if we had little nurturing in our early years or, worse, were

neglected or abused. While it may take longer to develop a reliable pathway of resourcing, the good news is that it’s possible. I’ve

seen thousands of people from diverse upbringings, and with much emotional suffering, find their way to a source of loving.

The trick to resourcing love is to look for what I call a tendril of loving. Perhaps there’s a relationship where you don’t feel the full warmth of love, but you sense there’s a potential for care that you’d like to experience. When you practice the above meditation, “Letting in Love,” be creative. Look wherever in this living world you feel even a small sense of resonance.

With practice, you can strengthen that tendril of loving so that it becomes a vital pathway of connection.

After you’ve found even a tendril of loving, pause and let it

soak in and fill you. Feel it in your body as warmth, light,

aliveness . . . however it expresses itself. Take at least fifteen to thirty seconds to get familiar with it.

And finally, repeat this process regularly. Your tendril will develop shoots and in time flower with the full fragrance of love.





Others are giving me the message that something’s really wrong with me. How do I know they’re not right?


There’s an important distinction between messages that let us know how we’re impacting others (and perhaps ourselves) and messages that say, “This makes you a bad person.” For example, it may be uncomfortable to hear something like “Your judgments and anger make me feel unsafe,” but it’s potentially useful information. We grow by being open to feedback. But any

message that implies we’re basically flawed is untrue.

Commit yourself to not believing messages of badness. If a message brings up shame, recall the discussion of “real but not true” in chapter 4. The feelings of shame may be all too real, but they do not express the truth about you. Meet your inner experience with self-compassion, or bring to mind someone who loves you and sense that they are holding you with kindness. Remember your basic goodness, and let your deepest intention be to trust your awakening heart and mind.

We’re in this together: The most insidious messages of

badness are those embedded in our society. Cultures are

organized around stories of good/bad, right/wrong, superior/inferior, and they invoke shame to varying degrees in all of us. These stories target the way we treat each other, how much we earn, what we consume, the shape of our body, how we express creativity, our spiritual or religious beliefs, our gender, the color of our skin. Social shame served human evolution by enforcing cohesiveness in early tribes, and it can still alert us to behavior that threatens our belonging. But it has a very big shadow. Society’s messages—about the proper role and behavior of women, about the inferior status of people of color, about the unnaturalness of nonheterosexual orientations, and more— continue to cause horrific shame, oppression, injustice, and suffering. We’ll explore this more in part 3, but please keep in mind that embedded in the message “something is wrong with you,” there is often a societal story that is invisible, shaming, and toxic.





SIX


Awakening from the Grip of Fear

We are not the survival of the fittest, we are the survival of the nurtured.

• LOUIS COZOLINO

I n a distant land, word spread far and wide of a holy man with magicso powerful it could relieve the most severe suffering. But to reach his wilderness refuge and receive his healing, a seeker had to trek through dense forests and over precarious mountain passes. Those who persevered arrived at the holy man’s simple hut exhausted and dirty. After guiding them to a refreshing stream and then offering tea, he’d sit with them in silence, gazing out at the pines and sky. When he finally spoke, it was to swear them to secrecy about what was next to pass between them. Once they took the vow, the holy man asked a single question: “What are you unwilling to feel?”

THE SUFFERING OF RESISTING FEAR

If you’re feeling trapped in emotional pain, the holy man’s question may seem confusing or even offensive. But if you look again, you might discover the resistance surrounding the pain, a fear of actually feeling your fear that keeps suffering locked in place.

Especially when fear is intense, we’re afraid we’ll drown in it, be annihilated. So, to varying degrees, our primitive survival brain prompts us to cut off the raw emotional energy in our body; we bury or numb our feelings and preoccupy ourselves with thoughts. But when we pull away from fear and other painful emotions, we also pull away

from our full presence and vitality. We pull away from our intelligence, creativity, and capacity for love.

Sometimes our unwillingness to experience our feelings shows up

as depression. Sometimes it takes the form of chronic anxiety or irritation, with our muscles and posture tightening into what I often call “Worrier Pose.” It can appear as loneliness, restlessness, boredom, or a sense of operating on autopilot. And it often manifests as

addictive behavior.

Whatever the expression, resisting fear puts us in a trance. Remember the circle of awareness in chapter 1? Everything above the line is in awareness, and everything below the line is not. When we resist fear, we are living partially below the line—identified with the fear, and cut off from our full lucidity and presence. Our unfelt, unprocessed fear is operating outside awareness to shape our beliefs, decisions, and actions. The fear we are unwilling to feel controls and binds our life.

A friend told me this story. When her son was six, he had a recurring nightmare of being chased by a monster. It was very big and dark, and no matter how fast he ran, the monster was always right behind him. The dream was so terrifying and appeared so frequently that he was afraid to go to sleep. One night at bedtime, his mom held his hand and said, “You know, if that monster turns up tonight, here’s something to try. Instead of running, turn around and see what it

looks like so you can tell me. Okay?” Early the next morning her son ran excitedly into her bedroom. He had faced the monster and . . . it wasn’t real! It was just an oversized bad guy from a favorite video game, and when he looked it right in the face, it dissolved.

You might say, “It’s fine to face down an imagined monster and watch it dissolve. But what about real dangers?” Whether or not

there’s an actual risk, facing and opening to the emotional experience of fear allows us to come above the line and access our natural resourcefulness. It calls forth our reason and clarity, courage and compassion. Running away only amplifies the felt sense of being powerless and afraid.

Because our ways of avoiding fear are both habitual and largely unconscious, turning to face fear requires intention and presence. RAIN can help us make the U-turn: Recognizing and Allowing fear to

be there, and then deepening our presence in a way that reduces fear’s power. With practice, we discover that when our resistance is gone, the demons are gone. We may still feel fear, but we are above the line, reconnected to a larger space of presence and self-compassion.

TURNING TOWARD FEAR WITH RAIN

After a daylong seminar on RAIN and stress, Brianna came up to me and asked for some help with a personal situation. She’d recently been hired as a marketing vice president in a large corporation, but she felt intimidated by the CEO, who was very quick to cut off anyone who was “wasting his time.” He ruled over the weekly staff meetings, which Brianna described as “torture” that put her into a state of “brain freeze.” “I shouldn’t be worried about my competence,” she said. “I

was recruited because I got an industry award at my last job. But the atmosphere here is totally different—really corporate, and the other VPs pretty much ignore me. I just go back to my office with my stomach churning and wonder how long I’ll last. Do you think RAIN can help me?”

I suggested that Brianna practice RAIN for a few minutes right before each meeting and asked her what was going on for her at that time.

“On those mornings, I can really feel the anxiety building, and it lands me in a frenzy of busyness . . . reviewing reports, marking what I might need to comment on . . . nothing really productive.”

I smiled because I recognized that feeling all too well. “Okay, so before you start RAIN, imagine you’re pressing the pause button on that frenzy.”

Brianna closed her eyes and pictured herself at her desk, half an hour before the weekly meeting. “As you pause,” I said, “your first job is to Recognize the anxiety and Allow it to be there.” After she nodded, I added, “Now, what do you notice if you bring your attention and interest to how it feels in your body?”

Beginning to Investigate, she muttered, “Dry mouth . . . really tight chest . . . heart hammering . . . and, oh yeah, my stomach’s in knots.” I suggested she place her hand on her abdomen and send her breath

there with a long, slow inflow and outflow. This would help her steady her attention and stay in contact with the fear.

Now I guided her to ask the scared place inside her what it needed most. After a moment, she looked up, surprised. “The fear needs to

feel accepted . . . that it belongs and it’s okay that it’s here.”

So the Nurturing that scared place needed was to be accepted, not to be made “wrong.” I asked Brianna how the wisest, kindest part of her wanted to respond. Could she find a way to acknowledge this very vulnerable part of herself? She sat quietly, still breathing slowly, her hand on her belly. Then she nodded. “I just sent the message ‘It’s

okay . . . this belongs.’ And . . . it does feel more okay. I’m actually a bit more relaxed.”

Brianna’s message was truly healing and wise. Like an ocean, we have many waves of different feelings, and they all belong; they are part of us. When we encounter the difficult ones like hurt or fear and acknowledge “this belongs,” there’s a natural sense of enlarging and more ease with what is moving through us.

This became Brianna’s RAIN practice each week before going to the staff meeting: After pressing the pause button, she’d Recognize and Allow the fear, Investigate as she breathed with it, put her hand where the feelings were most intense, and offer a comforting “It’s okay. This belongs.” When she felt anxiety spike during the meeting, she’d simply breathe into it and send that same message.

About three months later, Brianna updated me. Her tension around the CEO hadn’t disappeared, but her anxiety had lessened somewhat. More important, it didn’t feel like such a big deal: “It’s not so alarming when I get anxious. . . . I’m not taking it so personally,” she told me. “I was fighting it so hard, but now it’s okay that it’s there. Accepting it seems to loosen the brain freeze. It really does free me up.”

Brianna was experiencing the fruits of RAIN in her work life. When we’re stuck and reactive, anxiety feels totally personal—a negative commentary about ourselves. RAIN loosens that identification, so that instead of an emotion that defines and possesses us, anxiety becomes more like a familiar inner weather system—unpleasant, but not a problem.

Brianna told me she’d made an appointment with the CEO to propose a risky but creative marketing strategy and that she’d won his

backing. She’d also made a friendly alliance with a colleague down the hall and was getting to know a couple of others. “And you know,” she said, “there’s some real excitement mixed in with the anxiety now. I’m on my edge and growing.”

When anxiety arises, we are conditioned to assume that something is wrong and that we need to act to protect ourselves. Yet, as Mark Twain put it, “the worst things in my life never actually happened.” With practice, we catch on to this habit of anticipating trouble, of looking for something to worry about. Then we can say to ourselves, “It’s just anxiety, it’s okay . . . this belongs,” and begin to unhook from a lifetime pattern of reactivity.

WHEN FEAR FEELS LIKE “TOO MUCH”

Although Brianna’s anxiety was disabling at work, she still had enough presence and focus to practice RAIN. But when fear becomes acute

and we feel panicked or powerless, we become unable to access presence. At these times, attempting to turn toward and Investigate our experience has the potential to re-traumatize us or reinforce the fear. We are pushed outside our “window of tolerance.”

This phrase was coined by the psychiatrist and author Daniel

Siegel, and it’s a useful tool for anyone struggling with fear, rage, or other strong emotions. Each person’s window of tolerance is different. You’ve surely noticed how your resilience varies from day to day—and also over longer periods, shrinking when you’re under prolonged stress, expanding when things are going well. The good news is that whatever your circumstances, you can expand your window of tolerance (or what psychologists call your degree of affect tolerance) by doing the inner work of RAIN. But you can’t do that work at times when you’re already “outside the window.”

To explain what happens when we’re overwhelmed by emotion, I like to use another invention of Dan Siegel’s—a model of the brain that makes this very complex organ, and our reaction to stress, easier to understand.

THE BRAIN IN THE PALM OF YOUR HAND

Try this at home! Hold up your hand and make a fist with your thumb against your palm and your four other fingers folded tightly down over it. This is your brain. Your face is in front of the knuckles, and the back of your hand is the back of your head.

Now open your fingers again for a moment. Your wrist represents your spinal cord. Your lower palm is your brain stem. And your curled-in thumb is the limbic area of your brain. The brain stem is responsible for basic bodily functions (like breathing and heart rate), our levels of arousal, and survival reactions like the fight-flight-freeze response. The limbic area, deep within the brain, is our emotional center, and it works closely with the brain stem to drive our actions and responses. (As Siegel explains, the limbic area focuses on the crucial question “Is this good or is this bad?”) It’s also where our memories are formed and stored. Most of this activity goes on outside our awareness.



If you fold your fingers over your thumb again, you’re bringing the top layer of the brain, the cortex, online. This is the most recently evolved part of the brain, which allows us to orient ourselves in space and time, think, reason, plan, and imagine. The prefrontal cortex—the area right behind your forehead—extends from your first knuckles down to your fingertips. Press your fingertips into your palm, and notice that they link together all the parts of your brain. This is the area that sends and receives the messages that guide our lives. The middle prefrontal area is the witness. It has the capacity for mindfulness, empathy, and compassion. It underlies our ability to navigate complex relationships. And it is the domain that can calm or “down-regulate” the survival reactions of the primitive brain.





If you are in a resilient state, communication is flowing between all parts of your brain. (Dr. Siegel calls this state “integration.”) Say someone cuts you off while you’re driving your child to school. Your limbic system and brain stem react so fast you step on the brakes before you’re fully aware of what’s happening. Then you feel the surge of fear and anger flooding your entire body. But now the prefrontal cortex sends a calming message: “That was close, but we’re out of danger.” Gradually, you begin to settle back into your skin.

But if you have been overstressed or traumatized, the prefrontal cortex may not be able to down-regulate the limbic response. Fear and anger take over. You might shout expletives and frighten your child or, worse, try to catch up with the car and pass it or give the driver the finger. When we are hijacked by our survival brain, we can easily harm ourselves and others.

You can see how this works by consulting your hand-model of the brain. The messages “Danger! Trouble!” surge up through your brain stem into your limbic system. And because your prefrontal cortex (the four fingers wrapped around your thumb) is already overstressed, it disengages and your fingers just pop up. You literally “flip your lid”! Your arousal stays sky-high, and you lose access to good judgment, empathy, moral reasoning, and other inner strengths we count on to guide us in living wisely.

When we are cut off from our natural capacity for mindfulness and self-compassion, we need a way of soothing our system so we can reconnect. We need a way back to integration and resilience. This is, once again, when calling on the Nurture step of RAIN is a crucial path to healing.

NURTURING WHEN FEAR IS STRONG

In chapter 5, we explored how the Nurture step of RAIN allows us to work with shame. When we’re caught in shame, our deepest need is to trust that we are lovable and valuable. With RAIN, we learn to find a

source of love larger than ourselves, a resource that helps us trust our basic goodness.

When fear is pushing us outside our window of tolerance and we

are feeling overwhelmed, our immediate need is to access a sense of safety. In this case, in order to work with RAIN effectively, we need to feel sufficiently safe and present before we begin. This is why I often suggest Nurturing and strengthening your inner resource anchor as a first step. You can also pause to Nurture at any point in the

meditation.

You might be wondering, “But I thought the Nurture step was at the end of RAIN?” As we’ve seen, full Nurturing is often the final step, coming after we’ve Investigated and directly contacted our experience. But the self-compassion implicit in Nurture holds the whole process, and when we’re facing trauma or other intense fears, the Allow and Investigate steps may not be wise or even possible. At these times, we need to shift the sequence of RAIN. If we Nurture and establish some degree of safety and connectedness at the start, and again whenever it is needed, RAIN is more likely to unfold in a healing way.

One direct approach to Nurturing is to guide your attention to the body and breath, as in the guided meditation on this page, at the end

of this chapter.

A second approach to Nurturing, introduced in chapter 5, is to identify and access a resource anchor—whatever word, image, object, or gesture helps connect you with the inner resources you most need. Once this associative anchor is established, it gives you a quick and direct point of access, one that you can rely on when you’re most “under the line.”

But if we hope to make a lasting difference in our lives, it’s not enough to just access a positive inner state like safety or peace. We

now know that we can deliberately build these temporary states into traits—into enduring expressions of who we are. This process of turning states into traits is a profound expression of self-nurturing.

STATES TO TRAITS

Recall that our survival brain is geared to remember painful experiences more readily than pleasant ones; this is our negativity

bias. Even when we can’t recall painful events in detail (which often happens with trauma), they remain deep in implicit memory, shaping our expectations, beliefs, and mood—the way we experience ourselves and the world. In contrast, many of our day-to-day positive experiences are quickly forgotten. We retain some high points—those full of emotion and meaning. But most of our moments of feeling relaxed, safe, trusting, successful, and loved are passing states.

Making a desired state into a trait, an enduring quality of our being, requires two basic steps. The first is to “have the experience,” either by recognizing it when it arises spontaneously or by purposely eliciting it with a resource anchor. The second is to offer our full, sustained, and immersed attention to that positive state and to the self-sense that arises with it. Psychologist Rick Hanson calls this second step “installation.” It gives the positive experience “stickiness,” so that it becomes installed in our long-term implicit memory for future retrieval.

This is how what might have been a passing state gradually builds into a trait. By repeatedly having the experience and saturating it with our attention, we are recruiting our brain’s neuroplasticity to create a radical shift in how we experience ourselves and our life.

REFLECTION: INSTALLING A POSITIVE STATE

Installing is possible whenever a positive inner state (moments of calm, confidence, love, safety) arises naturally or when we have intentionally evoked the state. Once it’s there, do the following:

Bring your intention, interest, and attention to sustaining the experience, staying with it for at least fifteen to thirty seconds.

Allow it to fill your body; invite it to become as big as it can be. Involve all your senses: What are you seeing and hearing? How is your body experiencing touch, temperature, energy, movement? Is taste or smell part of the experience?

Intend that the experience sink into your cells, the way light fills a room, or water soaks into a sponge. Sense that you are letting in the felt experience, surrendering to it, receiving it into yourself.

Take a few moments to reflect on what feels meaningful or significant about the experience.



The key to successful installation is repetition: accessing and installing over and over. Practice when you’re feeling fine, but also when you’re grumpy or a bit stressed. Each time you touch a state like peacefulness or strength, let it totally fill you; stay with it for a while. Installing—getting familiar with it—will make it more accessible when you encounter real difficulty.

Whatever you practice grows stronger. Learning how to turn positive states into lasting traits is one of the greatest gifts you can give to yourself. No matter how trapped you’ve been in emotions like fear

or shame, strengthening your inner resources can help change your brain, heal your heart, and evolve your consciousness.

The guided meditations at the end of the chapter—“Nurturing the Seeds of Safety” and “Handing It Over”—will give you a chance to explore this directly.

PRACTICING RAIN WITH OVERWHELMING FEAR

Terry was a long-term meditator, but as her daughter Megan sank into a heroin addiction, Terry became less and less able to find solace in

her practice. Instead, sitting in silence often triggered unbearable agitation.

Determined to save her daughter from the streets, Terry had already spent three years on a roller coaster of fear and rage. She’d paid for one rehab center after another. She’d paid for rent, for counseling, tried to find Megan jobs, only to face a continuing web of lies and another relapse. Megan sometimes disappeared for weeks, leaving Terry panicked, and then showed up again when she hit bottom, desperate for help, promising this time would be different. Terry knew she was enabling addictive behavior, but she couldn’t stop. She lived in terror that she’d get a call: Megan was in the morgue after overdosing. Megan had been raped and killed.

It wasn’t until her best friend told her, “You’re traumatized and you need support for yourself right now,” that Terry began therapy and came to me for spiritual guidance.

I asked her what in her life gave her a sense of connectedness and peace. “Usually prayer,” she responded. “I pray to what feels like the

mother of the universe, the Divine Mother. But now when I try to pray, it’s like my heart is buried in fear. I can hardly breathe.”

“What would help your heart breathe right now?” I asked.

Terry closed her eyes for a moment. “If I weren’t carrying this fear alone,” she said. Then she looked at me with a small smile: “I wish the universe could take over for me!”

“Then let’s just go with that,” I said. “Okay?” She nodded gamely and again closed her eyes.

“Let the fears you’re carrying, the big ones, come to mind. And now imagine that you are holding them gently and respectfully in both hands . . . and placing them into the arms of the Divine Mother. It’s

not that you’re getting rid of them. It’s more like letting something much larger help you hold them. See if you can visualize and feel this. You might try actually cupping your hands and lifting them up.”

Terry bowed her head slightly as her hands rose. Tears started streaming down her face. Several minutes later, she brought her hands down and sat very quietly. “I’m breathing, Tara,” she said. “My heart’s breathing. It’s unbelievably heavy and sad, but there’s more space . . . it’s part of something larger . . . it’s breathing.”

Terry had found a resource anchor (the image and felt sense of that prayerful gesture) that could give her some ease. I encouraged her to sit quietly for a while, resting in the breath, noticing what it was like to let the calm enter and fill her heart. Before we parted, I suggested that she make this the center of her practice—handing over her fears to the Divine Mother (her resource anchor) and then steeping herself in the feelings of being held (to install the inner state).

When fears are deeply entrenched and/or daily life keeps reinforcing them, you might need to cultivate safety for days, weeks, or months before going on to full RAIN. And even then, it’s important to stop and access your inner resources whenever there are signals of

“too much.”

When Terry and I met several weeks later, Megan had left another rehab center and was entirely off her mother’s radar. Terry was miserable, but she had been praying a lot and said she felt ready to bring the full mindfulness and compassion of RAIN to her experience. I reminded her that she could ask the Divine Mother at any time to help her hold her fear.

She began by Recognizing and Allowing the fear and distress she was feeling. When she started to Investigate and asked herself, “What am I believing?” she heard herself say, “I’m powerless to control her or save her.” She paused, and I could see her deepen her breathing. “It’s a dark, clutching fist of fear in my chest,” she whispered, “and I just

have to stay here.” Then, after a few moments, she added, “When I sense the Divine Mother helping to hold the fear, it helps.”

Terry continued to breathe into that intensity, and something shifted. Tears came, then sobbing, as she curled up on the couch in the fetal position. “I might lose my baby, and there’s nothing I can do.” Terry had faced the anguish of loss that lived inside the clutch of her fear.

She grieved deeply for about ten minutes, and when she grew quiet, I asked, “What does that grieving place most need?”

She sat up slowly and muttered, “Right now? Water and tissues.” She was back in the room with me. After she settled a bit, she said, “It needs to be here, but . . . it’s just so big. It needs to be held by all the kindness in the universe. Just like the fear, held by something larger than me.”

Again, I invited Terry to take more time, simply letting the grief be there, letting it be held by something larger, resting in her experience. She sat a while, rocking slightly and holding herself. Then she gently cupped her hands and lifted them in offering, bowing her head. After some minutes I asked, “What’s it like as you allow this grieving and open to that vast kindness?”

“It’s like this great wrenching heartache is floating in a boundless sea of compassion . . . there’s some peace.”

The roller coaster with Megan wasn’t over for Terry, but her inner surrender allowed her to respond with more wisdom. Although it ripped her up, she said no to the next round of Megan’s pleas and promises. It became even harder when she found out her daughter was homeless and prostituting herself to support her habit. But Terry knew deeply that she couldn’t be Megan’s rescuer. Instead, she had to remain open to her own fear and grief and let them be held in that sea of compassion.

Terry’s boundaries forced Megan to choose. She chose to live. Over the next four years, she took increasing responsibility for her life,

slowly facing the demons she’d been running from.

OUR FEARLESS HEART

In my experience, fear does not stop arising. Our life is inherently insecure: We lose people we love, relationships fail, we fall short in our work life, our bodies will die, our globe will keep erupting in violence, our earth will continue to experience threats to its biosystems and species. Ultimately, we have no control over living and dying.

And yet, as Terry discovered, it is possible to experience the natural contraction of fear with radical compassion. Fear, a changing state,

can be held in vast tenderness, a trait expressing our deepest nature. Through the practice of RAIN, we can discover this heartspace—a loving presence larger than our small, frightened self—that includes anxiety or fear without becoming possessed or consumed by it.

When I last saw Terry, she told me what she’s learned from the ups and downs: “I can’t control Megan’s life. . . . She still has big challenges, and I can’t make sure everything works out. All I can do is care, do my best to be helpful, and when I’m afraid, try to stay present. If I call on the Divine Mother, there’s enough love and presence to

hold the fear, to hold my life.”

Each of us can learn to Nurture our inner resources, to discover our fearless heart in the face of fear. Our resource anchors may be very different—bringing to mind a trusted friend or a spiritual figure, leaning against a tree, touching our own heart, holding a rock. Yet if

we offer our full attention to the positive inner state they awaken, we are directly Nurturing a tender presence that can hold our life.

MEDITATION: NURTURING THE SEEDS OF SAFETY

There are three primary pathways for increasing inner safety through meditation: attention to body and breath; wise and loving messages; and mentally evoking a person, place, activity, or memory.





Body and Breath




Ground yourself by becoming aware of your body and making sure you are in a stable and comfortable position. Feel how your back, bottom, and feet are pressing the chair or floor;

feel your weight and the sense of gravity, how the earth is holding you up.

Scan your body, and consciously relax whatever tension you find.

Focus on your breath, slowing to a long in breath and long out breath (approximately five to six seconds each). Breathe without pausing between the inflow and the outflow, relaxing with the outflow and letting the entire breath be smooth and easy. (This is known as “coherence breathing.” It directly calms the body and mind.)

Place your hand(s) gently on your heart, belly, or cheeks.





Wise and Loving Messages




Self-message, such as “I’m here. I’m with you.” Prayers/blessings of loving kindness: “May I feel safe from inner and outer harm.”

Mantras or phrases with sacred meaning, such as “Orn Mani Padmi Hum.” (As our minds awaken, we discover the jewel of compassion.)





3. Mentally Evoking a Person, Place, Activity, or


Memory


To identify which of these might serve as a good potential resource anchor, reflect on the following questions when you are not in the grip of fear. Pay attention to your body, and notice which most bring you a sense of ease:

With whom do you feel connection or belonging? Feel cared

for or loved? Feel at home, safe, secure? You might scan

family, friends, teachers, and healers—those you know and

also those beings you feel connected to but have never met; those who are living or who have passed; pets; archetypal or spiritual figures like the Buddha, Kwan Yin, Jesus.

When and where do you feel most at home—safe, secure, relaxed, or strong? Here you might consider where you feel a sense of sanctuary—in the natural world, in a church or

temple, at home, in a coffee shop.

What activity brings a sense of safety, security, and/or strength? Notice if there is something you do—helping others, swimming, drawing, dancing—that connects you with your

inner resources.

What events from the past—particular experiences—are reminders of when you’ve felt strong, safe, and empowered? This might include any time of accomplishment or mastery, of learning or service, of being in relationship with others.

After reflecting on these questions, choose the person, place, activity, or memory that currently best offers a sense of safety. This is, for now, your resource anchor, your portal to a positive state.

Deepen your attention by bringing this resource anchor alive with all your senses. For example, if it’s a person you feel at home with, let the image of the person be clear and close in, remind yourself of sounds and words that might have been spoken, and recall a reassuring touch or look.

• • •

After you access your resource anchor through one of these three pathways, notice the feelings that arise in your body—the felt sense of ease, safety, or comfort.

End your reflection by taking fifteen to thirty seconds to install these positive experiences of safety or security, immersing your attention in the feelings, and letting them sink in and fill you.

MEDITATION: HANDING IT OVER

Explore this meditation whenever you find yourself obsessing, worrying, and anxious about outcomes. Notice what happens when you entrust your difficulties to a larger universe.



Find a comfortable position, close your eyes, and relax any obvious areas of tension.

Take some moments to Recognize and Allow any experience of anxiety or fear. Investigate by sensing what you are believing (what

bad thing is going to happen) and by experiencing where the fear is felt most strongly in your body. Deepen the Investigation by directly contacting and opening to the sensations.

Now bring to mind some benevolent entity or formless being—god, spirit, intelligence of the universe, Jesus, Buddha, Divine Mother, Nature—that you sense as wise, compassionate, and all-embracing. Imagine taking the full mass of the fear you’ve been carrying and handing it over—offering it into this larger field, this vaster being. It’s no longer your “job” to worry or to carry this alone. Your small self is not in charge. Let the fears or worries be held in the hands of something larger.

Visualize and sense the “handing over.” You might try enacting it physically, raising both hands toward the heavens and lowering your head. How do you feel when you are not holding the weight of this burden?

After the RAIN: If there is no problem to solve, what is this moment like? See if you can relax and rest in an easeful space.

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES





When fear arises, am I always supposed to go through the four steps of RAIN?


Not necessarily! There are several ways your practice might unfold:

The first steps of RAIN—Recognize and Allow—often elicit a mindful, open presence that helps us find balance and freedom in

the midst of fear (or whatever emotion is difficult). In other words, you might just need the first two steps.

At other times, when the fear is strong and you are caught in reactivity, Investigating will help uncover the layers of vulnerability, and Nurturing will offer the healing that is needed. Finally, as I’ve suggested above, when fear is intense, you might need to start with Nurturing, and establish a sufficient sense of safety before moving through the steps of RAIN.





Doesn’t “handing over” our fears disempower us? Or reinforce our sense that our fears are too much for us to manage?


When we’re stuck in fear, we’re not handling it well. We already feel victimized, possessed, separate, and vulnerable. The reason is that our survival brain has taken over, reducing communication with our prefrontal cortex, the site of reason, mindfulness, and compassion. And while it might initially seem that we’re handing fear over to something outside us, we’re actually using our imagination to reconnect with our own resources, our own temporarily hidden wisdom, compassion, and love. “Handing it over” (much like the “Turning it over” encouraged in 12-step programs) can be a powerful bridge back to our wholeness.





How can I tell when I’m outside my window of tolerance? I know there’s a danger of retraumatization, but sometimes I wonder if I’m just avoiding discomfort.


If you have a history of trauma and/or experience PTSD symptoms like nightmares, being easily startled, and strong anxiety or panic, it’s best to assume that emotional discomfort or feelings of “too much” mean you are outside your window of tolerance. Otherwise, you can “play your edge” and try to stay present for a while with your discomfort, witnessing it as it unfolds. Then, if the discomfort becomes acute, take that as a signal to shift your attention, and turn to an inner resource for self-soothing. But you may discover that with practice you develop enough balance and resilience to be with your fears. When you learn to stay present, you undo habitual avoidance and gain more ease and freedom in the midst of stress. You actually enlarge your window of tolerance.





I think I’m acting from fear, but when I meditate, I can’t find the fear in my body.


You are not alone! We humans have a strong reflex to disassociate from the body’s raw experience of fear and retreat into fear-based thinking and behavior. It takes practice to deliberately open yourself to the felt sense of fear. When fearful thoughts arise during meditation, bring a friendly attention to your throat, chest, and belly, breathing into those areas to help you focus. Notice any sensations of tightness, soreness, heat, pressure, or shakiness, and invite the fear to show itself. If you are patient, you will gradually become familiar with how fear expresses itself in your body. And with that familiarity, you will find you are less hooked by fear. You’ll be better able to respond

to fear, rather than react from it.





Getting in touch with my fears in meditation triggered my PTSD symptoms. I’m afraid I’ll fall apart if I continue. Should I keep on meditating?


If you are experiencing PTSD symptoms, it is wise to cultivate more inner resources before continuing with mindfulness and RAIN. Once you have strengthened your access to inner resources, you may find that your window of tolerance increases. Also, it can be very helpful to consult a trauma-sensitive teacher or mindfulness-based therapist about ways to modify your practice.

Keep in mind that there are many types of meditation, and some directly cultivate inner resources of calm and well-being. For example, you may already be familiar with loving-kindness meditation, or concentration on the breath, or a walking practice. Any of these can help you feel more stable and at ease during difficult times.





SEVEN


Discovering Your Deepest Longing

Men are only free when they are doing what the deepest self likes. And there is getting down to the deepest self! It takes some diving.

• D. H. LAWRENCE

F or his sixtieth birthday, Max came with his partner, Paul, to adaylong workshop titled “Radical Acceptance.” Paul had insisted. “Six decades is enough,” he’d said. “You’re charging to the finish line and not taking in the scenery.”

Max, the owner of an investment consulting firm, agreed. “I suffer from FOMO,” he confessed, when the three of us spoke during a break. Seeing my raised eyebrows, he added, “Fear of Missing Out. I’ll hear about something—a new workout, the next-gen iPhone, a high school reunion, an amazing life-changing workshop”—he paused dramatically to smile at me—“and be afraid I’ll miss the boat by not being part of

it.”

Then he paused again and looked at me with a more serious expression. “The truth is, I’m anxious and never content. Paul nailed it last weekend when he asked me, ‘What is enough?’ I’ve got so much going for me—great career, good reputation, health, loving partner— but it never seems enough.” Then he added, “My real FOMO is that life’s passing by and I’m missing out on what really matters.”

Fear of Missing Out. Max and Paul had introduced me to the shorthand for how so many of us live—haunted by the sense that there’s never enough time, that we’ll die without living fully. Whether we’re chasing after the next sensational experience, another person’s love, or a drink to soften our fears, in those moments we are missing out on presence. We have left the only place—here and now—where we

can realize the truth of who we are, connect caringly with others, and listen to the wind in the trees.

The Zen poet Ryokan wrote, “If you want to find the meaning, stop chasing after so many things.” Chronic wanting keeps us from ever really arriving in the moment and seeing it as it is. When we’re always on our way somewhere else, we are not living the life that is here. RAIN helps to free us from the wanting that constricts our life. In this chapter, you’ll see how Investigating can reveal the unmet needs that drive unhealthy habits of wanting and how Nurturing connects us with inner wholeness and fulfillment. But first let’s look at the universal conditioning that keeps us feeling that something is missing, that this moment is not enough.

AWAY FROM YOUR STAR

Our word “desire” comes from the Latin verb for “missing” or “longing”: desiderare, which means “being away from the stars.” Consider this: Every part of this universe is made of star stuff; our star is the source of our aliveness; its luminosity reflects awareness itself. All forms arise from that source and suffer when they feel separated from it. With this comes a yearning for connectedness and feeling fully alive. The default focus of desire is pleasure because pleasure is a primal biological signal for that which serves this full aliveness: safety, food, sex, self-worth, connection with others, spiritual realization. Desire, then, is the energy of our star calling us home.

While seeking pleasure can be entirely wholesome, the energy of desire becomes problematic and hard to navigate whenever our basic needs are not met. Then desire intensifies, and our attention narrows and fixates on more attainable or tangible substitutes. If we feel unsafe, we may seek power or money; if we feel unloved, we may constantly seek approval or pile up accomplishments in the hope of winning affection. And if our needs have been radically unmet, our fixations can take over. Desire turns into craving and addictive behavior.

Substitutes provide a temporary fix that keeps us hooked, but they never truly deliver. Our accomplishments never allow us to feel truly

worthwhile; our money or possessions do not bring real security; our hundreds of friends on social media will never convince us we are lovable. So we keep feeling that something is missing, reaching for substitutes and distancing ourselves from our star—the source of our longing.

REFLECTION: “IF ONLY” MIND

When we pursue substitutes, we’re in a limbic trance; the beliefs and unmet needs

driving us are largely “below the line,” outside conscious awareness. Investigating

reveals a chronic feeling of dissatisfaction that keeps us leaning forward and a belief

that “if only” things would change, life would be better.

Is there something on the horizon that (if it happens) you’re convinced will make

everything different? That you’ll be fulfilled or content “if only” you can find the right

partner, or have a child, or lose weight, or get the right job—or if your teen gets

accepted at the right college? Now investigate the effect of “if only” mind: How does it

shape your thoughts and your mood? Your decisions as you navigate life? Your

capacity to enjoy your life now? Are you waiting for your life to happen?

Try noticing how “if only” shows up in smaller ways throughout your day: If only I could

stay in bed a little longer, the kids would get dressed faster, there was less traffic, I

could get another cup of coffee, get this project out of the way, get the latest upgrade

for my mobile device, get my files in order, have that glass of wine, have someone else

clean up the kitchen, sleep through the night. When you do get what you’ve been

wanting, how long do you stay satisfied?

Now pause your reading, and check this moment for hints of “if only.” Is there a sense

that you are on your way to something else? A background feeling of dissatisfaction? Is

there something missing right now?



Because substitutes never satisfy for long, the waves of fixated desire can take over our lives. We are tossed around on the surface of the sea and unable to access the depths—the pure longing of our deepest self. As D. H. Lawrence says, this takes some diving!

RAIN WITH FOMO

Max’s takeaway from our workshop was a relationship with his future self. During a guided meditation, he saw an older version of himself on a small sailboat, carried by the winds around a pristine lake. He wasn’t chasing anything or proving anything. The message from his future

self was this: “You can be content right where you are.”

This vision inspired Max, but it seemed worlds away from his real life. When he came to a retreat four months later, we decided to bring RAIN to what he now called “my endless pursuit.” During his sittings, he’d been obsessing on a major new investment, which kept him from coming into presence. I suggested he Recognize and Allow the obsessing and then make the U-turn. “If you shift your attention from your thoughts about the project to the feelings in your body, what do you notice?” He named “excitement, grasping, and fear.”

Further investigation revealed an area of heat, pressure, and agitation in his chest. I asked what that place was believing, and he said, “That if I don’t do something, I’ll miss out. I’ll lose my chance.” “What will you lose?” I asked.

Max shook his head. “I don’t know, maybe money? A chance to do good? An impressive addition to my résumé?”

“Is it true, Max? Will you lose something important?”

Again he shook his head. “No, but that’s how it feels. And that’s

how it always feels . . . that if I don’t act, I’ll lose something . . . lose aliveness, life.”

Now that he had contacted the mix of fear and wanting as a felt experience in his body, I suggested that Max again bring to mind his future self as a source of wise Nurturing. “How might your future self guide you?”

He nodded and after a few minutes said, “I’m on that sailboat with him, but this time it’s different. He’s actively engaging the wind, however it’s blowing. He’s present, alive . . . having a blast!” Max was smiling.

I asked, “Is there something he wants you to know?”

“Totally. It’s like he just put a hand on my shoulder and said, ‘Life is enough in this moment. You don’t have to chase things. This is it!’” Then he opened his eyes and laughed. “It’s right now, Tara, . . . riding these winds . . . sitting here, breathing, exploring this stuff with you, feeling warmth in my chest. This is it!”

Especially if we’ve been chasing after something outside ourselves, when we contact what’s happening right now, we might find, as Max did, the agitation or tension or fear that’s part of desire. Often there’s a nagging sense of “something’s missing.” But what happens if instead

of pursuing what we think we want, we stay there? What happens if we

encourage ourselves (as with a kind hand on our shoulder) to trust

that “this is it”? Gradually we will discover the fullness and aliveness of our own presence. With this comes the blessing of feeling “enough”— that what we really long for is already here. We can feel the spirit of this in a famous poem by the Zen master Ryokan: “The thief left it behind: the moon at the window.”

It’s important to remember that while coming into presence frees

us inwardly, it doesn’t necessarily mean radical outward change. Max’s daily activities stayed pretty much the same. Laid-back wasn’t really

his style. He continued competing for high-profile contracts and the esteem of professional colleagues. But as he put it, “I’m not so restless and driven . . . there are more times when I’m really here. And when I do start anxiously chasing after a better wind, the old sailor puts a hand on my shoulder and whispers, ‘This is it!’”

ADDICTED TO LOVE

The medicine for Max’s FOMO was learning to keep coming back to

the present moment. Yet there are times when we cannot make the Uturn into presence without encountering deep and raw layers of unmet needs. I’ve seen this in my own life, and with countless others, when desire snowballs into full-blown obsession. At these times, we need to pay deeper attention to the craving and fear that are driving us.

David came to a meditation retreat shortly after his partner of six months ended their volatile romance. He was tormented by her loss. His mind kept raking through their short history, rerunning moments of passion, moments when their love seemed to promise a lifetime of intimacy together. The more he obsessed, the more desperate his longing became.

When we met privately, he proclaimed, “I’ve lost the love of my life. People keep telling me I’ll find someone else, someone even better,

but . . . I don’t believe it. I think she was the one. I feel like my life is over.”

David was surprised when I suggested that we do RAIN together, starting right where he was. The words poured out: “I sit there trying

to meditate, and all I can think about is calling her, making up, making

love, making it work.” He told me how he kept going over their last fight in his head, trying to figure out exactly how he’d screwed up. “What feeling are you most aware of?” I asked.

“Wanting,” he said, “intense, nonstop wanting.”

“See if you can just Recognize this wanting and Allow it to be there, without adding any judgment.” He shook his head with disgust.

“That’s hard. I feel so out of control, so ashamed that I’m wanting her so badly.”

“I understand, David. That’s so natural. See if you can Allow that too, the shame that comes with the wanting. It might help to name these feelings—‘wanting, wanting . . . shame, shame’—and just pause, giving them space to be here for now.”

After a few moments, he nodded, and I asked, “What is the strongest emotion right now?”

He didn’t hesitate: “Wanting. Every cell in me is yearning to have her back.”

“Okay,” I said, “then let’s Investigate the wanting. Try watching one of your fantasies as if it were playing on a mental screen.” I waited as he closed his eyes. “Now notice what happens when you turn away from the screen. What’s going on in your body and heart?” After a few moments, I added, “Where does the wanting live in your body? Can you tell me how it feels?” I was encouraging him to make the critical U-turn from thoughts to feelings, to enter his experience fully.

David’s wanting turned out to be a clawed hand, nails sunk deep into his heart, yanking. Every tug felt as if it were shredding flesh. His heart was being ripped apart.

We then began to deepen presence through a way of Investigating that I call “Tracing Back Desire.” This helps us find the unmet needs and, within them, the true longing that fuels our fixated wants. “Imagine that you could go inside that wanting energy, that clawed hand that’s yanking at your heart.” David was leaning forward, his jaws clenched, face scrunched in utter concentration. I waited a few moments, then asked, “What does that wanting energy want to experience?”

“It wants company . . . it doesn’t want to be alone.”

“Okay, stay inside that yanking feeling,” I said, “and sense . . . what is the feeling of ‘company’? If it had ‘company,’ what would that be

like?”

“It could relax . . . it could let go . . . it would be part of something.” “And what would it feel like to be ‘part of something’? . . . What’s that like?”

“It’s like”—he put both hands on his chest—“my heart’s this open space . . . it’s totally alive . . . filled with warmth . . . light.”

“Can you feel that right now?” He nodded. “Is this what that wanting energy really wants? Is there anything else?”

David was very still. Then he whispered, “Right now there’s no wanting . . .”

Investigation opened into the fullness of Nurture as David rested in this warm, luminous space. After a while, I asked him to sense what he wanted to remember about this experience. “This is love, Tara . . . and it’s already here,” he responded. David’s hands were still on his heart. “But I know I’m going to leave this room, and within minutes or hours I’m going to forget and want it with her.” Then, gently patting his chest, he said, “Somehow I have to remember that it’s here.”

Before we ended our session, we talked about not fighting the fantasies that would inevitably recur, and I told David he should try not to judge himself for this deeply grooved and very human way of seeking love. When we judge our desires, we block the pathway to the love that’s buried within the longing, the intrinsic, timeless love that is calling to us.

IS ATTACHMENT BAD?

Many people ask me if we are supposed to let go of our longing for intimate connection with others. They’ve heard that “attachment” is unhealthy or that it blocks spiritual development. But it’s natural and healthy to seek close, nurturing relationships. Our bodies and brains seek attachment from the moment we’re born; that’s how we humans survive. Infants attach even to caregivers who fail again and again to meet their needs. The challenge is that when our attachment needs haven’t been met in early life, we may grasp after intimacy—or push it away—making real connection impossible. And when our substitutes

fall short, we often touch the feelings of abandoned children everywhere, crying in the night for comfort that doesn’t come.

For David, passionate sex simply upped the ante. We humans have been struggling with (and celebrating) the biology of desire ever since we came down out of the trees. Hormones and other neurotransmitters flood the body, driving both arousal and bonding and creating a strong imprint on memory. Some of the same brain circuits are also involved in addiction to opiates and other drugs. No wonder David felt a claw in his heart; he was in withdrawal.

That’s why the process David was learning—finding a love sourced within—is essential for healing. When desire is outwardly fixated, RAIN helps us undo the fixation by making the U-turn into our direct experience. Attachment will still arise; it just won’t run our lives and block the flow of love. The more we can trust the loving inside ourselves, the more we can connect with others from a place of wholeness, spontaneity, and authentic care.

FROM UNMET NEEDS TO ADDICTION

If our earliest needs for safety and connection have not been met, we become more

susceptible to addiction. Neuroscientists have documented that stress causes biological

changes in the brain, including a decrease in the dopamine receptors that register

pleasure. This makes us more driven to seek high-intensity rewards involving sex, food,

money, or drugs. While we can get a fix and temporarily light up our pleasure centers,

the dopamine receptors become less sensitive, and we need more and more

stimulation to get satisfaction. As participants in Alcoholics Anonymous are sometimes

reminded, “One drink may make you feel like a new person . . . then the new person

has to have a drink.”

When we’re caught in craving, activity in the prefrontal cortex decreases. This impairs

critical thinking and capacity for restraint. You feel like an entirely different person. It’s

you in limbic hijack, without access to your more recently evolved brain! Over time, the

brain patterns that make up our self-sense become deeply disrupted. Our thinking, our

feelings, our choices, and our ways of relating to others all become hitched to the

addiction. We lose contact with the gold—the spirit that animates our being.



SUBSTITUTING FOOD FOR LOVE

Fran came to see me on the recommendation of her sponsor at Overeaters Anonymous, a 12-step group. She told me OA was helping. Making new friends, hearing their struggles, and honestly sharing her own helped her feel less ashamed of her compulsion to eat. But whenever Fran hit a major stressor, she still relapsed into bingeing. Maybe she was missing a key ingredient, she said. “The people who believe in a higher power have someplace to turn when they’re alone and the going gets tough, but I don’t. My sponsor has tried to help me with this. I can sense there’s something larger than me in this

universe, but not some godlike power watching over me in particular.” Fran wanted to know if meditation could give her the inner

strength to resist her compulsion to eat. I suggested we start with RAIN and asked if she was willing to revisit a recent episode of bingeing.

“Oh, that would be when my father and stepmother were coming,” she said. Fran told me they had a strained relationship and that she’d been dreading their visit. She’d gotten home from work early to clean house, snacked instead of having dinner, and then the snacking turned into an extended binge on cereal and ice cream.

She said that her anxiety had really kicked in as she converted her office into a guest room and tried to plan a meal they’d enjoy. We began RAIN there, with Fran noting that anxiety and pausing to give it some space. She Investigated by asking that anxious place what it was believing. “Well, they’re going to regret coming, they’ll think my pullout couch isn’t comfortable and that I can’t cook. They’ll compare me to my older brother and sister, who are earning over 200K a year each and have families and live a more traditional lifestyle . . .”

“Okay . . . so let’s slow down and take a moment,” I said. “What is the strongest feeling that is coming up?”

“Anxiety . . . but also . . . well, really, hurt. In their mind, I’m a

loser; they don’t respect me.”

“And when you let yourself feel that hurt . . . where is it in your body?”

Fran put a hand on her throat. “Right here,” she said. “My throat feels strangled . . . like I’m trying to hold back tears, hold back words.” “What would happen if you stopped holding back tears and words?”

“If all that pain came out, no one would ever want to be around

me.” She paused, then continued: “My brother always used to tell me, ‘You’re hurt waiting to happen.’ Even when I was very little.” Fran started crying. “Nobody wants to be with me when I’m hurting.”

“Is that really true?”

“Well . . . I don’t want to be with me. . . . I feel so childlike, so stupid for being so sensitive.”

I asked Fran to go inside that place in her throat that felt strangled, that young place that so easily felt hurt. “What does that part most need from you right now . . . how does it want you to be with it?”

“It wants me to know that it’s hurting, and it wants me to care,

and . . . not to leave.”

“Okay, now take a few moments here, Fran, and let yourself witness that hurting place from the kindest, wisest part of your being. . . . How do you want to respond?”

Fran sat a bit taller and took a few deep breaths. “I want to assure that young part that I care. . . . I do care . . . but I know I will leave. I just can’t stay with those feelings for long.”

“How about telling her that you care, and you want to stay, even though it’s hard, and you’ll do the best you can?”

Fran nodded. “The hurting place said that’s good enough.” And after a time she added, “Something inside me is easier . . . just tender, not hurting as much.”

HOLE IN THE SOUL

“I was born with what I like to call a hole in my soul. . . . A pain that came from the reality that I just wasn’t good enough. That I wasn’t deserving enough. That you weren’t paying attention to me all the time. That maybe you didn’t like me enough.

“For us addicts, recovery is more than just taking a pill or maybe getting a shot. . . . Recovery is also about the spirit, about dealing with that hole in the soul.”

—William Cope Moyers



Over the next several months, Fran and I did many rounds of RAIN together. The Investigation step helped Fran become intimately familiar with the unmet need for belonging—for being seen, cared for, accompanied. Contacting the “hole in her soul” that was driving her anxiety made it easier for her to send herself messages of care. But

outside our sessions, when the anxiety progressed to compulsion, she was unable to stay present in that hurting place. She’d interrupt the old pattern briefly and then just roll into a binge.

This began to change after a RAIN meditation she did on her own. When we next met, Fran told me she’d felt hurt when an OA friend didn’t include her in a post-meeting outing. Her adult mind knew it was probably an innocent oversight, but her inner child was wounded. Typically, she would have gone home and (as she put it) stuffed the child with food. But this time she went directly into her bedroom and curled up in bed. Her hands went to her throat, and soon she was sobbing. “It was like I was utterly alone, young, no one there . . . and at the same time I was also watching. My heart just opened to this young girl, and I whispered over and over, ‘I want to be with you, I’m not leaving, I’m not leaving.’ And then it wasn’t even me whispering. It

was like my soul . . . this light-filled presence . . . was embracing

her . . . me . . . I don’t know. But it was spiritual, beyond the little me. I guess this is my higher power . . . even when all the emotions settled, I felt like I was glowing.”

YOUR STAR IS CALLING YOU

That glow Fran experienced in After the RAIN was empowering. Within days, she was able to interrupt what might have been a damaging relapse. She accepted that sometimes she’d still get hooked and that cultivating this pathway would be a lifetime’s work. But she now trusted that—together with the support of OA—she could respond to the needs of the hurting part within her. Nurturing and staying present during After the RAIN would deepen her connection with that caring presence she called her soul. It also shifted a deeply lodged, limiting sense of identity. As Fran said, “I have addictive behaviors,

but I am not an addict. . . . I’m so much more.”

Awakening from the trance of wanting is a spiritual path. When you are driven by unmet needs to pursue harmful substitutes, you are

being driven further and further from your star. The suffering of wants and addictive cravings is your star calling you to awaken, and RAIN can guide you in listening and responding. You can learn to make the

U-turn, discover what you really long for, and heal your unmet needs. Through the radical compassion of RAIN, you can discover the timeless, loving source that has been calling you home.

MEDITATION: TRACING BACK DESIRE

Sit comfortably, and take a few full breaths, releasing tension and letting go with the out breath.

Scan your life and sense where the energy of wanting might be taking over in some way and causing suffering.

Bring to mind a particular situation that might regularly trigger the desire or the thoughts that most stimulate this wanting. Let the situation or thoughts be as clear and close as possible so you can feel the wanting alive inside you.

Recognize and Allow the wanting to be there, and if there is a layer of judgment (“I shouldn’t be feeling this”), see if it’s possible to send a gentle message that this is a natural, universal experience. “It belongs.”

Investigate the desire by letting your physical posture express wanting, perhaps by leaning forward, clenching your fists, feeling how your face is when wanting is strong. Then bring your attention inside your body: Where do you feel the energy of wanting? What sensations are you most aware of? Are they pleasant or unpleasant? Is there fear? Any other emotion?

Now continue Investigating by asking that wanting place, “What do you most long for right now?” Attention? Safety? Acceptance? Connection? Understanding? Love? Listen, and then, whatever the response, ask, “Imagine if you received that, what would that give you, what would that be like?”

Often it can take repeating the question—“Imagine if you received that, what would that give you, what would that be like?”—in order to contact within yourself the experience you are longing for.

With each round, try to feel in your body what the experience you are wanting really is. What would it actually feel like if you got the love (understanding, connection, belonging) you long for?

Nurture by giving yourself permission to open to and fill yourself with the goodness of this experience. Soak it into every cell, and rest in the experience you are longing for.

After the RAIN: You might ask yourself, “Is it true that what I long for is already here?”

MEDITATION: WHAT IS MY DEEPEST LONGING?

Find a comfortable way of sitting, and allow yourself to relax and be at ease. With a receptive presence, become aware of the state of your heart. Is there a sense of openness or tightness? Of peace or anxiety? Of contentment or dissatisfaction? As you feel the region of your heart, direct the breath there, so you are gently breathing in and out of your heart.

Begin to Investigate by asking yourself, “What does my heart really long for?” It can also be helpful to ask, “What most matters in this life?” Or, “If I was at the end of my life looking back, what would be most important about how I lived today . . . this moment?” As you pose these questions, sense that you are addressing your inquiry directly to your heart.

After asking, simply listen and be aware of any words, images, or feelings that arise. Try to be patient. It can take some time for the

mind to open out of its habitual ideas about life and connect with what is most alive and true. You may need to repeat, several times, some version of “What does my heart long for?” and then listen in receptive silence. As you listen, stay in touch with the feelings in your body, and particularly in your heart.

Your longing will probably express itself differently at different times. You might feel an aspiration to love fully or to feel loved, to know truth, to be peaceful, to be helpful, to be free from fear and suffering. There is no “right” longing. Sometimes you will land on an immediate intention that supports your longing. For example, you might become aware of the yearning to write poetry, to practice yoga, to help others, to engage in social activism. This would be in service of the deep longing to live a creative, compassionate, vital life. What is important is attuning to what is most true for you in this moment.

The sign of arriving at a deep longing is a felt sense of sincerity, innocence, energy, or flow. Some people describe an inner shift that gives them fresh resolution, openness, and ease. If there is no real sense of connecting with what matters, that’s fine. You might sit quietly and open to whatever comes up or choose to continue this exploration at another time.

After the RAIN: If you sense you’ve arrived at what feels like a pure and deep longing, allow yourself to let go into its fullness. Feel

the very essence of this yearning in your cells as it expresses itself through your whole body and being. Sense the longing as the calling of your awakening heart.

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES





When I try Tracing Back Desire, I keep arriving at wanting to be special to someone. Is there



something wrong with wanting this? If so, where am I supposed to go from here?


We are social animals, and our survival and flourishing rely, in part, on the nurturing of others. It’s entirely natural to want to

feel special, to want to be treated in certain ways, to want a particular person as a partner. Yet this wanting can cause suffering if it takes over. Our attention becomes fixated on an external source, as if who we are and our entire well-being depended on someone relating to us in a certain way. The purpose of Tracing Back Desire is to connect you with an inner source so that your wants motivate you but don’t control and limit your life. When you’re practicing with Tracing Back Desire and you arrive at the desire to be special to someone, deepen your investigation. Make the U-turn by shifting your attention from the person you want (real or imagined) and starting to imagine and explore the inner experience of “feeling special.” If you were special to someone, how would that make you feel inside? Warm? Relaxed? Glowing? Vibrant? Connected to everything?

Whatever positive feeling you find—perhaps “warmth and aliveness”—let it fill you. Get familiar with it. This is what you are really wanting; this is the felt sense of being special. And it’s here inside you. Get to know and trust this inner source of well-being. You will naturally feel the urge to find that special person as well,

and that’s fine. But if you know that what you long for can also be found within, you will create much more ease, grace, and contentment in your life.





I know that desire is “natural,” but I feel deeply ashamed of how much I crave food, sex, or getting high on drugs.


Most of us believe we should be able to control ourselves and that our cravings mean we’re failing—particularly when we act on them. This shame fuels the core sense of deficiency that often drives addictive behavior.

The beginning of freedom is to bring a healing attention to our shame. When we are deprived, craving is natural. If you haven’t eaten for a long time, your body will crave food. Similarly, if we are deprived of love, attention, and security, we will crave fulfillment of these universal needs. And if those needs go unmet, that craving will transfer itself to a substitute like food, sex, or drugs. It’s not your fault that you have unmet needs and that they are driving you to substitute gratifications. Countless humans are in the same boat.

When shame comes up, try calling on the wisest, most loving part of your being—your future or evolved self. See through those compassionate eyes, and tell your small self, “It’s not your fault.” Or try saying, “You’re okay, sweetheart,” or “These cravings are yours, but they are not all of you.” And remind yourself, “Others feel this too.” If you bring a compassionate presence to shame over and over again, it will gradually loosen its grip. And you will find yourself able to respond to the cravings in a fresh and resourceful way.

PART III

RAIN and Your Relationships





EIGHT


A Forgiving RAIN

I imagine one of the reasons people cling to their hates so stubbornly is because they sense, once hate is gone, they will be forced to deal with the pain.

• JAMES BALDWIN Forgiveness does not change the past, but it does enlarge the future.

• PAUL BOESE

A woman from our meditation community who volunteered at ahospice gave me this story about a patient she had befriended. Charlotte was often anxious or depressed, and as she neared death, she was increasingly mute due to the tumor growing in her throat. One morning when I arrived, I found her distraught from a nightmare: She had dreamed that the staff told her she had only three days to live. Her voice weak and raspy, Charlotte insisted that she wasn’t ready, she couldn’t die yet. She had something important to say to her husband first. Much to my astonishment, three days later Charlotte was packed and about to go home. The staff told me her tumor had shrunk dramatically.

The next time I visited, Charlotte had returned. She seemed deeply at peace. Here’s what she shared with me, as close to her words as I can recall: “I was angry at my husband, on his case, all through our years together. His work and tennis always came before me, he was too permissive with our kids, he was always intellectualizing but couldn’t express feelings, couldn’t fix things

around the house . . . and the list goes on. After twenty-some

years of our marriage, he became too close with another woman.

He was honest about it and didn’t sleep with her, but I never got

over it. I guess I already felt rejected. Even from the early days, I

couldn’t forgive him for not making me feel special. What I saw

was a guy who was letting me down, not on my side. I forgot his

basic decency and care. It wasn’t until that dream that I realized

I needed to tell him I loved him . . . that I regretted nothing

more in my whole life than how my judgments drove us apart.

So I told him and he listened. He shared some of his own

regrets, and when we hugged, we both had tears streaming down

our cheeks. It was the first closeness we’d had in years. Now I

am ready to go.”

• • •

We don’t have to wait until we’re dying to free our hearts from the coils of resentment, anger, and blame. Yet because these habits of aggression are so deeply ingrained, we do have to be dedicated and purposeful in order to release them. Otherwise, we risk spending decades in a trance that keeps us from feeling truly close or intimate with anyone, including ourselves.

REFLECTION: AT THE END OF LIFE

I often invite students to imagine they are at the end of their life looking back. This vantage point helps us remember what matters most so that we can Recognize the habits that separate us from each other.



Take a few moments now to travel into the future and imagine yourself close to death. Now, as if you were looking back through the years, reflect on an important relationship. Was there openness,

acceptance, and care? Or were you distanced by judgment, anger, and blame? If you were with this person right now, how might this end-oflife perspective guide you?

Witnessing how resentment ensnares our heart moves us toward a path of forgiving in small and large ways. Like Charlotte, we most deeply want to be loving and free. There is a wisdom in us that knows that we need to release blame if we are to love each other and love our life.

HEALTHY ANGER VERSUS THE TRANCE OF BLAME

We’ve all been wounded by others—neglected, not seen, rejected, disrespected. Many of us—and those we love—have been abused or devalued and systemically oppressed because of our sexual

orientation, gender identity, race, or religion. Anger has an intelligence; it is an essential survival emotion. We need to pay attention when it mobilizes our bodies and fills our minds with stories of wrongdoing. It alerts us to marshal our energies against obstacles to our well-being, to create better boundaries, to defend ourselves from physical threats, to make our needs or views heard when we’ve been silenced.

And on a societal level, anger in response to oppression can energize the call for justice. Yet, as Buddhist teacher and author Ruth King writes, “anger is not transformative, it is initiatory.” It’s an

energy we need to use wisely.

But what if our stories of blame go on and on? What if we regularly feel triggered, victimized, and angry and our blame is directed toward all sorts of people, including ourselves?

Chronic blame and resentment almost always signal a painfully limiting trance. As the “on button” becomes jammed, our anger hardens into armor around our heart. Like a scab that never falls off, it prevents the light and warmth of awareness from healing our wounds. It leads us to react from fear rather than respond to our circumstances with wisdom. And it separates us from others, undermining understanding, empathy, and intimacy.

When we are in trance, we become what one of my friends calls “blame ready to happen.” Like heat-seeking missiles, we’re easily triggered by a tone of voice, an offhand comment, being kept waiting, a lack of attention. Our reaction is out of proportion to what is

occurring, and we habitually assume that others are judging us, taking advantage of us, disrespecting us, or pushing us away. Or we may

nurse slow-burning resentment; perhaps our teen neglects household tasks, or our partner spends too much time working. This chronic resentment is insidious; it creates an unseen distance that gets in the way of loving and enjoying others.

REFLECTION: BLAME READY TO HAPPEN

When we’re in trance, we are easily triggered by situations and people that are associated, often unconsciously, with our original wounds. Awakening from trance begins with recognizing when we are inside it—when our thoughts and feelings are operating “under the line,” outside conscious awareness.

While it’s natural to be annoyed or hurt by certain behaviors directed toward us, the trance of blame produces a stronger, more painful, and more lasting response. Ask yourself these questions: “How regularly am I triggered?” “When I’m blaming someone, does it take over my whole experience of them?”

With these questions in mind, notice your reaction in situations when people

criticize you

don’t listen or seem interested when you’re talking

say they’re too busy to see you

don’t respond to emails or texts

let you down—don’t help you enough or do “their part”

don’t show you appreciation

demand too much from you

disagree with you

have something you want (wealth, job, home, children, partner)

are always late



When we’re caught in the trance of anger and blame, our survival brain shapes every dimension of our experience. Our bodies are tense, our hearts numb or constricted; our thinking is agitated and rigid. The thicker the trance, the less we have access to our prefrontal cortex, the home of reason, mindfulness, and empathy.

This cutoff from our whole brain dramatically impacts how we perceive others. Rather than real beings with subjective feelings like

ourselves, they become what I call Unreal Others. Our attention focuses on their faults, their difference from us, on how they are threatening or impeding us. At the same time, our self-sense narrows and we become an Unreal Self—identified as a victim, identified with our righteous anger. When the aperture of our attention contracts in this way, we are living below the line, unable to feel connected with others or at home with ourselves.

THE UNREAL OTHER

Stefan, a meditation student in our D.C. community, had been trapped for decades in a relationship of Unreal Othering with his father. While aware of how his armoring of blame closed his heart, he felt stymied

by the intensity of his resentment and anger.

A sensitive, artistic child who took after his mother in many ways, Stefan knew from an early age that he was a disappointment to his father. His father, who loved carpentry, sports, and all things

outdoors, took every opportunity to deride Stefan’s lack of athletic ability, his fear of rock climbing, his total lack of interest in tools. At first Stefan strived to find ways to please his dad, but as an adolescent he learned to shut him out, and even stopped talking to him for several months.

The hostility continued after Stefan left home. At holiday gatherings, his father seemed compelled to fling out taunts about the son who couldn’t change the oil, who never went to a Patriots game, who didn’t like steak. The jabs still drew blood, bringing up the

feelings of inferiority and self-doubt that had plagued Stefan since childhood. And while the critiques subsided somewhat after Stefan

and his wife had children, and again after Stefan’s mother died, the tense distance between the two remained.

Then, a few months before Stefan came to one of our weeklong meditation retreats, his father had a heart attack. He’d been living alone, but now he was forced to move to an assisted-living center. He could no longer drive, and the loss of independence and home devastated him. Stefan helped his sister make the arrangements, but he was unsympathetic. His sister challenged him: “He was a real jerk

when you were younger, but that’s history. The guy’s having a hard time. When are you going to forgive him . . . after he’s dead?” Outraged, Stefan responded, “He’ll never know how much suffering he’s caused. . . . He doesn’t deserve my forgiveness.”

Stefan and his father were at a poignant impasse. Both were trapped in their roles: the unsatisfactory son; the hostile, belittling father. Both had hardened into Unreal Others, two-dimensional characters in each other’s inner movies, rather than real, complicated, subjective beings with their own passions and cares, hurts and insecurities. Both were relating from the narrow confines of an Unreal Self.

REFLECTION: UNREAL OTHER AND UNREAL SELF

Bring to mind a recent conflict with a friend, partner, or family member. Now view this as a movie, including what triggered the conflict, and then freeze the frame at a high point of tension.



In those moments, what are you focused on? Is it a facial expression communicating anger or vengefulness, aversion or disrespect? Words or a tone of voice conveying those emotions?

Are you seeing them as a bad, Unreal Other?

What happens when you consider the challenges they face? Might they be feeling hurt, stressed, anxious, deficient, upset with themselves?

What happens when you remind yourself of the things you value about them—the ways they can be caring, helpful, creative, engaging? Now shift your attention to yourself:

From the perspective of a witness, how do you imagine you look when you are caught in blame? How do you sound? How does your body feel? Your heart? Are you in the role of angry or hurt victim? Self-righteous judge? Threatening aggressor?

Do you like yourself this way? Is this who you really are?

What are you forgetting about your own pain and vulnerability?

What are you forgetting about your goodness, about what really matters to your heart?

When we unconsciously perceive people as bad, Unreal Others, it’s easy to hurt them. We no longer see them as the subjective, feeling beings that we are. And as I’ll discuss in chapter 10, this Unreal Othering is also the tragic grounds for oppressing whole groups of people whom we deem inferior, dangerous, or hostile because of characterizations such as race or class, religion or political views, and sexual orientation or identity. Still less recognized: our Unreal Othering and violence toward non-human species.

The good news is that our evolving brains have the capacity for mindfulness and compassion. We can emerge from trance, we can see ourselves and others more clearly, and we can cultivate a forgiving heart.

DEFINING FORGIVENESS

Here’s a helpful definition: Forgiving means letting go of the

protective armor of blame and/or hatred that encases your heart. Another definition I like is this: Forgiving means never putting anyone (including yourself) out of your heart.

And another: Forgiveness is the compassion that arises when we’ve brought full presence to the suffering of hurt and wounds.

However, for many the word “forgiveness” does not resonate, or it creates confusion. If this is the case for you, feel free to substitute “compassion” or “openhearted acceptance” for forgiveness as you continue reading.

Forgiveness is a process that unfolds over time. In both myself and others, I’ve noticed that forgiving often becomes possible after we ourselves have been the recipient of another’s kindness. As I reflect on this, it makes sense. When we are treated with compassion, that offering of warmth and connection decreases our fear, reduces our sensitivity to rejection, soothes our wounds, and helps us accept the feelings of loss that lie just under the armor of blame. Our heart begins to soften, and our view expands. We can see more clearly how another might be suffering.

But we don’t have to wait for someone else to unlock our heart. Forgiving can unfold through the practice of RAIN, when we use Investigation to look beneath our armor and bring self-compassion to what we find. This too softens our hearts and enables us to extend our compassion to others.

For most people, the shift from blaming others to an inner-directed presence isn’t easy. It takes courage to open ourselves to emotional reality, to accept our hurt, fear, and loss. As the writer Anne Lamott once wrote, quoting an unknown source, “Forgiveness is giving up all hope of having had a different past.” We are taking the exquisite risk, shedding the protection we’ve held so tightly, and saying—gently and tenderly—YES to what is.

REFLECTION: WHY DO WE HOLD SO TIGHTLY TO BLAME?

Please bring to mind someone toward whom you often feel anger and blame. Then ask yourself, “If I let go of judging this person as bad or wrong, what painful feeling would I have to feel?”



When I introduce this reflection in workshops, I often ask people to say out loud a word or phrase for what they feel. Hands go up, and person after person shares the fears and vulnerability that lie beneath the armoring of blame. Do any of the following resonate with you? Powerless, out of control

Afraid—they would just go on hurting me

If they’re not wrong, then I’m the one who is wrong

Hurt

I’d have to take responsibility

Accepting a painful loss

Grief

I’d have to accept that life isn’t fair

Unlovable

Unsafe

Forgiving is hard because we’ll do almost anything to avoid the vulnerability inside us. It’s also hard because we often fear that forgiving means excusing harmful behavior: “You hurt me, but it’s okay. I forgive you, so you don’t need to take any responsibility.” Because forgiving is so central to freeing our own heart and healing our world, I’d like to name some other points that students find confusing.

MISUNDERSTANDINGS ABOUT FORGIVENESS

Forgiving Does Not Mean We Should Deny or Suppress Our

Anger or Fear, Hurt or Grief

Our body, heart, and mind naturally contract defensively when we feel hurt, and there’s intelligence to that contraction. The message of anger and blame is this: “I’m threatened; there is an obstacle to my wellbeing.” Before moving toward forgiveness, we need to protect

ourselves from any imminent danger. We also need to offer acceptance and compassionate presence to whatever emotions we experience. Bypassing an emotion like hate or anger by ignoring or pushing it

away can lead to what I call premature forgiveness; we might assume we’ve forgiven, but actually we’ve dissociated from the very feelings that need our attention.

If we’ve experienced abuse or other forms of trauma, it is particularly important to respect the message of anger and take whatever time we need to find a safe space for healing. The idea that we can and “should” forgive a perpetrator may bring up shame and failure, and divert from the natural healing process. Rather than trying to access compassion for another, our full attention needs to be on what gives us a feeling of efficacy and strength. This means feeling our anger, honoring the need for protection, and offering ourselves selfcompassion and care. When we’ve healed enough to be able to think about the person who perpetrated the trauma without being retriggered, we can begin to include them as a Real Other in our heart.

Forgiving Is Not Condoning Harmful Behavior; nor Does It

Mean Passivity or Inaction

When we forgive, we are in no way saying “What you did is okay” or that we’ll allow the behavior to continue. If a friend betrays our confidence, we can forgive and also create new boundaries, no longer sharing what feels private. We can forgive an ex-partner for emotional abuse and choose never again to be alone with them. We can forgive a therapist or teacher for unethical or harmful behavior and also inform the proper authorities, as well as other people who might be at risk. While the energy of anger may catalyze us, it can’t sustain us in the long run. We need forgiveness to go hand in hand with a deep dedication to social activism. We can forgive politicians who are responsible for destroying our earth’s ecosystem and throw ourselves into supporting the movements and leaders that reflect our values. We can release hatred or blame toward those who perpetuate the oppression of marginalized people and devote ourselves to reducing bias and seeking justice and reparation for those who are being harmed.

Forgiving Does Not Have to Be Done on Our Own

We often need support, especially if we’ve experienced traumatic wounding. We might choose trauma therapy, work with a healer or spiritual counselor, or share with trusted friends. When an entire group has been traumatized—such as those who’ve lost friends and family in a church bombing, in a shooting rampage, or in war—help often comes first through a collective sharing of fear and grief, through ritual and prayer, and through the powerful and healing experience of belonging to something larger, a fellowship of kindred spirits.

Forgiving Is Rarely a One-Shot or Quick Process

Cultivating a forgiving heart—in response to both deep violations and small grievances—is a lifelong process. Like physical healing, it has its own organic timing and can’t be rushed. Especially when we have deep

wounds, healing happens in stages: We often need to bring a caring attention to unfolding layers of anger, fear, shame, and grief.

For many people, blame and resentment are strongest in our closest, most significant relationships. This means we are apt to be continually retriggered. You might find that every time your partner seems at all judgmental, you contract into a frightened, angry, armored self. You may have to move through many rounds of connecting with the hurt under your armor, nurturing yourself, and letting go of the anger. As you do, you’ll find that each round helps to heal your woundedness; each round empowers you; each round gives you a larger sense of who you are and makes it more possible to live without pushing others out of your heart.

THE THREE STAGES OF FORGIVENESS

When I teach about forgiveness, I’ve found it helpful to describe the process in terms of three stages. Like RAIN, these are not invariable, but they provide a useful map.

THE THREE STAGES OF FORGIVENESS

Intending to forgive

Making the U-turn with RAIN Including a Real Other in our heart

In my own practice, when I realize I am caught in the trance of blame, I ask myself three questions that help guide me through these three stages of awakening from blame:

What is my deepest intention in this relationship? This reminds me of my longing for an awake, open heart—a forgiving heart.

What am I unwilling to feel (or running from) inside me? This enables the U-turn, shifting my attention from the other person to the vulnerability under my armoring of blame.

What is really true about this person? How might they be struggling? What matters most to them? This helps me remember the person’s humanness, suffering, and goodness.



Stage 1 of Forgiveness: Intending to Forgive

I know many students who feel that to be on a spiritual path, they should be forgiving. They see anger and blame as embarrassing comments on their spiritual development. Yet forgiving is not something that an ego-self can dictate. In fact, self-judgment or shame makes forgiveness more difficult.

You can’t will forgiveness, but you can be willing. This is an essential understanding. There is some wisdom, beyond your ego, that knows that for your heart to be free, it needs to be inclusive, not blaming. From this place, you understand that you can’t truly be

happy or feel loving if you are holding on to anger and blame. As the Zen teacher Charlotte Joko Beck writes, “Our incapacity to forgive is directly related to our inability to feel joy in our life.”

This place of inner wisdom gives rise to the deep intention toward forgiving. You might feel it as a tender hope or prayer that your heart can relax and open, that you can experience the freedom of a fearless, forgiving heart. This intention to forgive carries real power. In the moments when your intention or prayer is sincere and deep, you become available for healing and transformation. Simply having the intention to forgive opens the door for the whole process of forgiving to unfold.

REFLECTION: INTENDING TO FORGIVE

As you’ve been reading, have you thought about a person you are pushing away with blame or resentment? Can you sense how the trance of blame keeps you small and rigid? How you are forgetting your own gold and theirs? You might call on your future self—the wisest, most loving place in you—and imagine just for a moment what it would be like to have the heartspace that includes this person. Can you sense the freedom that is possible?

Now bring this person to mind and mentally whisper, “My intention is to forgive you, [calling the person by name].” Can you feel the sincerity of your intention, even if some parts of you are still

unready? Trust that with the mindfulness and compassion of RAIN, your heart will become increasingly inclusive, forgiving, and free.

Stage 2 of Forgiveness: Making the U-Turn with RAIN

Our intention to forgive motivates us to do the deep work of RAIN. Once we’ve set our intention, we’ll more readily Recognize when we go into trance. We can then choose to pause and Allow the experience to come more fully into awareness.

We actively step on the path of forgiveness when we make the Uturn. We shift our attention from outwardly directed thoughts of

blame so that we can directly Investigate our inner vulnerability. This is where we really face the hurts and fears that live under the armoring of blame. Healing begins here: With Nurturing, the last step of RAIN, we bring a tender presence to the parts inside us that most need our attention. This dissolves protective armoring and helps soothe, ease, and open our heart.

I’ll return to Stefan to show how RAIN, and the U-turn, worked for him.

When Stefan signed up for our spring retreat, he hoped he’d find some relief from his anger toward his father. Being challenged by his sister had upped the ante. And his meditations were revealing how he was creating his own suffering. “I sit there running all these movies about how bad he is and drive myself crazy. Then I tell myself, ‘I’m the one feeling this . . . he’s just living his life.’” Stefan’s intention to

forgive was becoming increasingly conscious and strong.

Yet during the first few days of the retreat, his mind seemed, as he put it, “hell-bent on fueling the flames.” “Every thought of him brings up anger,” he told me when we met on the third day. “I see that condescending look, and it’s like he’s still in control . . . making me miserable.” After a long pause, he continued, “And yet he’s this old man shuffling around an efficiency apartment. I want to be forgiving— my sister’s right. But I’m still so triggered.”

“What you’re feeling is natural,” I said. “We usually can’t just

decide to drop anger and open our hearts, especially when there’s a deep wound. If you want to truly forgive, the starting place is bringing

your full attention to what you’re actually feeling . . . and we can do

this with RAIN.”

It was quite easy for Stefan to Recognize and Allow his blaming thoughts, so I invited him to make the U-turn and Investigate.

“If you step out of the mental stories of blame, where do you feel

the anger in your body?” I asked.

After a few moments, he responded, “Right here,” and put both hands, one over the other, on the center of his chest.

I said, “Notice what the sensations of anger are like, and let them be as strong as they are. If it helps to keep your attention there, you might leave your hands where they are.”

He nodded and his brows furrowed, his jaw clenched. Then, after some moments, he sighed, lowered his hands, and seemed to slump in his chair. I asked him what he was aware of.

“The anger got intense, and then it sort of collapsed. I feel deflated, defeated . . .” He was silent for a bit, then added in a soft voice, “I was

a disappointment. I just wasn’t male enough for him to respect me.”

I encouraged Stefan to continue Investigating by sensing what happened in his body when he was believing that—that he wasn’t male enough.

“There’s hurt. It’s this young part of me . . . in my chest . . . he’s ashamed, he’s lonely, he’s crying . . . but silently.”

“If he could speak, what would he say?”

“I will never have a father who sees me, who likes me, who wants me as his son.” As he said these words out loud, Stefan put his face in his hands and began sobbing. This was the pain his anger and blame were covering, the deep grief of loss.

I waited a bit and, when he quieted, asked gently, “What does that part of you most need from you right now?”

“To know I’m here, that I care.” I invited Stefan to Nurture that young part of himself by mentally sending that message several times, sincerely, really meaning it.

He again crossed his hands, placed them on his chest, and became very still. A few minutes later, he opened his eyes and said, “Thanks— something lifted a bit; there’s more space, ease.”

I encouraged Stefan to take all the time he needed with the U-turn. Later in the retreat, as I looked out at the students meditating, I often

saw Stefan with two hands crossed on his chest. Then, during our last group meeting, Stefan stood up and shared his “takeaway” from the retreat: “I can make myself a victim by blaming someone else, or I can heal and empower myself.” He put one hand on his chest for a

moment and then added, “It’s a choice.”

The shift in identity out of victimhood is a gift experienced in After the RAIN. I often think of a line from a movie I saw many years ago: “Vengeance is a lazy form of grief.” When I share this with others, they understand. Blaming others is easier than facing the reality of our hurts, fears, and losses. Yet it’s only when we make the U-turn of RAIN, bringing a healing attention to our inner life, that we can access our full strength, wisdom, and compassion. The U-turn undoes victimhood and empowers us to see past the mask of Unreal Other. And this allows us to extend our compassion in ever-widening circles.

Stage 3 of Forgiveness: Including a Real Other in Our Heart

Imagine that you are walking in the woods and see a dog sitting by a tree. You go over to greet it, and suddenly it springs at you with bared fangs. You jump back, angry and afraid. Then you notice that one of its paws is caught in a trap. Your entire mood shifts, and now you are filled with concern. Still, you might not step too close; it’s dangerous. But your heart actively wants to help this dog.

The shift from blame to care occurs the moment you realize that the dog’s aggression is coming from vulnerability and pain. This applies to us all: When we behave in hurtful ways, it is because we are caught in some kind of painful trap.

You might bring to mind someone who has hurt you. Can you see how he or she is entrapped by wounds and fears? When Oprah

Winfrey did a show about childhood trauma, she talked about how early wounds become precursors to violent behavior. Rather than blame, she said, a person needs to ask this important question: “What happened?” What pain from the past drove this behavior? In a New York Times interview, the rapper Jay-Z put it this way: “‘Oh, you got bullied as a kid so you trying to bully me. I understand.’ And once I understand that, instead of reacting to that with anger, I can provide a softer landing and maybe, ‘Aw, man, is you O.K.?’”

If we could read the secret history of our enemies, we should find in each man’s life sorrow and suffering enough to disarm all hostility.

• HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW

We won’t be able to see a bully’s vulnerability if they’ve just injured us. But we can see this secret suffering once we’ve taken care of ourselves.

When I saw Stefan after the retreat, he spoke differently about his father. “We had him to dinner, he was slouched in his chair, clearly getting tired, and my son said, ‘Hey, Gramps, how about a game of ping pong?’ My father immediately sat up tall, made up something about a show he was watching that he needed to get back to. He hated showing vulnerability.”

Stefan was touched by his dad’s pride and powerlessness, and seeing his “leg in a trap” softened and opened Stefan’s heart. He started loosening up, and his father responded in kind. The two watched a Netflix series together, had competitions to see who made the best popcorn, and during the week would text about favorite teams (Patriots versus Steelers).

Six months later, his father had another, even more serious heart attack. At the hospital one evening, Stefan was reading the news aloud when his father put out his hand . . . a signal to stop. Then Stefan heard the words he had never expected to hear: “I know I wasn’t the right dad for you, but I don’t think you know how much I’ve always loved you.” His father’s eyes were wet, and the two held each other’s gaze for some time. These were moments that Stefan, long after his father’s passing some months later, would always remember.

When Stefan shared this with me, he said, “You know, Tara, I think what made it possible for him to say that was that he felt forgiven by me; it was safe enough.”

I don’t share this story as a promise that if you forgive someone, they will come around. But the truth is, the energy of our open heart affects others in profound ways, some seen and some unseen. And it frees us as well.

THE GIFT OF FORGIVENESS

Both giving and receiving forgiveness are pure expressions of radical compassion. Both evolve us. When we open in forgiveness, we reconnect with our own openheartedness. When we feel forgiven, we are able to trust our belonging and our basic goodness. Like breathing in and breathing out, giving and receiving are interrelated: Both allow us to remember and live from the gold.

The author Scott McClanahan tells of a man who left home after an ugly fight with his parents. He stayed away for many years, a few of which he spent in jail. Some months after he was released, he wrote to his parents saying he’d be coming home and giving the date. He said that if they wanted to see him and were not ashamed of what had happened and of where he wound up, they should put a blanket on the clothesline. On the appointed day when he got off the train, he became anxious and started having painful doubts that they’d want to see him. The doubts became more insistent as he got closer to home and remembered the horrible words that had been exchanged. He was about to turn back when he saw a blanket in a tree. Then he saw another. And as the house came into sight, he saw that the clothesline was covered in blankets, the yard was covered in blankets, the roof was covered in blankets. His parents were standing there, and they were welcoming him inside.

We long to be included in each other’s hearts. And we long to love others without holding back. What could be more beautiful than dedicating ourselves to putting out blankets of forgiveness, letting those we’ve pushed away feel us welcoming them home?

PRACTICE: THE RAIN OF FORGIVENESS

Forgiving others has two essential phases: The first is an inner process of healing the woundedness beneath the blame, and the second is bringing a compassionate attention to the other person involved. Please consider the first part below as a “stand alone” meditation, and practice it as long as it takes (days, months, years)

to feel well established in self-compassion. Then, when you are ready, practice them both as a sequence.





Sit in a comfortable way, closing your eyes and coming into stillness. Take several full breaths, and with each exhale, release any tension you are aware of. Begin by reflecting on your intention to cultivate a forgiving heart that includes yourself and all beings.

PART I: RAIN to the Wounds Beneath Blame

Scan your life, and sense where you might be feeling unforgiving toward someone and caught in anger and/or blame. Remind yourself of what happened (or is happening) to cause these feelings. You might ask yourself, “What is the worst part of this? What about this most upsets me?”

“What am I believing about this person? What am I believing about how they are relating to me?”

Recognize: Mentally note whatever feelings and thoughts are predominant as you bring this person to mind.

Allow: Pause and Allow this experience to be here, as it is, without any judgment or effort to do anything.

Investigate: Now make the U-turn, letting go of thoughts of the other person and bringing your full attention to what is happening inside you.

Discover how your upset feelings and thoughts about the

person express themselves as feelings in your body: Where

are those feelings strongest? What are they like? Take your

time to fully enter and feel the part of you that is most

distressed.

You might ask this hurting part the following: “How do you

want me to be with you? What do you most need? Is it acceptance? Protection? Understanding? Forgiveness? Compassion? Love?”

Nurture: Call on your wisest, most loving self (your future self, your awakened heart). Imagine that you can listen and respond from your future self: How might you offer what is most needed? Is there a touch (like your hand on your heart), a message, or an image that

helps that wounded part receive what it needs?

Take some moments (thirty seconds) to bring Nurturing to this part and to sense how this part experiences the compassion that is offered. (Note: If it is difficult to access your own awakened heart, you can call on whatever source of loving feels most accessible—a friend or family member, a deity, your dog—to help Nurture the inner part.) After the RAIN: Notice and rest in the sense of who you are when you are offering and receiving inner Nurturing.

PART II: RAIN of Forgiveness to Another

After completing part 1, bring your attention to the other person.

Sense that you are viewing that person from the awareness of your future self—witnessing him or her with your wisest, most compassionate heart. (You might experiment and imagine that you are doing this reflection ten to fifteen years in the future.)

Recognize: Mentally note whatever you observe about the other person.

Allow: Pause and Allow this experience of the person to be there, just as it is.

Investigate: You might ask yourself this: “What is the vulnerability—the fears, hurts, unmet needs—that might drive this person to cause suffering? How does this person have a leg in a trap?” Nurture: Offer forgiveness through the following phrases, or through your own compassionate words and/or visual images: Mentally whispering the person’s name and saying, “I see and feel the harm you have caused, and I forgive you now.” Or, if you’re not yet ready to forgive, “I see and feel the harm you have caused, and it is my intention to forgive you.” Repeat several times.

If you do feel able to include this person in a forgiving heart, you might follow the forgiveness phrases with whatever caring wish resonates for the healing of this person’s suffering.

After the RAIN: Notice the quality of heartspace that has arisen, and let it be as large and inclusive as it is. You might inquire, “Who am I when resting in a forgiving heart?”

With forgiveness practices, it is common to judge ourselves for how well or fully we are able to do the meditation. Let go of any judgments you are carrying, and honor the sincerity of your intention to open and free your heart. End the meditation by releasing all ideas of self and other. Simply rest in the experience of tender awareness. If a thought or feeling arises, sense the capacity to include this entire living dying world in the vast space of a forgiving heart.

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES





My partner grew up with a rageful, narcissistic mother who lashed out at her almost daily. Now



she’s doing the same with our teenage daughters. I understand that her painful past is probably



behind this behavior. But she’s an adult now. Shouldn’t she take responsibility for the harm she’s



causing?


When we’ve caused harm, true healing requires taking responsibility for our behavior, asking for forgiveness when possible, and making amends. Being able to acknowledge honestly the hurt we’ve caused is actually empowering and reduces self-blame.

Yet, just as wounds from our past can drive us to hurt ourselves and others, they also make it difficult to change our behavior. Prolonged emotional abuse in childhood is known to undermine the development of capacities like executive functioning, self-regulation, mindfulness, and empathy—all crucial to becoming a fully responsible adult. For someone like your partner, admitting that she is causing harm can feel dangerous, bringing up intolerable emotions of shame and fear of rejection.

As you struggle with this situation, you may find it helpful to consider the word “should” as a flag. It tells you that your beliefs about good or right behavior, no matter how logical and reasonable they may be, are at odds with the reality of how your partner is right now. And crucially, when someone’s acting from unprocessed wounds, blaming doesn’t help. Blame punishes: It

reinforces the core wound of “Something is wrong with me.” As you might have experienced with your partner, it also evokes defensiveness and/or denial. Rather than serving positive change, it perpetuates the hurtful behavior.

Of course, you need to communicate clearly that your partner can’t go on hurting your daughters and to create boundaries that will protect them. As a co-parent, this is critical—otherwise you are enabling harmful behavior. But it is possible to communicate and seek the way to change from a place of care rather than

blame. Just as with children, the wounded inner child of adults needs nurturing to grow and change. I’ve never seen anyone evolve and stop behaving hurtfully in response to “shoulds,” anger, or blame. All research shows that punishment doesn’t work for genuine healing and transformation but that care and rehabilitation do.

Yet shifting from “should” and blame to compassion for your partner is possible only if you take good care of the parts within yourself that, quite naturally, might be feeling powerless, angry, bitter, self-righteous, hurt, and afraid. You are being called to inhabit your highest self, for the sake of yourself, your partner, and your children. You might need help from a therapist to create a safe, compassionate space for communicating as both you and your partner move toward becoming allies and together move toward transformation and healing.





Some people believe that people are doing the best that they can. Do you think this is true?


If you scan your own life, you’ll see times when you’re relating to people with presence and care and other times when you’re preoccupied, reactive, even hurtful. Yet if you focus on a

particular situation you deeply regret and ask, “What stopped me from being more sensitive, kind, accepting, aware . . . ?” you’ll probably realize that you were in trance—below the line—with your attention narrowed. Your thoughts and behavior were driven by deeply grooved habits of distractedness, by emotions like anxiety or aversion, or by cravings for pleasure or relief from distress. Your survival brain was in charge, and you were cut off from your more recently evolved prefrontal cortex. Your brain

was doing the best it could, calling on its primitive coping strategies and trying to satisfy unmet needs.

The mindfulness and compassion of RAIN cultivate an integrated brain. This means that even when we’re emotionally triggered, rather than suffer a full limbic hijack, we have some awareness of what’s happening and increased access to our inner resources. We have more choice to live from our full potential, our true “best.”





Getting angry and blaming my partner for the ways he hurts me is the only way to get his attention. For me, forgiving him would mean living with abuse.


Anger, blame, and punishment can work to temporarily control another’s behavior. The question is, Does that really change the behavior and give us the relationship we want?

A woman taking my weekly class told me that her husband physically bullied her throughout their four years of marriage. As she put it, “I flip-flopped back and forth from a hurt, scared victim to an angry victim.” When she’d explode in rage and threaten to leave, her husband would grovel. He’d swear the assaults would end and beg for her forgiveness and another chance. She’d agree to stay, each time hoping that this time he’d really be different.

As she practiced the U-turn of RAIN, dropping blaming thoughts and attending to her inner experience, she finally came face-to-face with the truth of her suffering—“This is the suffering of abuse.” And she knew that Nurture meant she had to take care of herself. Shifting away from anger and blame enabled her to Recognize and accept reality: She was suffering, he wasn’t going to change, and she could do something about her situation. She moved to her sister’s house and filed for divorce. Real forgiveness came, but it took a long time, even after she felt safe.

Anger is a signal. It energizes us to take care. But if we want to step out of being a disempowered, angry victim, we need to move on from blame. This is true whether our partner is abusive, our teen steals money from us, or a sibling manipulates a shared inheritance. If we can let go of the aversive energy of blame, we gain access to the wisdom we need to respond effectively to our situation.





NINE


Seeing the Goodness

To love someone is to learn the song in their heart and sing it to them when they have forgotten.

• ARNE GARBORG It is a sobering thought that the finest act of love you can perform is not an act of service but an act of contemplation, of seeing. When you serve people, you help, support, comfort, alleviate pain. When you see them in their inner beauty and goodness, you

transform and create.

• ANTHONY DE MELLO

T he couple had asked to meet with me after one of our Wednesdaynight classes, and even before they spoke, I could see the worry in their faces. It was about Jono, they said, their twenty-three-year-old son.

Jono had learning disabilities, and he’d dropped out after two years at a small liberal arts college. Since then, he’d been living at home and working part-time at Home Depot to contribute to the household. “I tried to get him to take courses at a community college,” his father told me, “but no way. Then I tried to get him to do career counseling, and he refused that too. He’s hanging out with old high school friends— nice kids, but they’re not going anywhere.” He added grimly, “It seems like all Jono wants is to watch movies, go mountain biking, or mess around with his video camera . . . certainly not the makings of a secure future.”

At this point, Jono’s mom jumped in. “It’s not that we don’t like having him around . . . we do, we adore him! He’s a sweetheart—but

lately he mopes around and barely talks to us—he’s not his old self.”

I could feel how deeply they cared about Jono and told them so.

The mom’s eyes filled with tears. “Oh, we do, we do. And we’re so afraid for his future.” Then she looked at me imploringly. “But what should we do?” she asked. “Should I pray for him and surround him with white light? Should we bring him here and urge him to meditate? We’d do anything to help him.”

“I do have a suggestion,” I said, “but first, let me ask you both a question.” They leaned in, curious. “What are the qualities that you really love and appreciate about Jono?”

“Oh,” said his mom without hesitation, “he’s always been the kindest person you’ve ever met . . . so sensitive to others’ feelings. And he can be great fun to be around; he’s got a wacky sense of humor.”

His dad added, “And I’ll admit Jono’s a creative guy. . . . I’m impressed with what he can do with that camera.” Then he added thoughtfully, “He’s really smart. He just hasn’t found a way to apply

his intelligence that translates.”

“Whoa,” I said, and then smiled. “That’s for another time. For right now, thank you! You’re bringing Jono to life for me.”

I went on to suggest that each day during their meditation they reflect on what they most loved and respected about their son. “Let yourself feel your appreciation for who he is deep in your body, in your heart. And then when you’re with him, just notice how he’s doing—his mood, energy, that kind of thing. Stay with that for a couple of

months, and then let’s meet again.”

When we did, both of them seemed calmer. This time, Jono’s mom went first: “Maybe that practice you gave us just relaxes me, but the more I remember Jono’s strengths, the more I feel like everything will work out.”

Her husband nodded. “At first I thought you were just telling us to let go, but it was a lot more than that. . . . We still don’t know how he’ll find his way; we’re just more sure he will.”

Before they left, I shared something I’d found with my own son:

The more I trusted in him doing well, the better he did. My confidence was contagious.

I met with Jono’s parents for the last time a few months later. They reported that he had been volunteering as a video editor at a local

nonprofit and that he was planning to return to school for a degree in digital video production. Most important, he seemed more like his old self; on Father’s Day, he’d presented his dad with a “news spot” he’d made announcing his promotion to CEO of Home Depot. Jono had regained his sparkle and playfulness, and he was finding his way.

• • •

Our relationships, especially the close ones, easily lock into rigid patterns of communication that block true intimacy and healing. The mindfulness and nurturing of RAIN can release us from the grip of these persistent habits. While I didn’t review the formal practice of RAIN with Jono’s parents, you can see the steps unfolding in how they related to him: They Recognized that he was having a hard time and that they were distressed; rather than continuing to react, they paused and Allowed him to be as he was; they Investigated by shifting their attention from what was wrong to what they trusted about him—his goodness; and they laid the grounds of Nurturing by filling themselves with genuine appreciation for him. Through this informal practice of RAIN, they stepped out of fear-based reactivity and became able to offer Jono what he most needed: trust in who he was.

WHAT IS BASIC GOODNESS?

For Jono and his parents, healing emerged when they shifted their attention from what was wrong to remembering what I call “basic goodness.”

What does this mean? If you recall the image of the Golden Buddha in chapter 3, you might think of our day-to-day social self or personality as the protective clay coverings. These coverings—our appearance, manners, defenses, judgments, skills, weaknesses, and so on—are often evaluated in terms of “good self” and “bad self.” The good self meets the standards we have adopted from our caregivers, peers, and the larger society. Perhaps our good self is polite, hardworking, attractive, and accomplished. Our bad self is all the ways

we fall short—when we call ourselves selfish, impatient, judgmental, or impulsive.

But none of these conditioned ego patterns limit or express our basic goodness. Basic goodness is the gold of our true nature: the universal qualities of awareness, aliveness, love, creativity, and intelligence that live through all of us. Our changing moods, behaviors, and personalities are like surface waves. Basic goodness is the ocean itself. If we remain focused on our conditioned patterns, if we judge or identify with these patterns, we can easily miss our vastness and

depth.

Because fear constricts the expression of basic goodness, it’s easiest to recognize the gold in others when they are relaxed and present. We often see it shining in children before their personalities have taken shape. One friend told me about gazing at a picture of her nine-monthold granddaughter, filled with wonder at the pure sentience and brightness in her eyes. Suddenly she recalled a long-forgotten line of poetry: “There lives the dearest freshness deep down things.”

SEEING THE GOODNESS

Because we all have different bodies, minds, and personalities, the gold lives through our evolving beings in myriad ways.

I asked my social media friends to share examples of seeing basic goodness in others. Here is how some of them finished the sentence “I see the goodness . . .”:

on my husband’s face when he sees the kids after an out-of-town trip.

when my youngest son hears the fatigue in my voice and brings me a cup of water.

in my wife when she greets the parking attendant or cashier with such kindness, attention, and respect.

when my best friend hugs his dog with deep affection.

in my five-year-old daughter, who says to the sun at sunset, ‘Good-bye, I love you.’

when my husband pulls over to help someone whose car has died—and never takes anything for his time.

when my partner is tender and willing to stay in the relationship to work out our difficulties.

when my dad was disabled after a massive stroke, and he still would ask me, ‘Sweetheart, can I get you anything?’



Shortly after I posted this inquiry, I received a birthday card from a dear friend. Her message began, “I see your basic goodness when . . .” As I read her words, my eyes filled with tears; I felt so deeply loved and seen. And then I was flooded by a sense of her basic goodness—the gold shining forth, the beauty of her deep and loving attention. I was reminded of one of my favorite quotations, by Thomas Merton:

Then it was as if I suddenly saw the secret beauty of their hearts,

the depths of their hearts where neither sin nor desire nor selfknowledge can reach, the core of their reality, the person that

each one is in God’s eyes. If only they could all see themselves as they really are. If only we could see each other that way all the

time. There would be no more war, no more hatred, no more cruelty, no more greed. . . . I suppose the big problem would be

that we would fall down and worship each other.

MIRRORING TELLS US WHO WE ARE

The author Alice Walker tells this story:

In the Babemba tribe of South Africa, when a person acts irresponsibly or unjustly, he is placed in the center of the village, alone and unfettered.

All work ceases, and every man, woman and child in the village gathers in a large circle around the accused individual. Then each person in the tribe speaks to the accused, one at a time, about all the good things the person in the center of the circle has done in his lifetime. Every incident, every experience that can be recalled with any detail and accuracy is recounted.

All his positive attributes, good deeds, strengths and kindnesses are recited carefully and at length.

The tribal ceremony often lasts several days. At the end, the tribal circle is broken, a joyous celebration takes place, and the person is symbolically and literally welcomed back into the tribe.

Our trust in our own basic goodness emerges from the clear and deep mirroring of others. The nurture we need to survive as infants comes not only from warm milk, not only from the warmth of being held and comforted, but also from the loving energy of a caregiver’s gaze. When we feel seen and heard and responded to with care, the message is “You matter. You are part of us. You belong and are loved.” When our growing curiosity and playfulness are met with delight, the message is “Your aliveness and unfolding are valued; all of what you are is welcome in this world.”

Mirroring the gold in our children (and each other) requires basic elements of radical compassion: clarity, openhearted presence, and emotional intelligence. But when we’re “below the line”—in trance—we quickly fixate on the “coverings” of a child’s behavior and then react with impatience, judgment, or anger or withdraw into disinterest or preoccupation. This reactivity can feed a sense of our own deficiency

as parents and drive us even more below the line. And if reactive

trance becomes habitual, the child easily internalizes the bad-self message: “Something is wrong with me.”

Most of us give and receive a mix of clear and distorted mirroring. When I think back to my son’s youth, what jumps out now is that I always had something to worry about! In grade school, I worried that he didn’t have many friends. In middle school, he was “too social”— always wanting to hang out. In high school, it was video gaming, partying, procrastination, lack of academic focus. And my worrying went hand in hand with judgment, controlling, and the message “You should be different.” Behind all this was the trance of unworthiness and fear: “I’m failing as a mother. This is my fault. If I don’t fix it, he might not have a good life.”

But he always had my love and appreciation as well, and he must have sensed how my heart lit up as I watched him delight in Rollerblading or return inspired from a wilderness vision quest, when

I learned how he had consoled a friend in trouble or marveled at his mastery of Magic: The Gathering. When I see him now as a young therapist and entrepreneur, husband and father, I know that the times when I beamed out genuine appreciation and trust in his unfolding were the times that most served his confidence and well-being.

CAN WE OVERDO POSITIVE MIRRORING?

Our strengths and talents—the parts we might call the “good self”—are real parts of us! And when they’re recognized—especially when we doubt ourselves or lack confidence—it can be a real gift. But some praise is not healthy mirroring. Maybe you were constantly affirmed and rewarded for good grades, for being attractive, cooperative, artistic, or athletic. What was the message you absorbed? For many of us, it was “This is what I have to do to be lovable and good, and I can’t slip up.” And along with that belief came a chronic fear of falling short, of making a mistake, of not being the best, of risking something new. Trying to pump up someone’s self-esteem with excessive praise polishes the covering over the Golden Buddha, but it distances them from the gold.

WHAT ABOUT MIRRORING WEAKNESS OR VULNERABILITY?

Mirroring a person’s weaknesses (or what they experience as “bad self”) will be helpful only if you have first established your caring and respect for them and belief in their basic goodness. Otherwise, they are likely to be too hurt or defensive to even take in your message. Most of us know what it’s like to receive criticism when we don’t feel appreciated in a fundamental way. Our entire being gets armored in reactivity!

But when trust and caring are there, our mirroring can help others Recognize unconscious behaviors, emotions, or beliefs that are

creating suffering and separation. Parents serve their children by letting them know how their rudeness or deceit, carelessness or anger, impacts others. Therapists mirror unprocessed emotions like fear or shame, helping their clients bring them into awareness. A trusted friend or colleague might mirror our sense of loss and sorrow, helping us feel accompanied and seen.

Clear and deep mirroring can bring radical healing at any age. During my Ph.D. internship, I had a psychotherapy supervisor who

had the gift of what he called “seeing the beloved.” Rob offered his full presence to his clients, and he reflected their goodness in ways they could hear and trust. He found the courage in their vulnerability, the dedication in their honesty, the depth of their longing to heal or awaken. They’d leave their sessions more at home in themselves, increasingly attuned to the gold. And he did the same with us, his students.

I remember how, in one of our weekly supervision groups, Rob picked up on my worry. I was very fond of a client, but I’d become concerned that I lacked the skill necessary to work with her. “You

really care about her, don’t you?” he said, nodding with his

affectionate smile. Then, looking around, he addressed us all. “Don’t ever underestimate the power of it . . . your pure caring. I can’t tell you what technique is better than what, but caring . . . that’s the magic ingredient.” His words cleared the worry from my heart, and something more. They showed me how simple the gift of mirroring can be.

I could not lie anymore,

so I started to call my dog “God.”

First he looked confused,

then he started smiling, then he even danced.

I kept at it: now he doesn’t even bite.

I am wondering if this might work on people?

• SANT TUKARAM, seventeenth-century poet-saint, translated by Daniel Ladinsky

SEEING OUR OWN GOODNESS: SELF-NURTURING WITH RAIN

Recall a time when you were really down on yourself. When you were in the thick of it, did you have even an inkling of your own good heart, of your care for others, of your growing capacity for honesty and presence? How much were you seeing the goodness in your family, friends, or colleagues?

When we’re trapped in self-judgment, our perceptual filter narrows and our mirroring becomes distorted. We monitor ourselves to see

how we’re falling short, become preoccupied with hiding our inadequacy, and stay busy justifying, proving, or improving ourselves. And this self-mistrust inevitably extends to others.

When feelings of self-aversion or unworthiness are strong, the full practice of RAIN (see RAIN Step-by-Step in chapter 3) helps us bring mindfulness and self-compassion to the limiting beliefs and feelings that are covering over the gold. As we Investigate, we contact the deep vulnerability that is driving us and, by Nurturing, reconnect with a larger, more loving presence.

We can also directly call on the Nurturing step of RAIN at any time, by intentionally looking for and reflecting on the goodness within us, as in the Reflection below.

REFLECTION: RECALLING YOUR GOODNESS AT DIFFICULT TIMES

When we are caught in the trance of unworthiness, it can be hard to believe in our own goodness. Bring yourself into presence in whatever way works best for you, and then try one or more of the following prompts.

Recall someone—a person, a spiritual figure, a pet—for whom you can easily feel appreciation and love. Sense the goodness of your care for this being.

Recall a time when you were kind or generous.

Reflect on qualities you appreciate in yourself (such as your love of nature, adventurousness, humor, curiosity, persistence).

Imagine yourself as a child, and then recall any moment of playfulness, affection, or wonder that stands out for you.

Bring to mind someone you trust, someone who appreciates and loves you, and try to look at yourself through their eyes.

Imagine your future self, the self who expresses your deepest intention and potential, the self you are growing into.



I often refer to RAIN, and especially to the practice of Nurturing, as spiritual re-parenting. We are learning to offer ourselves the kind of mirroring that we all needed as young children. As you experiment with these different reflections, see what works for you. (Just as there are many styles of good parenting, there are many different approaches to spiritual nurturing.) You are undoing the fears and selfdoubt that come from years of distorted mirroring, and it takes many

rounds. With each round, spend time in After the RAIN, sensing who you are when you feel Nurturing and Nurtured. The more often you get any taste of your basic goodness, the easier it becomes in daily life to reconnect with the gold.

BECOMING A MIRROR OF GOODNESS FOR OTHERS

Nelson Mandela wrote, “It never hurts to think too highly of a person; often they become ennobled and act better because of it.”

Can you remember times of positive mirroring that made a difference to you? I still recall moments that deepened my confidence in life-changing ways. There was the parent of a friend who told me that I had a special way of listening that could help others. There was the Harvard Divinity student, a friend’s older brother, who responded to my probing philosophical questions by telling me I was “spiritually deep.” And when I first became serious about yoga, my yoga teacher told me one day that she could sense my dedication to the path. These few words helped me Recognize and trust my own being. They became companions on my journey, and remembering their impact still inspires me to offer the gift of mirroring to others.

REFLECTION: BENEFACTORS WHO HAVE NURTURED YOU

Sitting comfortably, close your eyes and relax your body. Now, looking back through

your life, bring to mind a person who had a positive influence on you. Ask yourself,

“When did they mirror something about me that helped me trust my goodness?” As a

memory arises, pause and allow yourself to appreciate them, and feel how their words

or actions Nurtured you.



Becoming a mirror of goodness is a deliberate training in radical compassion. When we’re in trance—preoccupied, anxious, reactive, on autopilot—we’re often blind to the goodness of others. Instead, we fixate on what we don’t like, what seems wrong. If we want to become clear and nurturing mirrors to others, we need first to be conscious, present, and intentional.

LOOKING TO SEE GOODNESS: THREE KEY QUESTIONS

What does this person care about?

Am I looking with fresh eyes?

What is the best way to let them know their goodness?

What Does This Person Care About?

Logan, a young man who had attended a number of our retreats, was consistently harsh with himself and filled with self-doubt. During one of our meetings, I asked him if he could recall any recent moments of respite, times when he felt at home with himself. Yes, there had been one the day before, he said. During a meditation, he’d noticed an elderly woman who was sitting on a chair across the room. Her feet were dangling because they couldn’t reach the floor, and this looked so uncomfortable that he got up and found a cushion to put under them. When he returned to his place, he’d become aware of a sense of inner warmth, connectedness, and peace.

I paused a minute and said, “Logan, that was such a caring thing to do. . . . I really get that kindness matters to you, and that you live it.” As we continued to talk, I told him I was confident that he had a lot to offer others and that he had the makings of a fine meditation teacher. Before we ended, I thanked him for being so sweet to the older woman —who, as it happened, was my mother! We parted with tears, both touched by our shared reflection on kindness.

Two years later, Logan was teaching meditation in prisons and also working with teens. In an email, he told me about a seventeen-yearold girl who seemed trapped in unrelenting self-criticism. During a teen retreat he was co-teaching, he’d asked if she could remember a time when her mind was at ease, and she told him about helping someone in their meditation group. As I had done with him, he mirrored her kindness and goodness back to her. And when he asked how she’d felt while she was helping the other teen, her face softened. “I felt like there was nothing wrong with me,” she said.

You can clearly see a person’s goodness when they are doing what they love. This is when you can sense what most matters to them, what brings them fully alive. Reminding them of this goodness can help someone undo a lifetime of self-aversion or alienation. When we ask

ourselves, “What does this person care about most deeply?” we become able to see past the surface wants and fears—the ego coverings —and help them to do the same.

Am I Looking with Fresh Eyes?

Often we deprive those closest to us of our mirroring because we see them through the eyes of habit. We are in trance, caught in our assumptions about what they are like and how they think and feel. In the words of the poet T. S. Eliot,

What we know of other people

Is only our memory of the moments

During which we knew them. And they have changed since then. We must also remember

That at every meeting we are meeting a stranger.

In order to get past familiarity, we need to train ourselves to see afresh, to become genuinely curious. One trick that works for me is to start by looking into someone’s eyes and really wonder what color they are. And then extend that wondering to who is looking through those eyes. Do I know what they care about most right now? If I were seeing them for the first or last time, what is the quality of presence and care I’d most want to offer? If they were gone, what about their basic goodness would I remember?

Sometimes I’ll choose one person, as Jono’s parents did with him, and for some weeks make it a practice to see how their basic goodness is living through them.

Look for things in them that you might have missed because of familiarity, for familiarity breeds staleness, blindness, and boredom. You cannot love what you cannot see afresh. You

cannot love what you are not constantly discovering anew.

• ANTHONY DE MELLO

What Is the Best Way to Let Them Know Their Goodness?

Expressing our appreciation is an intimate offering, and we might feel shy or uncomfortable, or fear that our comments won’t be welcome. Maybe we think we aren’t a significant figure in the other person’s life and that what we are noticing won’t really matter. Or perhaps it’s simply not our habit.

The author and physician Rachel Naomi Remen tells a story about her grandfather, a rabbi, who called her Neshume-le, which means “little beloved soul.” His words felt like blessings as they gave her great comfort and trust in her place in the world. After he died, Rachel told her mother how much these blessings had meant to her. Her mother responded, “Rachel, I’ve blessed you every day of your life. I just never had the wisdom to do it out loud.”

I’ve found that inner training, such as purposefully reflecting on goodness, warms us up to express our appreciation more naturally. This is why I had Jono’s parents reflect on his goodness—to alter the focus of their attention.

In Buddhism, the loving-kindness (metta) meditation does just

this. In the traditional meditation, we reflect on the goodness of a widening circle of beings—eventually including all life everywhere— and reflect on set phrases of well-wishing. Over the last several decades, I’ve found that this meditation becomes increasingly embodied and powerful when we experiment with visual imagery, touch, and whispering words. As I’ve mentioned, students have found it life changing to offer themselves loving kindness by gently placing a hand on their heart and whispering, “It’s okay, sweetheart,” or “This belongs,” or “May you be happy,” or whatever message most comforts. My own experimenting led me to a practice that I continue to this day. During supper one evening toward the end of a monthlong silent retreat, I was touched by the gentleness and kindliness that emanated from an elderly man sitting nearby. I suddenly imagined that I was standing in front of him and we were looking into each other’s eyes; then he closed his eyes, and I kissed him lightly on the brow. That image brought an upwelling of tenderness, a sense of soul connection. Since then, I’ve done this practice for dear ones, for people I don’t know, and for those I’ve never met. I pause to see their goodness and

then imagine offering some gesture of care—a kiss on the brow or sometimes a soft touch on their face or a gentle hug. Often I’ll include

a phrase of well-wishing, sometimes silent, sometimes whispered. This full, embodied practice opens me to a warm, tender heartspace—a field of communion that includes myself, whomever I’ve been reflecting on, and really all beings.

This meditation also reminds me to offer my blessings out loud. When I’m with a person I’ve been reflecting on, there’s a more immediate sense of intimacy. I’m more inclined to Recognize their basic goodness and then ask myself, “How might I let them know?”

REFLECTION: A WARM-UP TO “SAYING IT OUT LOUD”

Take a few minutes to sit still, relax your body, and quiet your mind. When you feel present, bring to mind someone dear to you. Remind yourself of what you appreciate and love about them—perhaps the affectionate look in their eyes, their brightness, humor, honesty. Feel the warmth of your appreciation in your body.



Now imagine being with them in person and telling them some of the specific ways you experience their goodness. How do they receive your mirroring? How do you feel, having offered it? How does this sharing affect your feelings of connection?

End by taking some moments to renew your intention to offer the gift of mirroring in person.

TEN WAYS TO BRING LOVING-KINDNESS PRACTICE ALIVE IN YOUR DAILY LIFE

Set an intention to reflect, each morning for a week, on the goodness of the people you live with or see most regularly. Then, whenever you remember to during the day, silently offer them your prayers.

Whenever someone you know triggers feelings of irritation or insecurity, pause, recall some specific example of that person’s goodness, and mentally whisper, “May you be happy.”



Choose a “neutral” person you encounter regularly, and whenever you see them during the following week, remind yourself of their goodness, and silently offer your wishes for their well-being. Notice if your feelings for this person change. Choose a “difficult” person, and set a time to reflect daily on his or her goodness. After you’ve offered prayers of loving kindness for at least two weeks, ask yourself, “Is there a change in my feelings? Has there been any change in their behavior toward me?”

Discover what happens when you let someone know the goodness you are seeing in them.

Keep your practice fresh and alive by experimenting with whatever words, images, or gestures awaken a genuine sense of connectedness and care. Explore whispering your prayer for yourself or another person aloud.

Explore saying the name of the person you’re praying for.

Imagine and feel your heart holding the people you’re praying for.

Visualize them feeling healed and loved and uplifted by your prayer.

Even a few moments of reflecting on goodness and offering loving kindness can reconnect you with the purity of your loving heart.

TRANSCENDING BIAS: SEEING GOODNESS IN ALL BEINGS

Can you imagine moving through your day, appreciating the hearts

and spirits of those you engage with, the beauty of clouds, birds, grasses, and trees? Of course you also include what’s painful, perhaps your anger toward someone who’s hurt you, or the suffering of a friend whose partner has Alzheimer’s. Yet still, there’s an awareness that remembers the goodness that animates our beings. Thomas Merton wrote, “Life is this simple: we are living in a world that is absolutely transparent and the divine is shining through it all the time. This is not just a nice story or a fable, it is true.”

I heard a story read at a Christmas Eve church service that really brought this home.

One Christmas Day, a woman, her husband, and their year-old son had driven a long way before they found an open diner by the side of the road.

It was quiet and almost empty, and they were waiting gratefully for their food when the little boy began waving from his high chair and calling, “Hi there!” to someone behind them. To the mother’s dismay,

it turned out to be a wreck of a man, unkempt and unwashed,

obviously a homeless drunk. Now he was waving back at her boy and calling, “Hi there, baby, hi there, big boy . . . I see ya, buster.”

The woman and her husband exchanged looks, and the few other people in the diner were shooting disapproving glances their way. And the old guy went on, even after their food came. “Do you know pattycake? Attaboy . . . Do you know peekaboo? Hey, look, he knows peekaboo.” The mother tried turning the high chair around, but her son shrieked and twisted to face his new buddy.

Finally, giving up on their meal, her husband got up to pay the bill, and the mother took the baby in her arms, praying that she could quickly get past the old drunk, who was seated by the door. But as they approached, her son reached out with both arms—his pick-me-up signal—and propelled himself into the man’s open arms.

But now the mother could see tears in the man’s eyes as her son

laid his head on his shoulder. He gently held and rocked the boy, and then he looked straight into her eyes. “You take care of this baby,” he said firmly. And as he slowly handed him back, “God bless you,

ma’am. You’ve given me my Christmas gift.”

She must have mumbled something in return, but as she rushed to the car, tears streaming down her face, she could only think, “My God, my God, forgive me.”

Hearing this story, I felt a deep, aching remorse for the countless beings I had not seen. Learning to recognize what Merton calls the “secret beauty” is an evolutionary task for all of us: It is the very spirit of radical compassion. We need to spiritually re-parent ourselves and, by seeing the goodness in others, help them to trust who they are.

Yet as I will explain fully in the next chapter, we are conditioned to limit our attentiveness to a select few and, in a flash, unconsciously diminish many. Extending our conscious caring beyond those in our most immediate circle of family and friends is necessary for healing ourselves and our world.

MEDITATION: SEEING THE SECRET BEAUTY (LOVING KINDNESS)

The Buddhist metta (loving-kindness meditation), awakens our capacity for unconditional friendliness and love. Our hearts open as we bring our attention to the innate goodness within ourselves and all beings.



Sit in a way that allows you to be comfortable and relaxed. Letting go of whatever tension you can, loosen your shoulders, soften your hands, and relax your belly. Feel a smile spread through your eyes, softening the flesh around them. Bring a slight smile to your lips, and then feel the smile on the inside of your mouth. Smile into your heart, and then imagine the smile expanding, creating a receptive, tender space through the whole heart and chest area.

Now bring into your heart someone you love, ideally a relationship that is not complicated. Take some moments to reflect on the qualities in this person you most appreciate. Recall their intelligence, humor, kindness, vitality. Picture this person when they are feeling love for you. Be aware of their essence as good and wakeful and caring. Mentally whisper their name and the words “thank you,” and notice how your appreciation for this person fills your heart. Take a few moments to communicate your love by mentally whispering whatever prayer or phrase(s) of well-wishing most resonates for you. You might also imagine offering them an active gesture of love (kissing them on the brow, touching their cheek, hugging them).

Next, bring your attention to your own being and to the care in your heart. Take some moments to reflect on your own goodness—this caring for another and any other qualities that come to mind. Sense your deep aspiration—toward loving well, toward truth, toward living fully—and the goodness of your heart’s intention.

If it’s difficult to connect with your own goodness, bring to mind someone you trust who loves you, and look through their eyes. See who’s here under the surface conditioning, the being you are evolving into (your future or true self). As you see your own goodness, you might also offer yourself a tender gesture of love, such as placing a hand lightly on your heart, and mentally whisper some words of care. Now widen your circle of caring by bringing to mind a “neutral” person. (This might be someone you see regularly but don’t know well

or feel strongly about.) Take some moments to recall how this person looks, moves, and speaks. Now try to imagine them gazing at a beloved child . . . or struck by the beauty of a fresh snowfall . . . or laughing, relaxed, and at ease. Remind yourself that they want to be happy and don’t want to suffer. Then, as this person comes alive for you, imagine offering them an active gesture of care and your prayer for their wellbeing.

Now bring to mind someone with whom you have a difficult relationship—perhaps someone who evokes anger, fear, or hurt. First take a moment to bring a kind, non-judging attention to your own feelings as you reflect on them. Then, turning back to this difficult person, try to see past the surface covering. Look to see some aspect of their basic goodness. It may help to imagine this person as a young child, sleeping peacefully—or at the other end of life, as someone who has just passed away. Can you recall something about them that you admire, some quality of dedication, caring, or creativity? Even if it’s difficult to recognize this person’s goodness, remind yourself that all humans want to be happy, want to avoid suffering. Remember that life matters to this person just as it does to you. Holding them in a gentle attention, imagine offering them a gesture of care and/or your prayer. Next imagine that you are bringing together all those you have just prayed for—a dear person, yourself, a neutral one, a difficult one. Holding yourself and these others in your heart, sense your shared humanity, your vulnerability and basic goodness. Send prayers of care to all at once, recognizing that you are in this together.

Finally, allow your awareness to open out in all directions—in front of you, to either side, behind you, below you, and above you. In this vast space, sense that your loving presence is holding all beings: the wild creatures that fly and swim and run across fields; the dogs and cats that live in our homes; the life-forms that are threatened with extinction; the trees and grasses and flowers; children everywhere; humans living in great poverty and those with great riches; those at war and those at peace; those who are dying and those who are newly born. Imagine that you can hold the earth, our mother, in your lap and include all life everywhere in your boundless heart. Aware of the goodness inherent in all living beings, again offer your prayers.

After the RAIN: You might inquire, “Who am I when I’m sending out loving wishes?” Allow yourself to rest in openness and silence, letting whatever arises in your heart and awareness be touched by loving kindness.

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES





How could everyone have secret beauty? What about Stalin, Hitler, Idi Amin? Aren’t some people



just evil?


The more we learn about the multiple factors that affect the formation of character—genetics, intergenerational trauma, abuse in childhood, social oppression, war—the more difficult it is to write off another human being as evil. As the Russian writer Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, who spent years in labor camps under

the Soviets, wrote,

If only it were all so simple! If only there were evil

people somewhere insidiously committing evil deeds,

and it were necessary only to separate them from the

rest of us and destroy them. But the line dividing

good and evil cuts through the heart of every human

being. And who is willing to destroy a piece of his

own heart?

Yes, the human psyche is sometimes so deranged or wounded that most evidence of goodness is covered over. But if we remember that these “bad” people were once helpless children; if we imagine them weeping with sorrow, desperate for kindness or attention; if we know they don’t want to suffer—perhaps then we can intuit some universal currents of goodness within them.

I often recall the words of a Tibetan teacher: “The essence of human bravery is refusing to give up on anyone.” Assuming basic goodness helps us accept our own imperfections along with the flaws of others. No matter how buried in hatred, anger, or addiction someone may seem, goodness and the potential to

awaken to it are always here. Trusting the gold is an intrinsic part of calling it forth.





What if letting someone know their goodness just swells their ego and blinds them to their weaknesses?


This question takes us back to the difference between a person’s “good self” (the ego qualities that win us social acceptance) and the meaning of “basic goodness.” Moderate

praise of the “good self”—such as appreciating someone’s athleticism, wit, physical beauty, or mathematical ability—may be affirming and even motivating in the short run. But as you suggest, excessive praise can cause unwholesome inflation. More important, it sends a stress-evoking message: We have to continuously earn the appreciation and love of others.

In contrast, when we mirror people’s basic goodness, we are recognizing the universal qualities of love and awareness as they are expressed through them. We are mirroring the truth of who they are beyond any changing capacities. Far from inflating their ego, this message enables them to feel their belonging to life and gives them the peace that comes with being a part of the whole.

If you think of your own life, you can sense this difference. Over many years, I’ve found that no matter what my “good self” achieves, it does not relieve the trance of unworthiness. Yet whenever I remember basic goodness—when I feel loving connection, presence, awe, or gratitude—self-worth is no longer

an issue. I’m at home in my true self.

You might think of your true self as an ocean that has changing waves on the surface. If you know you’re the ocean, you’re not afraid of the waves. (And if you forget you’re the ocean, you’ll be seasick every day.) Helping people see their basic goodness—their oceanness—does not blind them to the ego waves on the surface that need attention. To the contrary, as I’ve seen again and again, when we become confident of our basic goodness, we become increasingly dedicated to bringing the mindfulness and compassion of RAIN to whatever causes pain and separation.





TEN


The RAIN of Compassion

Your path is not to seek for love but merely to seek and find all the barriers within yourself you have built against it.

• RUMI

If you have come here to help me, you are wasting your time. But if you have come because your liberation is bound up with mine, then let us work together

• ABORIGINAL ACTIVIST GROUP, Queensland, 1970s

T he longtime prisoner and meditator Jarvis Jay Masters was in theexercise yard at San Quentin when a seagull landed in a puddle, and he saw a large young inmate pick up a stone to throw at it. The unspoken rule in the yard was to mind your own business—the smallest incident could turn violent—but Jarvis immediately raised his arm to stop him. Outraged, the young man shouted, “What you

doing?” Everybody watching expected a fight. But Jarvis

spontaneously responded, “That bird has my wings.” The younger man muttered and shook his head, but somehow the tension dissipated. And for days afterward, inmates came up to Jarvis to ask, “What did you mean by that, Jarvis?”

Something in us knows what Jarvis Masters meant. Whenever we pay close attention to another life, whether it’s a person, our dog, a favorite plant, or a bird, this being begins to feel like part of us; it matters to us. We share the same wings, the same longing to live fully and freely. Yet we’re also familiar with trance, when preoccupation, judgment, or feeling threatened makes it easy to distance ourselves, especially from those we don’t know and who are different from us.

Trance makes them “Unreal Others” rather than subjective, feeling beings like ourselves. In trance, we can read the daily news of suffering —homes lost in floods, refugee families being turned away, another death in the opioid epidemic, the suicide of a gay teen—without registering the reality of these lives. “Isn’t it awful,” we might say, or “There but for the grace of God go I,” and then turn back to our pressing business.

But of course, strangers aren’t the only Unreal Others. The more stressed and reactive we are, the more even those we consider most dear can become unreal. Just as we can block our sense of their basic goodness, our hearts can close to defend us from their vulnerability. When we numb ourselves to their hurts and fears, we lose our ability

to respond with warmth and tenderness.

And yet each of us has the potential to bring the spirit of “that bird has my wings” to all beings: This realization brings the happiness of being truly openhearted, and it is the hope for healing our planet. In this chapter, we’ll explore how the radical compassion awakened in RAIN dissolve the trance of Unreal Othering.

EVOLUTIONARY ROOTS OF UNREAL OTHERS

Our deep conditioning to perceive Unreal Others emerged in service of survival. For millions of years, our earliest ancestors lived in small, isolated groups, where familiarity meant safety and any stranger was a potential threat. These groups called themselves “the people,” or “humans.” Other groups were “less than human,” enemies to be hated and/or feared. And because “the people” were different and superior, they did not hesitate to attack and violate other groups: If they’re not human, we can hurt them, steal from them, enslave them, kill them. Then about seventy thousand years ago, humans entered a cognitive revolution marked by a dramatic leap in language, communication, and collaboration. Internally, this correlated with a radical spurt in brain development, culminating in the capacities of

the prefrontal cortex for mindfulness and reason, empathy and compassion, and calming or regulating the reactions of our survival brain.

As the cognitive revolution spurred the growth of communication among human societies, it created a crucial evolutionary trajectory:

our unfolding toward an interdependent global community. And yet in the most primitive parts of our brain, the Unreal Other persists, now working against our survival and ensnaring us in a regressive and toxic trance: It fuels institutionalized racism, classism, the oppression of refugees and other marginalized humans, unimaginable cruelty to nonhuman animals, war, and a mindless destruction of our earth’s ecosystem.

Yet even as our ancient survival brain perpetuates the trance of Unreal Other, our evolved prefrontal cortex gives us the tools to undo it. Both as individuals and as a society, we have the capacity to recognize the biases that have kept us below the line. Once they are conscious, we become more able to respond from an awake and inclusive heart.

REFLECTION: BRINGING IMPLICIT BIAS ABOVE THE LINE

“Implicit bias” is the scientific term for the unconscious or semiconscious ways we

stereotype individuals or groups, depending on our social conditioning. Please consider

the following reflection as an opportunity for self-understanding, not as fuel for guilt and

self-judgment.

Bring to mind the following groups of people:

Those of a different race from you

Different ethnic group or nationality

Different religion

Different sexual orientation

Different gender identity

Different ability (disability)

Different social class

Different political view

If possible, consider a few individuals you know from each. As you do, honestly notice any subtle judgments that emerge. Are they less—or more!—intelligent, ethical, attractive, loving, spiritual, or capable than yourself? Imagine that your child or

someone else close to you has started dating someone from these groups. Notice your reactions in your body, because they may be more discernible than a mental

expression of bias. As you review, also note the following: Are you inclined to blame the group for in some way being bad or wrong or causing harm?



Psychologists and neuroscientists who have tested implicit bias have shown that it can even be directed at the ability or worth of our own group.

Archbishop Desmond Tutu, winner of the Nobel Peace Prize for his work to end apartheid, tells a memorable story about his own discovery:

I went to Nigeria when I was working for the World Council of Churches, and I was due to fly to Jos. And so I go to Lagos

airport and I get onto the plane and the two pilots in the cockpit

are both black. And whee, I just grew inches. You know, it was fantastic because we had been told that blacks can’t do this. And

we have a smooth takeoff and then we hit the mother and father

of turbulence. I mean, it was quite awful, scary. Do you know, I can’t believe it, but the first thought that came to my mind was “Hey, there’s no white men in that cockpit. Are those blacks

going to be able to make it?” And of course, they obviously made it—here I am. But the thing is, I had not known that I was

damaged to the extent of thinking that somehow actually what those white people who had kept drumming into us in South

Africa about our being inferior, about our being incapable, it

had lodged somewhere in me.

Early mindfulness researchers proposed that a key impact of mindfulness practice is the reduction of automatic processing. This is supported by more recent findings that mindfulness practice reduces implicit age and race bias. Say you have the associations that black is bad and old is bad. Mindfulness loosens these associations, enabling you to notice and question them, so that you see a person of color or

an elderly person more clearly, with fewer distortions from societally conditioned bias. This frees you to recognize your shared vulnerability, your shared belonging.

Challenging our conditioning extends to the whole array of preconceived notions we might have about other peoples. It also extends to our tendency to feel separate from and more intrinsically valuable than nonhuman animals.

I experienced an awakening from this assumed superiority many years ago when I was leading a spring retreat in the Blue Ridge Mountains. The meditation center was located near a large farm, and during our early morning sitting we could hear sounds of cows lowing in distress, grieving for the calves that had recently been taken from them. (In the meat and dairy industry, farmers separate calves from their mothers as soon as possible in order to impregnate the mothers again.) With all mammals, there’s a deep mother-child attachment, and now, for the first time, I could imagine the excruciating pain of those mothers and babes. Others did too. So we started to include the cows and calves in our daily heart meditation. Connecting to the

reality of the enormous suffering caused by industrial farming, both then and increasingly over the following years, led me to a plant-based (vegan) diet.

The steps of RAIN allow us to recognize and undo the Unreal Othering that closes our hearts to other living beings. The mindfulness of RAIN asks, “What’s it like being you?” and cultivates genuine understanding. The compassion of RAIN allows us to respond to others from a heart that says, “That bird has my wings.”

TAKING IN ANOTHER BEING: RECOGNIZING AND ALLOWING

We practice the first step of RAIN when we look at other beings with the intention to Recognize whatever is happening with them at the moment—their mood or emotions, energy level, way of expressing themselves, appearance. Then, with whatever initially calls our attention, we pause and Allow. We include without judging.

A video I saw recently offers a beautiful illustration of the impact of Recognizing and Allowing.

Called Look Beyond Borders, it was made in 2016 as part of a study that paired a few of the millions of refugees who were arriving in Europe with people from their host countries. The video shows them being seated facing each other and asked to gaze quietly into each other’s eyes for four minutes. First we see some nervous smiles, some laughter, tears. And then, after the silence, the camera focuses on a

woman from Berlin as she speaks to the Syrian man facing her. “Are you alone here, or with your family?” “Alone,” he answers softly. He pauses and adds, “It’s life. Sometimes nice, sometimes, not good.” Then their time is up; they rise to their feet and hug each other tightly. They had become real to each other.

This is the power of the non-judging mindful presence of Recognize and Allow. But what if you’re practicing and judgment does come up? Instead of starting to judge yourself, simply bring RAIN inward, Recognizing and Allowing the judging thought, Investigating and feeling its energy in the body, and then offering care to whatever you find.

Seeing that “it’s just a thought” clears the way for the next steps of RAIN, allowing you to go on to Investigation—which, as we will see, can dramatically loosen judgment.

REFLECTION: GAZING INTO ANOTHER’S EYES

This is one of the most valuable trainings I’ve found for dissolving trance. You might try it if you have a partner, family member, or friend who is willing to explore it with you.





Sit face-to-face with knees almost touching and close your eyes. Take a few long, deep breaths, relax any obvious tension, and allow yourselves to settle and become present. Reflect on your mutual intention to offer a sustained, open, and nonjudgmental attention to each other. After about a minute, open your eyes. Sit for five minutes gazing into each other’s eyes. Simply Recognize (notice) whatever experience arises and Allow it, let be. Afterward, take some time for each of you to share what you experienced.

DEEPENING OUR ATTENTION TO THE OTHER: INVESTIGATING AND NURTURING

Ruby Sales is a veteran of the civil rights movement and a lifelong social activist with a focus on spiritually based community building. In a beautiful interview with Krista Tippett, I heard her describe a

turning point on her path.

One morning Ruby was having her hair done, and the daughter of her hairdresser came in from what was clearly a long night hustling on the streets—exhausted, with sores on her body, on drugs. And Ruby, seeing her, suddenly felt called to ask a simple question, “Where does

it hurt?” At these words, years of pent-up pain began to pour out. This young woman had been traumatized by sexual abuse since childhood. She had kept it all inside, not even letting her own mother know. Listening to her, Ruby realized she needed a larger way to do her work, a way of paying attention to the inner life of how we live in the world that gets to the root of pain and awakens our true understanding. “Where does it hurt?” Now, as Ruby talks about racism, she not

only talks about the pain of people of color. She also focuses on what she calls the spiritual crisis of white America. She speaks about “the forty-five-year-old person in Appalachia who is dying at a young age, who feels like they’ve been eradicated because whiteness is so much smaller today than it was yesterday,” and “the white person in Massachusetts who’s heroin-addicted because they feel that their lives have no meaning.” Ruby is calling for a theology of love that purposefully seeks to understand—and care about—even those who might be seen as enemies.

Investigation reveals the vulnerability that naturally arouses Nurturing. Asking “Where does it hurt?” or more broadly, “What’s it like being you?” quiets our reactive survival brain and awakens empathy, understanding, and care.

For Valarie Kaur, a civil rights lawyer, social activist, and Sikh, this inquiry became particularly compelling in the days, months, and years following 9/11. After the Twin Towers fell, the first person to be killed in a hate crime was a Sikh who was like an uncle to her. The killer was

a man who called himself a patriot and said he’d decided to “go out

and shoot some towel heads” in revenge.

Valarie was devastated and terrified. She had a young son who wears the traditional Sikh turban, and she feared for his life. “He’s

seen as a terrorist,” she said, “just as black people are seen as criminals

and women as property.” In the midst of her fear, she reflected deeply on the best response to this murder. Gradually, she realized that she didn’t want her pain to harden into anger against an Unreal Other, and two questions emerged to guide her work:





Who have we not yet tried to love?


Can we wonder about and tend to their wounds?


She had turned her attention toward Investigate and Nurture. Fifteen years after her adopted uncle was murdered, Valarie contacted his killer, Frank, in prison. Early in the call, Frank insinuated a connection between her uncle and the deaths on 9/11. Valarie had to steady herself, had to remember her deep intention to try to understand him. Then, at one point, she wondered out loud why he had agreed to speak with her. This was when Frank told her: “I am sorry for what I did. . . . One day when I go to heaven to be judged by God I will ask to see him [Valarie’s uncle], and I will hug him and ask him for forgiveness.”

Today Valarie speaks nationwide, promoting love as a foundation for our collective work toward social and economic justice. She models activism on the labor of birth, where the first essential step is to breathe into the pain. Here she is guiding us to a mindful, non-judging presence; a presence that seeks to understand and to bring our hearts fully to what is: Investigate and Nurture—wonder about others and tend to their wounds. Only then can we effectively engage the energy for radical change—to push a new life into the world. And Valarie continues to describe her goal in a very personal way: “One day you will see my son as your own, and protect him when I’m not there.”

RAIN IN ACTION: FACING THE RACIAL DIVIDE

Love is often hard work, and when we’re in conflict, we can regress into our survival brain in a flash. I discovered this some years ago during a meeting of a multiracial group in our local community. One moment I was sharing openly about some serious health problems,

explaining why I hoped we might meet less frequently. The next moment I was hurt, angry, and stunned by the comments of an African American friend. She had responded with quiet anger to my request: “I’m disappointed . . . and not trusting your commitment to our

group.” Our meeting ended with us both upset and distanced.

How could she be so insensitive? Didn’t she know how important this was to me? Hadn’t I been involved for years in several groups addressing white privilege and racial injustice?

When I had some quiet time later in the day, RAIN kicked in—first to look at my own reactivity. I quickly Recognized and Allowed the feelings of “hurt” and “angry.” Investigating, I could feel a sense of betrayal; I’d been vulnerable and trusting, sharing about my health, and then got slammed. The belief was “She doesn’t understand, she doesn’t care.” Then Nurture: I placed a hand on my heart, breathed in and out of the hurt place, and mentally whispered, “It’s okay, sweetheart.” This familiar process calmed me down and gave me some space. But it was much harder to bring RAIN to my friend. I could Recognize and Allow that she was upset, but Investigation wasn’t bearing fruit.

A week later, feeling stuck, I asked another friend (also a woman of color) for help in understanding why my group member been so angry. I told her I had tried to understand but just couldn’t get why she’d reacted the way she had. My friend said, “Tara, for you, it was about spreading out some meetings. As a white person, these meetings are optional for you. For an African American woman in her situation,

they feel like life or death.”

In an instant, my awareness shifted. I recalled the times my friend had shared her concern about her grandson, who was in jail. I remembered her powerful blog post where she discussed feeling like a mother to all the African American men in the streets who were targets of racial violence. Our meetings were part of a larger process of healing racism, something her life was dedicated to, and we in the group were the friends and allies she trusted, had invested in. And now a white person was threatening to withdraw some of her energy. Not only that, but I was a white person with power, someone whose leadership was needed in racism work.

At this my heart broke open. Her experience as an African

American woman had become more real to me.

There’s a tendency in some spiritual communities to brush over differences with the belief “we’re all really one.” Yes, but people who have been marginalized (like people of color) live in a world that is far more dangerous than many white people know. I needed to really get

it in my cells how my friend considered the young black men who were losing their lives in the streets: “These are my sons.” And how it felt

not to be able to rely on white people to stay with the ongoing and often messy work of racial healing.

When we talked a few days later, I was able to listen with full presence to how she experienced our conflict. She too had reflected deeply, and could see through my eyes and express her care. We hurt each other in that clash, but by being willing to stay engaged and deepen our attention, we brought our friendship closer.

In the months that followed, paying attention to differences helped me come more above the line on something else: my whiteness. I could see in retrospect how my friend’s confrontation had triggered strong feelings of guilt—the chronic underlying sense that as a white person, I wasn’t doing enough to eliminate racism.

My awareness of whiteness has become a continuing process of awakening to the assumptions and privileges that come with my skin color: That I could go into any store and not be viewed as a potential criminal. That I could buy a home in any neighborhood. That I’d have

a good chance at getting jobs I was qualified for. I’ve also taken for granted that I’d receive good, respectful medical attention. And perhaps more subtly, when it would help me to change the schedule of our group meetings, I could simply ask for what I wanted. This was an entitlement that I as a white person, and as a person with power, had never questioned.

During this period of my waking up around whiteness, my

husband, Jonathan, and I took a vacation. One afternoon we decided

to swim from the beach to a small island some distance away. Swimming out was a joy: My strokes were confident and steady; I felt tireless and graceful. But returning was different. I quickly became fatigued, and when we finally got back, I was thirsty, exhausted, and humbled. I hadn’t realized that currents had carried me out to the

island and then worked against my return. And so it is with the currents of a white-dominant culture: They make life unimaginably easier for white people and painfully difficult for people of color.

REFLECTION: “IS THIS PERSON REAL TO ME?”

We’ve been looking at how we create Unreal Others. It’s important to realize that, especially when we’re stressed, our habits of Unreal Othering apply even to those closest to us—our brother, child,

mother, friend, and work colleague. We are trying to “get through the day,” and they are making things worse or better or playing bit

parts, irrelevant to our concerns. We’re just not there; our hearts are closed. If we want to relate more reliably with presence and compassion, we need to bring the habitual trance of Unreal Other above the line. Our starting place is to pay closer attention to our everyday encounters.



Take a few long, deep breaths, relax any obvious tension in your body, and arrive in presence. Now review your day, or the last couple of days. Remind yourself of someone you spent time with. Be curious about how attuned you were. How “real” did this person seem to you? Did you notice

what kind of mood they were in?

how they were feeling physically?

what was important to them at the time you connected?

what they might have been worried or anxious about?

if they were relaxed, comfortable, and open with you?

if they were tense and defensive with you?

whether anything in the interaction was difficult for them? Investigate without judgment, and as you deepen your attention, notice if the person you’re reflecting on becomes more multifaceted, interesting, and real. And notice your heart’s response to this person.

Before ending, you might think of someone you’re going to be spending time with soon. Imagine entering this next encounter with the inquiry “What’s it like being you?” Or, if they’ve been having difficulty, “Where does it hurt?”

CAN YOU HAVE TOO MUCH COMPASSION?

But perhaps right now you’re feeling the barriers going up. “I’m

already extremely sensitive,” people tell me. “If I let in everybody else’s pain, I’ll be overwhelmed.” I’m often asked about “compassion fatigue,” exhaustion from encountering so much suffering in our

world.

It’s true that many people, especially social activists and those in

the helping professions, become burned out. But it’s likely that the real culprit is empathy, not compassion. Empathy is our capacity to feel the emotions of others and/or take the perspective of other people. But therein lies a trap: If we become too distressed by their suffering, we may not have the cognitive or emotional resources to help them. Compassion begins with empathy, but the crucial element of mindfulness protects us from merging or identifying with the pain. Empathy alone can lead to burnout, but the mindfulness and care inherent in compassion foster resilience, connectedness, and action. Neuroscientists have even been able to detect clear differences in how these two states are processed in the brain. Empathy activates areas linked to emotion, self-awareness, and pain. Compassion stimulates areas associated with care and nurturing, and also those connected to learning, decision making, and the brain’s reward

system. It also stimulates secretion of oxytocin, the “bonding

hormone” released during lovemaking and while nursing a baby. We feel warmth and connection—positive feelings that mobilize our

energy and make us more capable of helping effectively.

CULTIVATING COMPASSION WITH RAIN

For Mitch, a member of our meditation community, the most difficult part of his father’s decline into Alzheimer’s was his mother’s suffering. “It’s like ongoing and countless deaths,” she told him. Mitch was the only one of his siblings who lived nearby, and he visited his parents regularly. As his father sank into confusion, Mitch began to dread the obligatory time in their small condo. Sometimes his mother’s loneliness and despair would flood him, and he’d leave feeling overwhelmed, exhausted, and helpless. But just as often—especially when he was stressed or busy—he’d feel robotic, cold, and distant. Either way, he was filled with guilt about not really showing up.

At a daylong workshop, Mitch explored bringing RAIN to his painful mix of feelings. The day started with sharing in small groups, and Mitch talked about his own sorrow at losing the father he knew, about his mother’s grief, and also about his guilt—“I’m being dragged into a bottomless pit, and I don’t want to be there.”

As group members began to practice RAIN on their own, Mitch focused on Recognizing and Allowing his own empathic distress: how he was feeling his mother’s feelings, as well as his own reactivity of overwhelm and withdrawal. He took his time, mindfully naming the emotions—fear, grief, guilt, helplessness—and with each, Allowing it to be there.

Mindfulness also allowed him to deepen into Investigation, discovering how his sense of failure appeared in his body, feeling the squeezing in his chest and the twisting in his belly. Observing this intensity, he began Nurture by whispering, “It’s okay, breathe, relax.” He then remembered a recent visit that was particularly upsetting: His mom had yelled at his dad for walking outside in his pajamas and then crumpled in tears of remorse. He was ashamed of the helplessness

he’d felt and how he’d hated being there.

Again he gently sent the message “It’s okay, breathe, relax,” and then repeated it several times. A deep clutching inside him loosened, and some space opened up. What followed was an image of himself hugging his mom as she was weeping. He was holding her in tenderness, and after some moments this loving space included his father, too. As he told me later, “After all these months of being so upset about their situation, I had some moments of simply caring about them. It was the first time . . . just caring.”

Perhaps you’ve experienced this too—being so worried or overwhelmed or reactive to another’s suffering that there was no room for the pure experience of care. At these times, RAIN can help us return to the tenderness of our heart.

RAIN TRANSFORMS EMPATHY INTO COMPASSION

Recognize: Brings mindfulness to painful empathic feelings and reactions like fear,

grief, guilt, shame, aversion, anger, numbness, or tightness.

Allow: Loosens our identification with the feelings and gives us more space to witness

rather than react.

Investigate: As we then inquire gently and more directly contact the empathic feelings

in our body, our tenderness and caring naturally arise.

Nurture: The fullness of compassion manifests as we feel and express care for

ourselves and for all who experience suffering.

After the RAIN: As we rest in this compassionate presence, we become familiar with

the natural openness, radiance, and tenderness of our heart.



The openhearted caring of After the RAIN transformed Mitch’s visit with his parents the next day. He was immediately struck by the trap his mom was in. He had a practice that he now knew could help him, but she was alone all day with her overwhelming feelings and needed more emotional support than he could possibly provide. She also needed more day-to-day help in caring for his dad. Over the next weeks, Mitch put his energies behind getting her into an Alzheimer’s support group and bringing in some part-time nursing care. His mother, like all of us, needed to feel that she belonged to a community of care that could help her carry her grief and loss. And as Mitch felt less stuck in overwhelm or guilt, his response to his parents became increasingly simple and clear: He could let himself be touched by their suffering and respond with care.

I find it helpful to use breathing as an image of compassion. We need to breathe in—mindfully taking in and connecting with what we and others are feeling. There is no presence and no potential for compassion if we don’t fully contact the reality of these emotions. And we need to breathe out—actively expressing our care and connecting with the larger space that unfolds when we feel loving and/or loved. Only the vastness of our heartspace has room for the intensity of human emotions.

This truth is embodied in the Tibetan compassion practice called Tonglen, which literally means “taking in and sending out.” With the in breath, we mindfully take in suffering; with the out breath, we send out our care. Like RAIN, Tonglen cultivates the two wings of awareness: mindful contact with the reality of suffering, and an active expression of nurturing.

THAT BIRD HAS MY WINGS . . . FOR REAL

Pity often masquerades as compassion—as if Jarvis Masters had thought, “Oh, you poor bird!” Pity positions us as separate and above the other person. We’re sorry for them and want to help, but they are still “other.” With true compassion, we feel the other person’s experience as our shared human vulnerability. Our urge to help is not “doing good”; it’s like tending to a wound on our own body. In the words of the aboriginal activist group in Queensland that open this chapter, “If you have come here to help me, you are wasting your time. But if you have come because your liberation is bound up with mine, then let us work together.” True healing grows from the wisdom of interdependence.

While volunteering in a nursing home for the destitute in Peru, a young man named Phil found himself waiting for hours in an emergency room with an old man who had broken his hip. All Phil could do was keep him company, and he felt helpless at not being able to relieve his pain. At one point, someone handed the man a bread roll. He immediately broke off half and tried to give it to Phil. Surprised, Phil refused to take it, but the man pushed the bread into his hand, motioning him to eat. And so he did, bewildered and humbled, as the old man looked quite pleased to be sharing his meal.

This experience radically shifted Phil’s understanding of compassion. The elderly man was no longer an Unreal Other, a

passive, unfortunate person to be helped. And Phil was not the privileged helper, doing something nice. They were in it together, lives linked in mutual care and belonging.

So often we imagine the spiritual path as one of discipline and difficulty. Yes, compassion does take training; as in the meditation

below, we are consciously developing compassion as an enduring trait. Yet because compassion is our evolutionary potential, the more we move in this direction, the more we feel a sense of homecoming. Radical compassion springs from the very roots of our being. When we are living from this source, we spontaneously respond to our world with the wisdom “That bird has my wings.”

MEDITATION: THE RAIN OF COMPASSION—“WHAT’S IT LIKE BEING YOU?”

There are times when this compassion practice may be inappropriate. If you are struggling with trauma-related fear, unrelenting depression, or severe psychological imbalance, this practice may cause emotional flooding or a sense of being stuck. Should you choose to practice and at any point feel overwhelmed, discontinue, and seek guidance from a spiritual teacher, therapist, or trusted guide in finding what will best help you move toward healing.



Sit in a way that allows you to be relaxed and alert. Let go of any habitual tension, and allow your body and mind to settle.

Take a few moments to scan through family members and/or friends who are close to you, and choose someone who you know is having a difficult time. Connect with your intention to awaken compassion toward this person.

Recognize: Become aware of whatever is most prominent about this person as you reflect on their current challenges. You might recall a mood they’re often in, something about their appearance, a regular activity of theirs, or the tone of recent communications.

Allow: Let your sense of this person—of how they are living, feeling, or expressing themselves—be just as it is, without adding any judgment.

Investigate: With gentleness, curiosity, and interest, now ask more deeply about their experience. Imagine feeling with their heart,

viewing the world from their perspective. You might use some of the following questions to explore “What’s it like being you?”

What life circumstances are most distressing to you?

What fears, disappointments, or hurts are you carrying?

What are you believing about yourself?

How does this life situation—and the emotions of fear, hurt,

anger, or shame—feel in your heart and body?

Where inside do you feel most vulnerable?

What does that vulnerable place most want or need right now— from others? From yourself?

Nurture: Keeping this person and their vulnerability in your

heart, expand your awareness to your whole body and to the sounds and space around you. From that inclusive heartspace, feel this being as part of you and offer what is needed. Is it acceptance? Being held? Forgiveness? Company? Understanding? You might also offer care energetically, as a flow of warmth, as an image, or through words. Imagine this person receiving and letting in your care, and envision them healed, happy, and well.

(If you’d like to try using the breath in this meditation, breathe in

as you Investigate, taking in the reality of this person’s experience. As you Nurture, breathe out your offering of space, care, or whatever else is needed.)

Widening the Circles: Now enlarge the field of compassion to include all those who experience the same suffering. If the person you are reflecting on is grieving a loss, connect with and offer care to all those grieving loss. If this person feels like a failure, connect with and offer care to all those who suffer this way. Sense the willingness of

your heart to be touched by pain (breathing in), and the vastness of loving awareness that is here, as you offer care to all beings (breathing out).

After the RAIN: Let go of all ideas of others, and notice the qualities of heart and presence within you. Is there a sense of openness? Tenderness? Love? Whatever you find, let go and rest there.

PRACTICE: ON-THE-STREETS COMPASSION

Whenever you become aware of suffering, you can practice compassion. You might be online and see a story about a refugee family. You might be driving on a highway and see a car accident. You might be at an AA meeting, listening as someone describes their struggle with alcoholism.



Right on the spot, you can follow these simple steps (adapted from the Tonglen practice):

Pause, and connect with your intention toward compassion.

For several slow and full breaths, silently breathe in their

pain, allowing yourself to imagine and feel what they are experiencing.

With the out breath, breathe out your care—wishing for their relief and that they be held in the openness of loving

awareness.

If you feel yourself resisting, turned off, or afraid of the pain, breathe for yourself, and then, if it’s possible, return to the person who is suffering.

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES





I wish I had more compassion, but the truth is I’m pretty caught up in my own problems. I just don’t



seem to have much authentic caring for others.


Thank you for your honesty, and please know that many others feel the same way. One of the reasons I so often share the image of compassion as widening circles is that it reminds us that compassion for our own life is at the center. If we are having a hard time and don’t hold our own vulnerability with care, it’s harder to embrace others with a full and wise presence.

You write that you wish you had more compassion. I

remember the Dalai Lama once said that while he wasn’t always good at practicing compassion, he cared about it. In other words,

even when our heart isn’t open, what matters is that deep down we care about caring. You can trust that caring is intrinsic to who you are.

Let your intention be to offer the caring presence of RAIN to the pain of your own difficulties. Investigate and sense the most painful feelings you are experiencing—maybe fear or hurt or selfjudgment—and make sure to feel them fully in your body, as that will awaken authentic self-compassion. Offer Nurturing to yourself, and then explore widening the circles: staying connected to the sense of inner vulnerability, bring to mind others who might be experiencing similar life problems and similar feelings. Extend the presence of RAIN to them: Imagine and let yourself be touched by their pain, and then offer them Nurturing too. Sense how we are in it together; we really do have each other’s wings! You’ll find that in time this practice of widening the circles awakens a very sincere and tender caring for all of us.





I’ve tried the on-the-streets compassion practice, but I find that I just get angry or scared and then shut down. What should I do?


Again, getting reactive in offering compassion outward is a signal that you first need to bring the RAIN of compassion inward to your own experience. Sometimes it won’t take long to Recognize and Allow your own reactions, say becoming angry at how you or another is being treated; getting judgmental about how you are treating yourself; feeling fear when someone acts aggressively. Investigating helps contact in your body the vulnerability underneath your reaction, and then Nurturing can soothe and comfort. This may give you the presence and bandwidth to sense the realness of another’s distress and offer your prayer and care.

But if you need more time for self-compassion, be patient. You can trust that the more often you offer a gesture of kindness to your own heart, the more readily you’ll find yourself responding to those around you with a natural openheartedness and care.





I want to stop othering, but how am I supposed to feel compassion for people who hate me for being white? For instance . . . Muslims or black people who consider me the enemy? It feels like a bad othering dance none of us can step out of!


We are all subject to our societal conditioning, and if we don’t address this on the group level, we miss the real healing that is possible.

If you are feeling hated or blamed, the first step is to bring acceptance and compassion to whatever is arising inside you— perhaps your own sense of hurt or anger at being the target of others. While you can begin to do this on your own, it’s invaluable to find an affinity group of white people dedicated to waking up— to seeing unconscious bias and bringing an honest, caring attention to their shared conditioning. By collectively holding

your Unreal Othering with compassion, you will gain insights and inspiration not available when you are practicing on your own. Once you’ve enlarged your self-awareness, it’s time to make

the effort to connect with people from different races to understand their realities and the suffering they are living with.

I saw a video of African American CNN commentator Van Jones being confronted by a young white man who was enraged

by the focus on racial violence against black people when there had just been a killing of a white police officer by an African American. Van responded, “If you cry just as much when that black man died in that police car, and I cry just as much when

that horrible bigot shot down the police . . . If you’re crying and I’m crying just as much, and we’re crying together . . . then we can find a way to get our cops to be better and our kids better. . . .” What had started as a hostile encounter ended with mutual respect and a warm hug.

In compassion training that addresses groups of Unreal Others, it’s natural and skillful to first deepen our understanding and healing by joining with those who feel safe and are easiest to relate to—affinity groups for just people of color, whites, Muslims, those of particular sexual orientations or gender identities, etc. But to continue evolving, we then need to wonder, “Where does it hurt?” and extend our care to widening circles. People of different and conflicting races, religions and political views, need to spend time with each other and awaken their care for each other’s suffering. We need to cry together, as Van says, to create a better world.





I’m white and deeply distressed about racism. Yet the more I see my white privilege, the more selfconscious I get around my black friends and the guiltier I feel. Clearly this doesn’t help, but I don’t know what to do.


Seeing white privilege—all the often hidden ways white people in contemporary societies benefit from their skin color—is essential if we are to evolve into a more just and compassionate world. But what makes white privilege so insidious is that it’s a pervasive societal conditioning, rather than a personal flaw. You can’t choose what color you are or what society you are in or what biases you are fed. This is not a matter of blaming individuals. It’s not your fault, and as you indicate, guilt and self-consciousness

do not contribute to healing. And yet, when white people start facing the ongoing suffering experienced by people of color, and the unconscious part they themselves play in perpetuating this suffering, they can become paralyzed by white guilt.

For the first eight months in one of my diversity groups, I felt anxious, awkward, and inauthentic every time I spoke. After one meeting that I hosted, I said my good-byes, returned to my empty living room, and realized I felt like an outsider in this circle, as if I didn’t belong. RAIN helped me contact a raw place of shame, a part of me that felt as if just being white were hurtful and that I could never do enough to right the horrors inflicted on generations of people of color. Of course I felt anxious and separate. I felt basically bad! I had encountered my own white guilt before, in a white affinity group, and now that it was again in full awareness, I was able to Nurture the place in me that took racism personally. While it took time, realizing that it was part of my conditioned identity as a white person—that it wasn’t my personal fault—actually freed me to be more engaged and real in the group. It’s helped me to be a better ally in antiracism efforts and to develop some friendships that I continue to cherish.

While we can’t choose our skin color or our society, we can choose how we want to respond to the suffering of racism. To varying degrees, every one of us suffers from racism, and we suffer whether we’re identified with dominant or nondominant populations. There’s no freedom—spiritual or other—if we don’t pay attention. Here I think of Valarie Kaur’s wonderful call to action: We need to breathe with the pain of racism—feel it, bring

compassion to it—and push, actively engage, for change. Breathe and push!





ELEVEN


Four Remembrances: Living with an

Awake Heart

Wisdom tells me I am nothing. Love tells me I am everything. And between the two, my life flows.

• SRI NISARGADATTA

M ore than twenty-five years ago, I went to a weekend retreat led bythe Zen master Thich Nhat Hanh with my dear friend and fellow teacher Luisa Montero-Diaz. We were delighted that Thay (as he is known) was teaching nearby, and also delighted to be taking time off from our busy lives of teaching and parenting to have two days together. But my brightest memory is of how the retreat ended.

Thay asked all of us to find partners, and Luisa and I quickly paired up. He began by instructing us to bow to our partner, acknowledging that each of us saw the Buddha in the other. Next we were to hug each other and then, while we embraced, take three long, deep breaths. During the first breath, we were to reflect: “I am going to die.” During the second: “You are going to die.” And during the third: “And we have just these precious moments together.”

When Luisa and I released our embrace, we stood together in silence. I was filled with tenderness for her; she was infinitely dear, unique, and wonderful. And I could feel the same warmth for me emanating from her smile and shining eyes. We stayed in this openhearted presence as we began to speak, as we said our good-byes to other retreatants, as we walked through the pine trees to our car, and as we laughed and shared stories and silence during the drive home.

Everything we most value—love, creativity, play, beauty, wisdom— can only be experienced here and now. Yet it’s so easy to race through life, forgetting that “we have just these precious moments.” The gift of RAIN is that it reminds us to pause, reconnects us with a wise and compassionate presence, and allows us to align our lives with our hearts.

• • •

As we complete our journey together, I want to share the four remembrances that guide me in daily life. You’ll find that each can bring alive your natural care and intelligence at times when you are likely to be caught in reactivity. These informal practices are drawn from RAIN and can be woven into stressful moments at work, difficult conversations, and any other situation where you want support in living true to yourself. They are the nourishment for our continued unfolding.

If you practice the four remembrances regularly, you’ll find that the qualities of heart/mind you most value, like openheartedness and equanimity, become available, strong, and steady. As you transform these uplifting states of mind into enduring traits, the potential of your future self will blossom in daily life.

THE FOUR REMEMBRANCES

Pause for Presence Say Yes to What’s Here Turn Toward Love Rest in Awareness



PAUSE FOR PRESENCE

Father Gregory Boyle, a Jesuit priest and author known for his work with gangs in Los Angeles, tells this story: It’s after Sunday morning service, and he’s in his office with a short window to get through his mail before performing a baptism. In walks Carmen, a gang member

and occasional prostitute. Plopping down on a couch, she starts rambling: She needs help, she went to Catholic school, she’s been to countless rehab centers, she’s known nationwide. He’s got his eye on the clock; she’s all over the place, and it’s now five minutes before the family arrives for the baptism.

All of a sudden Carmen looks directly at him, and her eyes pool

with tears. She says she started heroin after dropping out of high school and has been trying to stop ever since. Then she says slowly and clearly, “I . . . am . . . a . . . disgrace.” Father Greg writes, “Suddenly,

her shame meets mine. For when Carmen walked through that door, I had mistaken her for an interruption.”

Most of us know what it’s like to be on our way somewhere else—to assume that whatever’s happening here is just an obstacle to move through. Others become an interruption, but that’s not all. When we skim the surface of our days, we lose touch with our own heart and awareness.

I have a favorite saying posted in my office: “To be kind, you must swerve regularly from your path.” The challenge of this teaching was highlighted in a famous piece of social science research popularly known as the Good Samaritan study. The question was this: What affects the likelihood that we’ll help a stranger in need? In one part of the study, the researchers asked seminary students (surely people dedicated to service!) to prepare a short sermon on the biblical story of the Good Samaritan. The seminarians were then to go to another building to present their talk. Some of them were told they had plenty of time, others that they were already late. Their route took them right past a doorway where a man (an actor) sat slumped over, coughing, and obviously in difficulty. The key finding was this: The students who thought they were late were much less likely to stop and ask if they could help—even as they rushed to speak about the Good Samaritan. Especially when strong emotions like fear, shame, and anger are running the show, we’ll do almost anything rather than be right here feeling our raw and unpleasant feelings. When we’re caught in our reactive trance, it’s as though we were on a bicycle pedaling away from the present moment, and the more stressed we feel, the faster we pedal.

Whatever your deepest regrets about your life—ignoring your children, addictive bingeing, causing an accident, staying in an abusive relationship—all arise from being trapped inside a reactive trance. When we’re in trance, we’re unable to swerve, unable to respond to ourselves or to others with kindness.

Pausing for presence begins in RAIN when we Recognize and Allow what is here, and stop pedaling. We are learning to let go of the habitual controls—of all our strategies for avoiding unpleasantness

and discomfort, and grasping after pleasure. Practicing these pauses informally throughout the day might be uncomfortable or scary, refreshing or relieving. No matter what it feels like, pausing is the gateway to presence—to living aligned with our hearts.

REMEMBRANCE: PAUSE FOR PRESENCE

For now, set your intention to pause in just one or two situations of moderate stress and reactivity. It might be when you see a flurry of new emails needing a response; when you’re worrying about an upcoming deadline; about to enter a demanding meeting; or feeling irritated with a friend, colleague, or family member.

The pause itself is simple. Stop whatever you’re doing, become still, and take a moment to Recognize and Allow whatever emotions and thoughts are present. Then take three to five long, deep breaths. With each, match the length of the inhale and exhale: Breathe in fully, filling your chest and lungs, and then release with a long, slow out breath. When you’ve finished, notice if anything has changed, and then continue with your day.

Gradually expand the number of situations in which you practice an intentional pause, including those that involve more emotional triggering. In time, you’ll be able to pause in a wide range of situations, and you’ll have more access to your inner clarity, resilience, and heart.



SAY YES TO WHAT’S HERE

The holy man in chapter 6 posed a crucial question to those seeking spiritual healing: “What are you unwilling to feel?” Often what keeps us pedaling away from presence is our fear of painful or unfamiliar experiences. Yet by saying yes, we can bring the places that most need our compassionate attention into the light of awareness. Saying yes opens the door to genuine trust, confidence, and healing.

I saw this most poignantly in the life and death of a close friend and beloved Buddhist teacher, Cheri Maples, who inspired me and many others with her “yes.”

For the first weeks after Cheri crashed her bike into a moving van, doctors had doubted she could survive the extensive and multiple traumas to her body. Should she make it, they were certain that Cheri, a lifelong athlete who found her deepest joy in outdoor adventure, would never walk again. Before taking Buddhist vows, Cheri had been a police officer, a social activist, and an assistant attorney general for the State of Wisconsin. This fiercely independent woman would henceforth depend on the aid of others for moving from lying to sitting, for urinating, for bathing, for almost everything.

Yet when I visited her in the intensive rehabilitation unit where she spent many months, she was in good spirits—her naturally warm, interested, bright self. How was it possible that her life could take such a sudden sharp turn and that she could still be happy? As Cheri put it to me, “I have already faced the worst death; I can live with this.”

Two years earlier, Cheri and her partner of nine years had gone through a wrenching breakup. Cheri spiraled into a depression that was entirely out of her control. She pulled away from her teaching and social activism, outdoor recreation and formal meditation practice.

She isolated herself from all but a few friends. When we talked, she told me that something in her core had withered: “I’ve lost hope that I can feel close with the world.”

Then, very slowly, her informal practice—the mindfulness and selfkindness of RAIN—took hold. She began acknowledging and saying

yes to the worst death: the pain of losing love. To be clear, this was not a full-blown “yes,” not an openhearted acceptance with no resistance. Rather, when she could, she’d contact the waves of loneliness, terror, and desolation and let them be there. Recognizing and Allowing. Saying yes. In time, the “yes” became increasingly filled with compassion.

Over many months, as Cheri opened her body and heart to the reality of loss and grieved deeply, the tentacles of depression gradually loosened. She emerged with a fresh sense of openness to life and a deep trust in her own resilience. Along with another good friend, we taught a retreat together, and Cheri was filled with creativity and joie

de vivre. She was, as she’d always been, courageously transparent about her vulnerabilities. She was saying yes to her life and living with an increasingly fearless heart.

Witnessing Cheri’s healing reminded me of a teaching that captures the essence of Recognize and Allow: “Meet your edge and soften.” Sometimes meeting our edge means recognizing a feeling of resentment or irritation or discouragement. At other times it’s acknowledging the anguish and defeat that comes with a failing relationship, a life-threatening illness, or the suffering of a loved one. We soften by saying yes, letting go of resistance and allowing our experience to be just as it is. Because life serves up an ongoing stream of challenges great and small, this is an ongoing practice. Yet each

time we meet our edge and soften, we become increasingly confident that we can handle whatever comes our way.

Just a week after our retreat, and six months after returning to her former active life, Cheri had the bike accident. Now she was facing another kind of death—loss of control over the most basic tasks of

daily life. And yet this round was different. She knew how to meet her edge and soften: She could say yes to impermanence and loss; she could live with this death.

Saying yes expresses our heart’s wisdom. Only when we open to reality as it is—without any resisting or grasping—can our heart and intelligence come fully alive. Only by saying yes to this moment can we respond to our own life and the lives of others with the courage of radical compassion.

REMEMBRANCE: SAY YES TO WHAT’S HERE

While we need to open to our deep fears and losses, we can develop our resilience and confidence if we first practice saying yes to moderate discomfort and unpleasantness. You might try saying yes when you have indigestion or a headache; when you are anxious about being late, annoyed that the car was left close to “empty,” or

disappointed at missing a dear one’s wedding. Keep in mind that your “yes” is directed toward your own inner experience, not toward what someone else is doing. You are meeting your edge—any sense of emotional reactivity or inner conflict—and softening. Here are some ways to begin:

Whisper “yes” inwardly or say it softly out loud. Or alternate “yes” with “it’s okay,” “I consent,” “this belongs,” or any other word or phrase that conveys acceptance.



Imagine sending the message of “yes” directly to the inner place of vulnerability, upset, discomfort, or pain.

Make a gesture of bowing respectfully to the inner experience, or visualize





yourself bowing.

Meet the inner experience with a slight smile; let this form at your lips, and then try to feel the smile in your eyes and in your heart.

End by taking some moments to notice if there is any shift in your body, heart, or mind.

TURN TOWARD LOVE

Like many of us, Cheri had never been very good at asking for or receiving help. She was impatient and used to getting things done . . . quickly. Now, after her accident, she found that saying yes meant surrendering to her utter dependency. She had to accept being seen by others in states of mental confusion, acute pain, emotional distress, and powerlessness. She had to accept having people she didn’t know handling her traumatized body. She had to accept that to be moved to an upright position took a long time, accept that she had to ask for absolutely anything she wanted or needed.

Saying yes to the rawness and depths of vulnerability opened her to something she had never imagined. On the day I visited her, Cheri told me about a nurse’s aide who came one evening to bathe her: “I had never seen her before. She was quiet, a small woman from Guatemala —not someone who filled the air with talk. But every part of bathing me, from massaging my head to soaping my neck and back, was a gesture of love. She wasn’t just helping me; she was loving me. She

was an angel, bathing me in love!”

This aide appeared only once, but in fact Cheri was bathed in love that was flowing in from all directions—from each prayerful card and thoughtful gift, from the devoted advocacy and unceasing nurturing of her close-in support team, from the circle of healers who visited weekly.

As I saw that day sitting by her bedside, Cheri’s “yes” had created the space not only for receiving love but also for offering it freely and with good cheer. When an aide came by to take her vitals, he and Cheri celebrated a win by the Packers (Cheri’s home team). When an older

nurse appeared, Cheri softly asked how her husband was doing, and I saw how the woman moved in closer to share details of his recent job loss. Cheri told me about brainstorming promotion ideas for a friend’s new book and about her fears for a student whose son struggled with addiction.

This same openhearted spirit filled our time together. Cheri brought out her precious stash of ginger candies to share with me. We looked at photos from another recent visitor—her beloved dog Bear, who was lying by her side on her hospital bed. Then I took Bear’s spot as a friend snapped pictures for our mutual buddies in D.C. We joked about my training to become her service dog.

All that day we were both aware that we had “just these precious moments.” When I rose to depart that evening, we knew this might be the last time we were together in person, and it was. Yet our shared heartspace was large enough to hold our sorrow. We were able to love each other without holding back.

As you might have discovered, it can be easier to offer love openly when someone is gravely ill or in the face of a natural disaster or tragedy. Yet if we want to cultivate the trait of loving presence—if we want to embody and express it consistently in our lives—we need to practice turning toward love many times a day. We need to pay attention in ways that warm, soften, and open our hearts. This doesn’t mean looking for a big emotional experience. Just the “turning toward” plants the seeds.

When I’m having a hard time, simply remembering the idea of kindness, or mentally saying the word “kindness,” begins to soften me. Sometimes I might whisper a caring message to myself and place my hands gently on my heart. Often I’ll imagine feeling the Beloved kissing my brow, and as I feel filled with that loving presence, I’ll offer care outward to others. All this might take just a few moments, and such moments may happen many times through the day.

I’ve found that what matters for myself and others is a sincere intention. Then, even if the body and mind are trapped in aversion, there’s an opening for the tenderness and light of our heart to shine through.

REMEMBRANCE: TURN TOWARD LOVE

Set your intention to turn toward love when you become aware of feeling lonely, depressed, anxious, caught in self-judgment, or blaming others. Give yourself permission to experiment with different ways of reconnecting with love. Here are some possible approaches:

Send a caring message or prayer to yourself (silently or whisper out loud). Examples: “May I be happy”; “May I feel safe”; “Please be kind”; “It’s okay, sweetheart”; “I’m sorry and I love you”; “May I love myself into healing.”

Imagine receiving a caring message from a loved one or compassionate spiritual figure.

Place one or both hands on your heart; hug yourself; place a comforting hand on your cheek; put your palms together in prayer.

Imagine yourself surrounded by and held in warm light; imagine yourself being embraced by a loved one or by a compassionate spiritual figure; imagine you yourself are embracing your inner child.

Imagine and feel what it’s like to let in love. Visualize the eyes of a loved one who is feeling and expressing his or her care, and then sense your body allowing the warmth of that care to wash through you, to bathe you.

Send your care to dear ones, others in your life, and those you don’t know. You might do this through a message and/or image.

The more often you intentionally turn toward love—expressing it and letting it in—the more your natural care and compassion will arise spontaneously throughout the day.



REST IN AWARENESS

In the practice of RAIN, crucial moments of integration, healing, and freedom often emerge immediately after you’ve moved through the four intentional steps. That is why I’ve stressed the period called After the RAIN, when we simply notice and rest in presence. It is during this time of non-doing that we directly experience the openness, wakefulness, and tenderness of our true nature. These moments can reveal the formless radiance of consciousness itself, the essence of who we are.

Many people, however, skip or shortchange the invitation to “stop doing and rest in awareness.” We are conditioned to move restlessly

on to something else. The clock is still ticking; there’s always more to do. As a result, both in meditation and in daily life, moments of pure

being are rare. Yet if we were at the end of our life looking back, the experiences that would most matter—such as feeling at home with ourselves, connected to others, and fully alive—arise from this open presence.

If you’re caught in an emotional tangle, it’s difficult to become aware of the background of awareness itself. At such times, your attention naturally fixates on the foreground of obsessive thoughts, fears, and wants, and you’ll benefit from reawakening mindfulness

and compassion with the steps of RAIN. But when you’ve completed RAIN, or when in daily life you’re relatively relaxed, the lens of perception is more open. Then it’s easier to sense that behind the changing stream of images, sounds, and sensations, there’s a background of consciousness.

Here’s one of my favorite brief exercises: Stop reading, close your eyes, and for the next twenty seconds Try Not to Be Aware. Starting now!

Were you successful? It’s likely you realized that you can’t shut awareness off. Awareness is always here, always noticing what’s happening. But because we’re focused on the movie in our mind, emotions, or external objects, we are not aware of awareness itself. Turning your attention from the sounds or sensations to that which is aware of them, and resting in that formless presence, allow for a radical shift in your own experience of being.

Recall the image of the Golden Buddha. Most of the time, our sense of identity is hitched to our external coverings—our self-story, personality, defenses, wants, fears, achievements, and failures. These coverings are a natural part of who we are, but they don’t reflect the wholeness of our being. Resting in awareness reconnects us to the vastness, beauty, and mystery of our existence. The formless awake space of awareness is the source of our love, wisdom, and creativity. It is the gold, the sacred essence of our life.

REMEMBRANCE: REST IN AWARENESS

Set your intention to rest in awareness at times when you are calm and quietly present.

It might be when you lie down to sleep and can feel yourself unwinding; when you are

listening to the sound of wind or rain; when you are looking at cloud formations or the

intricacy of a flower; when you are with someone in comfortable silence. It might also be



when you’ve arrived at your destination, right before getting out of the car. Or when you are standing and looking out a window.

Close your eyes, be still, and notice the foreground of what you are experiencing— the thoughts, sensations, images, sounds. Let everything be just as it is. Then notice your own presence, the formless awareness in the background. What is awareness? Can you sense the silence? The stillness? The openness that everything is happening in? Relax and rest in this awareness; become the awareness.

Often after just a few seconds, the mind re-fixates on something in the foreground— or perhaps on a thought about what’s next. This is natural. Rather than struggle to sustain awareness of awareness (which is another “doing”), simply be mindful as you continue with your day.

The most helpful way to practice resting in awareness is for brief moments, many times a day. If you approach this remembrance with curiosity and ease, you will find that you become increasingly drawn toward, and then at home in, the inner stillness of being.

TRUSTING THE GOLD

I had the recent blessing of witnessing my granddaughter Mia’s birth. I sobbed as she was delivered, heart broken open at this ordinary and ever-astounding miracle. When we all settled and Mia was nursing contentedly in her mom’s arms, I asked myself what my prayer was for her. It was that she trust her goodness. That she realize and trust the awareness, intelligence, and love that are intrinsic to her being.

Who knows what kind of personality Mia will develop, what challenges she will encounter in her health, her relationships, her learning, her world? If she can remember the goodness that lives in

her and in all beings, she’ll know true happiness. And not only that. She’ll help serve the awakening of hearts in our world.

My prayer for Mia is my prayer for all of us. It’s natural that we get caught in self-doubt, emotional reactivity, and ways of acting that cause separation and harm. We do this as individuals, and we turn against others—humans and other animals—on a societal level. And

yet we are at a juncture in our unfolding as a species where we can purposefully evolve our own hearts and minds. We can cultivate mindfulness and self-compassion; we can learn to see past the mask of Unreal Others; we can Recognize and invite forward the gold in our own being and in others.

It helps to know that whatever you practice gets stronger. The more you practice RAIN and call on the four remembrances in daily life, the more familiar you’ll become with openhearted awareness. In time you’ll find that more than any habitual personality covering, this basic goodness feels like the truth of who you are.

It also helps to know that there are seasons to our awakening. Remember how the shadow god Mara continued to visit the Buddha after his enlightenment? The Buddha would respond with clarity and kindness: “I see you, Mara. Come, let’s have tea.” Just so, each time you meet difficulties with mindfulness and self-compassion, your confidence will grow. The old, limiting story of yourself no longer defines you. Even when challenging emotions arise, you can trust that you’re basically okay. Then having tea with Mara becomes the

gracious, good-humored, wise, and kind response to this human life. Finally, remember that even when our lives seem most lonely, we’re never on this path alone. We can’t and don’t awaken (or suffer) by ourselves. We are inextricably embedded in this web of living beings— always connected, always influencing each other, needing each other

to mirror our goodness and remind us of our inherent potential.

As we close, I invite you to imagine a world where we humans see and trust and revere the gold within all beings. Imagine how we’d help each other live true to ourselves, how we’d comfort and accompany each other, how we’d celebrate and create beauty together, how we’d awaken together and bring our collective care to our earth and to all beings everywhere.

We sow the seeds of radical compassion when we pause and say yes to what’s here; when we turn toward love and rest in awareness. This cultivates the presence that guides us in living from compassion, in living true to our awakened heart.

May we continue to create the world we believe in together, and may the blessings of loving awareness extend endlessly in all directions.

APPENDIX 1

EVOLUTION OF THE ACRONYM RAIN

ORIGINAL VERSION OF RAIN (MICHELE MCDONALD)

Recognize

Allow

Investigate

Non-Identification





CURRENT VERSION OF RAIN

Recognize Allow

Investigate Nurture

After the RAIN



I was introduced to the original version of RAIN in the late 1990s and taught it for a number of years. Along with many others, I was grateful to have an easy-to-remember mindfulness tool to guide me in untangling emotions.

During this time, I adapted RAIN in response to a key discovery in my own life: There is no healing without self-kindness. This was also evident in my students’ experiences: “I know I’m supposed to be Investigating this shame, but I hate it . . . and I hate myself for having it.” Realizing the necessity of self-compassion, I encouraged students to “Investigate with kindness,” bringing an attitude of true interest, care, and friendliness to their inner lives.

My students were also having difficulty with the N—Nonidentification. They’d regularly ask, “How do you do the step of Non

identification?” I had to explain that it wasn’t actually a step. Rather, the R-A-I steps of RAIN awaken a full presence that transcends a limiting self-sense. Non-identification is not something we intentionally “do”; it is a state of being that emerges naturally.

The need for an active step of compassion and the confusion around Non-identification motivated me to change the acronym in 2014.

In its current version, the final step, Nurture, invites a full flowering of compassion. It creates a balancing of the two wings of mindfulness and heartfulness.

Non-identification is perceived most fully in After the RAIN. In the same way that the earth blossoms following a spring shower, after awakening through the four steps of RAIN you can simply rest in a naturally lucid and open presence. No longer identified with passing states like fear or anger, you discover the boundless, wakeful, and loving awareness that is your home.

The possibilities for RAIN continue to unfold as people explore using it in conflict resolution, clinical settings, and interpersonal meditations like RAIN Partners (see Appendix 2). Because RAIN awakens our most valued human capacities for wisdom and compassion, I hope many others will join in bringing these practices alive in our world.

APPENDIX 2 RAIN PARTNERS

Practicing with Others

My inspiration for RAIN Partners came from feedback given bypeople attending my weekend workshops. For years, I’ve guided participants in practicing RAIN in groups of four. They’d share at the beginning what they were going to work on and then debrief at the end with their challenges, insights, and openings.

Many have found this to be profoundly rewarding. I was struck in particular by reports from those already familiar with RAIN. They shared how the supportive presence of their partners deepened their inner work and how being together in a healing process forged authentic connection.

Their experience motivated me to create a format for RAIN that people could do on their own with partners, one that could be incorporated into their meditation practice and daily life. I’ll share some key features of RAIN Partners here; if you would like to explore further, the full protocol and guided meditation are available on my website: www.tarabrach.com/blog-rain-partners-protocol.

WHAT ARE RAIN PARTNERS?

While RAIN can be done in small groups, for convenience most people choose to work with a single partner. Your RAIN partner might be a friend or family member, colleague, or someone you don’t know.

RAIN partners agree to do RAIN meditation sessions together on a regular basis—weekly, biweekly, monthly, or whatever arrangement works. A session takes approximately thirty-five to forty-five minutes

and can be done in person, by phone, or via the Internet. Continuing as partners over time allows for a deepening of trust, safety, and mutual support.

ARE THERE PREREQUISITES TO BEING A RAIN

PARTNER?

Before participating as a RAIN partner, you and your partner should have your own regular mindfulness practices as well as some experience working with RAIN. Each partner should carefully review the guidelines in the protocol before beginning.

WHAT HAPPENS IN A RAIN SESSION?

Both partners reflect in advance on a situation where they are getting caught in difficult emotions. It might be something triggered in a relationship, at work, by a health issue or an addictive behavior, or by events in our larger society. Each partner comes to the session with a particular situation in mind that activates the reactive pattern. You are advised not to choose something that is potentially traumatic or something that is highly charged and might be more than a peer process can hold in a healthy way.

As you’ll see in the protocol, in the Recognize and Allow steps you and your partner will name aloud the challenging experience you are focusing on, while Investigate and Nurture are done in silence. You then return to a final sharing that will help you acknowledge what might have been difficult and clarify the insights or openings you most want to remember.

The protocol also includes essential guidelines (like confidentiality) that help you both create a safe and nourishing space for your RAIN sessions.

WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS?

Here, I’ll share the words of students who have been RAIN partners: Having a partner makes me accountable. When I set up a

RAIN session, I have to show up.

It supports me in engaging fully with the process. When I’m alone, I sometimes start RAIN and then drift, or just stop. When I’m with my partner, I have to stick with it, go through

all the steps. I’m always grateful.

We call it our “RAIN dance” because together it’s so much

more powerful—and so beautiful in the way it connects us.

Our presence brings out the best in each other.

When we both are sharing problems, they feel less shameful

and personal and unwieldy. It’s much easier to be curious

about what’s going on inside me and to relate to myself with kindness.

By exploring together what we learned, it seems to go deeper. And it sticks. I can remember through my week, and get so much from each time of practice.

My partner helps me feel safe enough to explore issues I don’t want to face on my own.

This is empowering—I don’t have to pay for a therapist or

group . . . and get to do deep healing with someone who is

along for the same ride!

Doing this with a partner is a deep spiritual practice. By the

end of a session, the little me has faded, and I’m left in a sense of “we,” of openhearted awareness.

When I do RAIN with a partner, I’m always struck by how the sense of “my problem” shifts. What starts out as a weighty difficulty that usually makes me feel bad about myself turns

into something that feels unpleasant yet is held in a space of care.

We are always in relationship with our inner life and with each other. When we practice presence together, as we do with a RAIN partner, we co-create a field of radical compassion. This illuminates the truth of our connectedness and the intrinsic goodness that shines through ourselves and all beings.

For the RAIN Partners protocol and guided meditation, go to





www.tarabrach.com/blog-rain-partners-protocol/.