THE

PREFACE.



IT feemed to me that the Accounts of &h* Anti-
India and China I here prefent to the ffl °f ihe
Public, deferved to be retrieved from the r c ?&~
Obfcurity they have hitherto been in ; not which con-
only becaufe they are written in a very fo- tain the/e
reign Tongue, but alfo becaufe the Origi- two Ac ~
nal Manufcript, which is in the Comte dz comt ^
Seignelay's Library, feenis to be the only
one of its kind. Its Age may be fuffici-
ently afcertained by the Character it is in*
but we have a plain Proof that it was writ-
ten in the Year of the Hejra DLXIX, or
the Year of Chrifi MCLXXIII : For at
the End there are fome Obfervations, of
the fame Hand, upon the Extent and Cir-
cumference of the Walls and Towers of
DamafciiS) and other Cities in fubje&ion
to Soltan Nurodditiy fo famous in the Wars
Beyond-fea ; and the Writer fpeaks of
him as if then living. Now this Prince
dyed in the Year above, and fo the Ma-
nufcript muft be about 550 Years old.

But we may be fatisfied that our two 4? *^'
Authors are more ancient, and that the ^tlmL
*A 3 tWO ten. V



vx PREFACE.

two Dates they give, the one of the Yea*

CCXXXVII oi'the Hejra, which is that oi

our firft Traveller, and the other of the

Year of the fame CCLIV, when a great

Revolution hapned in China, are true and

juft : And thefe two Dates, correspond

with the Years of thrift ftCCCU an*1

DCCCLXVII. *

rtey are Every body knows that Marco Polo, t'fc

much older Venetian, was the firft that talked to us oj

than Mar- China with any Knowledge, and that

cq Folq. ^hat he writes was formerly much queftio-

ned, becaufe of the feemingly incredible

'**{ Wonders he relates, many of which have

been iince confirmed for Truths. Now

Marco Polo returned from his Travels ir

the Year of Chrift MCCXCV, whence ii

follows that our Arabs were four hundred

Years before him ; and as every Thing, we

have of the kind, is pofterior to him, thefe

Accounts muft be far more ancient thin

what others have penned. Nor will Vt

except any of the Arabian and Per/ian T. i-

vellers, or Geographers that have written

in either Tongue, who have been toe

partially fet forth by fome learned Meri oi

our own Times, and very far bey^-d

- what they deferve.

Tfo Nu- ^hQ Geography commonly called of A •
Jr%? y he~- ^> anc ^ i u PP°fed to be the Work of
uiden to Sharif alEdnfi, which was produced in &
fbem for cily, and which many Authors call Tht
gW Book of Roger, becaufe it was undertaken
vliingl. at t j ie Command of Roger II. King of i*
cily^ is the molt an dent we have} and ^

divide



PREFACE. vii

divided into Climates after the manner of
Ptolomey, whom the Arabs had tranilated
in their Tongue ; almoffc all the Eaft-
em Geographies are methodifed by the
fame Plan ; but it affords you no Pofitions
no more than mod: of the reft, if we ex-
cept the Geography of Abulfeda, to be re-
sumed hereafter. But this Nubian Geo~
fftdphy containing the molt curious Parti-
culars we read in the Authors that have
appeared fince, whether as to natural Hi-
ftory, or the Cuftoms and Manners of dif-
ferent Nations, we may fafely pronounce
it to have been pillaged by later CompL- *.
lers : And very remarkable it is That this
Nubian Geographer, whofoever he was, is
beholden to our two Authors for moft of
what he relates concerning the Navi-
gation of the Eafiern Ocean, of the Indies y
and of China, which alone may evince
*hem to have been of the higheft Antiqui-
\ : among the Writers of their own Nation.

I But we do not by this mean to extend ^% &**«
i-he Merit of thefe two Accounts beyond f on % BIe ~
due Bounds; we are ready to allow r> f f e ns
them to contain fome fabulous Particulars, but they in-

, d many fo very obfcure that there is no f orm us °f
earing' them up; and alfo that their f^ e or ^ f
c/ant of Politions fruftrates the Ufe we ^1*"

jght otherwife have made of the Def-
-riptions they give us. But thefe Difad-
vantages, which they have in common with

II the Arabian Geographers, are amply
ompenfated by a very great number of

fA 4



* curt-



viii PREFACE.

curious Things they tell us, and which are
fcarce to be met with elfewhere.
Jmons o- ® ne °f then chief Remarkables is the
thers, the Courfe the Arabs and the Perjians former-
old Ou-fe ly iteered froin Bajjbra and Siraf to the
fteendfor j n jj es allc [ China ; and inverfely the Courfe
fleered by the Ckincfe for Arabia and Per-
Jia. Many of the Learned who thought
with Martini That the Chinefe failed by the
direction of the Ccmpafs as far as Ceylon,
and there planted a Colony, have perfuad-
ed others That this Voyage was perform-
ed by Obfervation. And hence they
concluded it almoft impoffible but the
active and induftrious Arabs muft have
borrowed the ufeful Invention from the
Chinefe, and "have applied it in their long
Runs; it appearing by Hiftory that they
failed great Lengths, long before the Por-
ting uefe difcovered the E aft em Parts. Such
was the Opinion of the late Mr. Thevenot,
who knew nothing of our two Authors,
and who being very much prepofTefied in
favor of the Chinefe, concurred with Mar-
tini That they had had the Ufe of the
Compafs, and that they had failed to the
Jfland of Ceylon, and even much farther ;
while Vojjius infifts on the fame, as a
Fact not in the leaft to be doubted, tho*
he does not vouchfafe us the leaft Proof
to countenance his ArTertion. Our Au*-
thors.fo plainly and circumftantially ob-
ferve to us That the Indian and Chinefe
Ships did not ftir beyond Sir of, that we
cannot but fubmit to them, and efpecially

as



PREFACE. is

as they, at the (lime time, acquaint us They
dared not go farther, becaufe their Veilels
were unable to ftand the Aflaults of the
open Sea : But it is not becaufe our two
Authors make no mention of the Compafs
That we venture to affirm the Chinefe and
Arabians knew nothing of it; we have
other Arguments not to be refitted : But
tho' we had no other way of proving this
Ignorance upon them, the Courfe they
fleered would fufficiently declare it; they
forfaking it as too tedious and dangerous,
as foon as they came to have the Compafs.

In thefe Accounts alfo we have many Vley con-
curious Obfervables upon China, which a- iain ma *y
gree with Marco Polo, and are even con- v %y* k f° U
firmed by the moft fincere Travellers of whiri are
later Times : If others there are which confirmed
clam with what we elfe where read, they ty late
ought not for that Reafon alone to be mi- ^ vaveilerS -
ftrufted, fince great Alterations have be-
fallen that Country in the long Courfe of
eight hundred Years or upwards. By the
Lights Martini conveys to us in his Chi"
nefe Atlas, we difcover the Truth of many
Things that before appeared fabulous in
Marco Polo, and the fame may hereafter
be difcovered of the doubtful Things in
our Authors.

Martini is the firft that told us The
great Cities of China had often changed
their Names; and very poflible it is that
the Names in our two Authors may have
obtained in their Time; and tho' they are
defective in Pofitions, we prefently know

them



x PREFACE.

them by the Obfervations the Europeans
have made } for it is in vain to look for
them in the Arabian Writings ; tho' a
contrary Opinion has taken fuch deep
Root among us, that it is feemingly a
Ralhnefs to difpute tne Point. John Bap"
ti Ram tt/W) a Man of great Judgment
and very exteniive Learning, having feen
a fmall Part o£ Abidfedas Geography, and
therein obferved the Names of fome Places
mentioned by Marco Po/o y conceived a very
great V eneration for the Work. Caftaldo
made ufe ot it alio for feveral Pofitions ;
and Schickard cited fome parts of it, and
promifed a Tranflation of the whole.
Greaves a learned Englijhman actually tran-
slated it, and publifhed two of the Clima-
tes. Thevenot attempted the Thing after
him, but dying, the Copy of his Yerfion
fell into foreign Hands. Ail the Learned,
and,upon what they have faid, all that were
Strangers to the Oriental Tongues, have
fed up the Public with the excel live Com-
mendations they have beflowed on Abul-
fcda's Work, tho' often without knowing
why or wherefore. Andrew Midler who
printed Marco Polo in Latin with tedious
Diflertations, and particularly one upon
Cathay or Catai, regrets a Work Schickard
had promifed, concerning Tartary and Chi"
ndy which he was to have extracted from
Abulfeda, and was to have been like his
What ire Tarich Regum Perfta.

"rVvr^L Tt)e Pu ^ lic ma y P°flibly tWnk it a
ScVkkard S reat Pifappointment that Schickard di£

fromifel not



PREFACE. xi

not print this Work, or tranflate AbuU
feda, according to his Word ; and it mull
be moil readily believed, after fo many
learned Orientalifts have faid it, That the
Geography of this Author would com«?
pletely illuftrate Metres Polo, and afford
us a fair Profpect of China, as Mullet
will have it. We happen to live in an Age
that has been morl: minutely and almorl
trirlingiy inquiiitive into what concerns
the Lives and Writings of the Learned :
But as it is feldom thefe Compilers confult
any Thing farther than what is contained
in Prefaces, and are perfect Strangers
both to the Books and Authors menti-
tioned, it may not be amifs to fay what
is true of Schickard, and afterwards of
Abulfeda.

Schickard, who was a Profeflbr in the U- j n j c ^
niverlity of 'Tubingen, got a large Share of count tf
Reputation by a Work he intitled Tarich Schic-
ftegum Per/it ; which took Birth from ^^
the Difcovery of a Genealogy written
upon a long Scroll, which began with
Adam, and ended with a Moh.amedan Prince
who had had it done • this Schickard
took for a very great Curiofity, tho'
nothing in the World is lefs fo. He
copied the Names, which he often read
mirtakenly enough, and having collected
all that could relate to thole Princes }
when he comes to the Kings of Perjia,
he does not fay a Word of them that
he does not borrow from Teixeira, a
fortuguefe Author who writes from the

Per/tan



xii PREFACE.

Perftan Hiftories with the greater! Fidelity :
To ■ this he adds fome Citations from
the Book intitled JukhaJJin, which has
many Curious Particulars of Oriental Hi-
ftory, fome Paffages from the Arabian
Geography, but nothing Original. We
are lure he had not the leaft Knowledge
of the Authors that wrote this Hiitory,
which is quite Fabulous, if we except
what is faid of the latter Kings ; and
we need only read Tcixeira, or the Tran-
flated Abridgment of the Per/tan Hiftories
called Leb Towarich, in the fourth Volume
of the late Mr. Tbevenot's Collection, by
Gautptin'y to be convinced of the little
value of Scbickard's Work, and how un^
x equal he was to the task of writing the
Hiitory of the Jengbiz-kbanid Tartars, he
ventured to Promife.
He alfi Moil: certain it is alfo that he in like
pomUedto ]\j anner prromifed to Tranflate Abul-

Abulfeda. f e ^ a » ^ ut Greaves, who, by the Report
of thofe who knew him, was a very
worthy Man, not caring to join with
Scbickard in the Undertaking, wrote to
him about it. To which he anfwered,
That the Manufcript in the Vienna Li-
brary, was fo obfcure that it was abfo-
lutely impoifible to tranflate it : He co-
pied it however, and his Copy being
afterwards purchafed in Germany, is now
in the King's Library ; annexed to it
there is part of the Work tranflated,
• which requires no great Perufal for us
to pronounce it very much an Overmatch

for



PREFACE. xiii

for Schickard. Greaves was indeed com-
pletely qualified } for belides that he was
a perfect Mailer of the Oriental Tongues,
and had travelled in the Lev ant ^ he was
acquainted with the Principal Authors,
was profoundly learned, and a con-
fummate Mathematician. He gave us a
Specimen of his Work when, in the
Year MDCL, he publifhed the Defcripti-
on and Tables of the two Provinces,
of Chowarazm and Mawaralnahra or the
Tranfoxane y in Arabic and Latin. In his
Preface he acquaints us he had finifhed
the whole Tranflation of Abulfeda y and
he declared as much to fome of his learn-
ed Friends ; but being thrown into Pri-
fon by the Parliament, for lending Money
to King Charles II. his Houfe was ran-
facked, and his Work loft : This we had
from Mr. Hardy y a very ingenious Gen-
tleman, who knew him intimately well.

The two Climates Greaves has given Of
us, are one of the moft curious Parts of S rea Jp f
all Abulfedas Geography • for it takes ]*"£ j£
notice of Cities unknown to the anci- bulfeda>
ent Geographers, and which we are only
told of by the Mohammedan Hiftory, anci
our Modern Travels ; and what is more,
thefe Parts were fubje£t to the Seljukid
Soltansy under the third of whom, Soltan
Jelakddin Make Shah y there were very a-
bie Geographers, who by his order took
very exa£t Obfervations, as well towards
the Jelalean Epoch as the Meafure of the
Earth. The Tartar Princes were actua-
ted



xiv Preface.

ted by the fame laudable Spirit of Curio-
Jity ; and fo Abrrffeda y who dyed in the
Year of Chrift MCCCXLV, had a great
number of pretty exact Tables whereby
to fettle the true Places of the Cities he*
mentions. But notwithstanding all this,
there are Differences of one, and fome-
times two Degrees in the two Climates
before us ; which is nothing to what there
is, of the lame kind, throughout the whole
Body of the Work, which it may not
be amifs to inftance by a few Examples.
tfhe Un- i n order to this we will make Choice

7ii1PJi of the Countf y which one w ° uld think

the Pofiti- foould have been bert known to the Moham^
ens in A- 1 medans, and that is Arabia : Abulfeda fpeak-
bulfeda. \ ing of Medina^ which is facred among
; them, becaufe of the Tomb of Mohammed
which there ftands; lays it down in 65 of
67 Degrees of Longitude. Allah a famous
City, and formerly very well known, as it
Was in the Way of the Caravans from
Egypt to Mecca , is according to Abulfedti
in 53, 54, or 56 Degrees of Longitude".
Tima in 6j or 68 Degrees. Tadmor, the
ancient Palmyra^ in 62 or 66. Hafaniahaz^
the Seat of the ancient Kings of Yaman
or Arabia the Happy », in 65, 67, or 70;
Dafar^ the Seat of the ancient Homerites y
in 67 or 73. Najeran or Najratij a City that
often occurs in Hiftory, in 67 or 75. Aden y
jftill more known, in 65, 67 or 70. Nor
is there much more certainty about the
Places in other Countries which mould
have been better known to the Author ;

noar



PREFACE. xv

nor can any Thing be offered to juftify
his Ignorance or Negligence as to the
Longitude of St. John if Acre, or Ptokma~
is y which he writes to be in either 56, 57,
58, or 70 Degrees. When he gives you
but one Number, it is becaufe he found no
other in the Books he tranfcribed, * but it
is never the furer for that ; he himfelf does

* tfhe chief ofthefe Differences muff arifefrcm a dif-
ference of Meridians ; for Mr. Renaudot after all he,in the
Body of the Book y fays in their behalf as careful Observers
and intelligent Mathematicians , muff be inccnfifient with
himfelf to fuppofe thefe Numbers are mere Blunders
and Inaccuracies. Abulfeda feems to be no more than a.
ColleBor, as may be clearly gathered from that Prince's
own Preface, and from what Mr. Renaudot here ac-
knowledges. Uhat thefe various Longitudes are perplexing,
every Body mujl allow , it being hard to determin which
is to be preferred, as it is impoffible to find out the exact
Meridian of each ; but that they are flips of Ignorance or
Negligence cannot well be fuppofed. Befides, it is well
known, '[that were any Man, like Abulfeda, to collef£
from our own befi Geographers, or rather Hydrographers,
for what concerns the Sea-Coafi in particular, tho* fo
well known to mofi of the European Navigators, they
would be often found to vary a number of Degrees from
each other ; we need only inftance in the Coafi of France,
next to us, and the Coafi of Brafil in America, which
now are thought to be rectified, as they doubtlefs are :
But theft Variations did not arife from the want of a
fixed Meridian, but purely from a mifiaken Reckoning
or Computation. If fome of our befi Geographers then
have till very lately abounded with Errors of this kind, it
is fomewhat unreafonable to expeB the Orientals to be
quite free from them ; and as they fay, The Know-
ledge of a Part, is to be preferred to an Ignorance
of the Whole ; fo if we can to a Degree or two fettle
upon the Longitude of mop of the noted Cities in the
*uafi extent of Afia, which might perhaps be done, it
mufi be fomewhat more fatisfathry than not to know
where to look for them at all

not



xvi PREFACE.

not fuppofe it, and therein we have where-
withal to commend his Sincerity : For it
is to be obferved that of about five hun-
dred and fifty Cities to be found in him,
(for Copies vary as to the exact Number)
he gives no one Pofition for exa£t, except
that of Hamaoi Hamath. After this we may
guefs what Ailiffcance we are to hope from
this fo applauded Work , towards the
Reformation of our Eafiern Geography;
as alfo the Account we are to make of Po-
iitions which vary fo many Degrees of
Longitude from each other, and are not
much better agreed as to Latitude.
g%e De- The Defcription of each Country at
firiptromof t he Head of the Tables, is more valuable,
trL mon to anc * ma Y ^ e °f f° me ^ e > particularly for
be valued tracing out the Courfe of the great Rivers,
the Ni/e, the Tigris, the Euphrates, Oxus,
and a few others. The Accounts of the
feveral Cities in thefe Tables, are very
concife and exact enough ; they do not
contain the Fables common in the other
Arabian and Perfian Geographers, not ex-
cepting Tacuti himfelf, fo often cited with
Commendation, who tho' he divides his
Work into Climates, does not oblige us
with one Pofition.
We ran If what has hitherto been faid concern*
extras no- } n g tne little; Help we are to expect from

thingthtre- Abu! f eda be tme as Joubtlefs it is I it IS
from toil- n .* A J 'f-rM k r \

lufiratethe "dJ more certain That he can iupply us

Geography with no Light as to China in particular;

of China, to be perfectly fatisfied of this, we need

no other Teftimony than his own; for

thus



PREFACE. xvii

thus he delivers himfelf by way of Pre-
face to the little he fays of the chief Cities
of this Country : " China is, on the Weft,
a bounded by the Defart which divides it
" from the Indies ; on the South, by the
<c Sea, as alfo on the Eaft; on the North,
a by the Countries of Gog and Magog y
a and others we know nothing at all o£
a Geographers, it is true, have the Names
€l . of many Places and Rivers in China y
a but as we are ignorant of the Pronoun-
a ciation as well as of the real State of the
u Country, they are to us as it were un-
a known • and the rather as we have no
a Body that has been there, of whom
c< to inform ourfelves as we ought ; where-
" fore we will confine ourfelves to what
a has been written before us." After this
he ventures to name fome Cities, but fo
difguifed, that it is impoflible to guefs at
them, except Khanfa, which may be the
Ghiinfai of Marco Polo, and Zeiiun, which
he alfo mentions. In another Place he
fpeaks of Cambalic or Chanbalig, and Catai y
upon the Teftimony of Ebn Said : Thefe \
Paflages Mailer has recurred to y and they,
it muft be faid, confirm what the Author
himfelf confeifes of the little Knowledge
he had of thofe Parts. With the fame In-
certitude he declares himfelf at the be-
ginning of his Univerfal Hiftory.

But we muft not wonder Abulfeda knew '^ Ara-
fo very little of China, for the reft that )^edT-
fpeak of it, tell us nothing but idle Tales H^blT
and Abfurdities, if we except fome Paf- Fables a-
* & fages *w* ih



xxviii PREFACE.

fages in Tacuti, Ebn Wardi, and the Per-*
fian Geography, which feem to have been
transcribed from our Authors, who alone
have talked ferioufly about China. It is
aitonifhing, indeed, that they are fo little
known, but that they have been known to
many is plain, and among the reit to the
Author of the Geography printed at Rome y
who has taken whole railages from them y
this fuffices to eftablilh their Reputation.
Out Ju- They may it is pollible be attacked
*fokencM- fr° m another Quarter, and principally be-
temMuouJly caufe thefe Arabs exprefs themfelves fbme*
of the Chi- what irreverently of the Chinefe Philofo-
nefe Lea,- phy, which has been fo extolled for about
V m & a Century pail ; which deferving a parti-
cular Difcuflion ihall be profeffedly treated
towards the End of this Book, in a CritU
que upon the Chinefe Learning.
mjlorical A tew hiftorical Fa6b alfo in thefe Ac-
Faffs counts may be liable to fome Contradict
which a- t j becaufethev agree not with the Hi-
%,-ith our ft° r y °f China, as fome learned Miflio-
Chinefe naries have extracted it from the Annals
fiipory. f the Country, whofe Exa£tnefs they ap^
plaud, rho* it be impoffible to guefs at it
by what they have publifhed: And if
fome great Men of our own Time have
prefumed thereby to reform even the
Chronology of Scripture,they did not form
their Judgment from any aflual Know-
ledge of the Thing, and VoJJius who talks
fo highly of the Chinefe, had lefs than any
Body; ibr beiides that he was exceffively
credulous upon this Subject, he could

judge



P R E F A C E. xxix

judge but at fecond hand, being a Stran-
ger to the Tongue, which however was
very marvellous with him and more perfect
than any other. This Gentleman thought
quite othervvife of the Coptic Tongue,
which he would have to be a barbarous
Jargon never heard of till the twelfth
Century, tho' there is fuch a Certainty
to the contrary as convicts him of ut-
ter Ignorance in Mohammedan Hiftory,
and the Hiftory of Chriftianity in jK-
gypu Fath. Pezron approved of what
Voffius advanced, thereby to vindicate the
Chronology of the Septuagint ; and others
have endeavored to reflect an Authority
upon the fame for particular or private
Views not to be regarded when Truth
is the Concern.

In thefe Accounts alfo you may meet <fhey haw
with fome Things hard to believe, like ™ a "y
thofe formerly thought fabulous in Marco ^^ r
Poky and perhaps it were rafhnefs to ^credible™
warrant them all; but it muft be gran-»
ted That the like have often been verified
in procefs of Time ; and that for this
Reafon alone we are to be cautious how
we condemn the old Travels, when they
in other Refpe£b appear to be true. Such
are our two Relations ; from the firft to
the laffc Word of them there is a Simpli-
city very uncommon with the Orientals;
the other Arabians and Perfeans that have
written of the Indies and China particular-*
ly, even thofe fo much efteemed by the
Learned have avoided nothing more than
*B: this



xx PREFACE.

this attractive Charm, and have collected
the moft abfurd Stories they could fet Eyes
on. Nor muft we wonder they have fo
many Stories on China, which they hard-
ly knew at all, fince they have fome as ri-
diculous about Spain, which the Arabs pof-*
ferTed a long Time, about the City of
Rome, and about moft of the European Pro-
vinces.
ir^7\ * n OUY Differtations and Notes we have
\t?mmf- endeavored to illuftrate the moft impor-
fertations tant Paflages in our two Authors ; but we
and Notes did not deem it advifable to heap up
without Quotations from all forts of Writers, as
Tmmne- t ^ le Cuftom t0 ° much prevails with the
ceffary" Learned of later Times. Andrew Mul-
guotafwm kr, for Example , in his Treatife De
Cataidy has not omitted one fingle PafTage
in the Authors he knew, that could in
the leaft anfwer his Purpofe, tho' moft of
them were only Tranfcriptions from Tran-
fcribers, who of courfe could be of no
Authority. Yet after this Cloud of Quo-
tations he leaves us in the dark as to the
important Part of his Subject, and thofe
who ihall know no more of Cathay than
they have read in Mailer , will be but
very ilenderly informed; they will
only know the Opinions and Conjectures
of leveral learned Men who have copied
one another, and were never thoroughly
pofielied of their Subject.
Of Ben- Benjamin the Jew, who travelled over
umm the p- reat p art f tne Eafi^ and took Notice

jew and P • ■ j t»

li S q j ran ^ of a great many curious and true rarticu-?
fatprf, lars,



PREFACE. xxi

lars, is no defpicable Author, as forne
would have made him who did not under-
Hand him, at the Head of whom we mull
place thole who ventured to tranflate him,
Arias Montanus, and after him Conftantine
J'Empereur. They both tranilated from an
Edition printed at Conftantinopk, which
being erroneous, and not very fair, might
eaiily puzzle thofe who did not know
whereabouts he was. Accordingly Arias
Mont anus , committed horrid Faults, which
the Dutch Tranflator did not afterwards
perceive ; and both of them by their ill
reading of many proper Names of Cities,
People, and Provinces, have formed ima-
ginary ones which never were. Hence
we every where meet with Eliman, which
never was, inftead of at Yaman,* which is
Arabia the Happy, and many fuch Faults ;
Dougziin) a People unknown, inftead of
Drouziin, the Drifts, the Ille of Nikro-
kis\ the Hachifches, a People who cut
Princes with a Saw, and a hundred more
of the fame Stamp* Arias Montanus left
his Readers the Task of untying thefe
difficult Knots ; but Conftantin YEmpereur
with a more afluming Air, undertakes to
illuitrate his Authors by Notes, which he
has crammed with Arabian and Hebrew
Pailages quite wide of his Point ; for he
had them not from original Authors, or



* Mr. Renaudot writes it Eliemen, whkb does not fo
much Jbew the real difference.

*Bj from



audi PREFACE*

from Geographers and Hiftorians; he
did not fo much as know one of them ex-
cept the Nubian Geographer, and Elmacin
whom he often did not underftand. For
Inflance, he takes up Benjamin for talking
of the Kalif of Egypt who reigned in his
Time, becaufe truly he finds another in
Ehnacin of the Family of the AbaJJidSy
whereas a Man muft be quite a Novice to
• Mohammedan Hiftory, not to know that,
in Egypt j the Fat emit es declared themfelves
Kalifs, and withdrew Obedience from the
AbaJJids, whom they gave out to be Ufur-
pers of the Empire and the Pontificat.
Several Greater Men by far than Confiantin FEm-

%wc P ereur nave been guilty of as great Abfur-
mittedvafi dities in fpeaking of what they did not
Faults in know. So Jofeph Scaliger attempting the
Oriental Origin of the Title Prefier John, common-
Bijiory. Yy a ppiy ec i t0 tne King of Ethiopia, offers
one which is neither Perfian, as he pre-
tends, nor yet Arabic. He is in like
Manner miftaken in the Etymons of the
Per/tan Names, and prefuming to exhibit a
Series of Kalifs and Soltans of the prin-
cipal States from the Rife of Mohamme-
difm, which Abraham Zacut, the Jm\
had done very exactly, he mangled, all
the Names, becaufe he faw them in He*
Irew only, and knew them not originally.
Erpenius, tho* a good Matter of the Ara-
lie, is guilty of an infinit number of Faults
in his Tranflation of Ehnacin, as well in
the Text, as in the Geography and proper
Names: So that we may juftly fay we

have



P k £ F A C E. xxiii

have no body, befides Golius and Greaves^
that we can depend upon for the Eaftem
Geography ; to whom indeed we may add
d'Herbelot, whofe Bibliotheque Orientals is
full of very curious Learning, tho J by the
carelefsnefs of the Editors, it is a Work
not fo perfect as the Author could have
made it, intimate as he was with the beft
Arabian, Tnrkifh and Perfian Books.

There have appeared ibme new Produc- °^f° e
tions full of Eaftem Erudition, which it ?/ f ^*
may not be amiis to fay a Word to. Of the Hap-
thefe there is a Voyage to Arabia the Happy, py.
wherein are many curious Remarks with
regard to the prelent Times. The Editor
quotes Abulfeda's Arabia, but he excells
that Geographer, who knew but two or
three of the principal Cities. What he fays
of the Sharif s of Mecca, does not exactly a-
gree with the molt certain Records of 'Mo*
hammedifm-, for not only the Kalifs of the
firft Race were Matters in that Country ;
but Saladin, a devout Mohammedan, if there
ever was one, made a Conquer! of it by
his Brother, and drove out Abdalnabi, tho*
he pretended to be of the Race of their
Prophet.

Sir John Chardin, in the laft Edition of Chardin^
his Voyage to Perfia, has favored us with &awb t
ample Diflertations on the Morality of the
ancient Perjians, as if extracted from their
own Authors : And yet moffc of what he
fays is borrowed from the Guliftan of the
Poet Sdadi, who was, above iixty Years
ago,tranflated into German by Okarius, and
* B 4 inta



xxiy PREFACE.

into Latin by Gcntius. The Remainder
is no more than Sentences for the moft
part borrowed from the ancient Greeks,
and tranflated into feveral of the Eaftern
Tongues, and no more peculiar to the
Perftans than to every other Nation in the
World. Again , Mohammedifm glares
throughout the whole, and what they
would pafs upon us for the Perftan Philo-
fophy and Theology, is taken out of the
Koran, and belongs to the Perftans no far-
ther than they have naturalized it of their
Language.
Hyde\r Dr. Hyde, a learned Englijhman, has un-

Reiig. Vet. dertaken a Work of greater Depth, where-
^ €r f' by to explain the Religion of the ancient
Perftans, and which is the more likely to
impofe on the Reader, as it is full of Quo-
tations from Perftan and Arabian Writers.
It alfo excites the Curiofity by the novelty
of the Defign, which is to juftify the
Worjhip of Fire among the old Perftans,
and to prove it to have been a Ceremony
of mere Indifference, which intentionally
aimed at the true God ; for according to him
the origin of this Fire~Worfeip was fet on foot
by the Ifraelites, who, when they were led
away Captive,brought it from Jerufakm, and
retained it to the latter Times, which no
body ever knew before Hyde. We under-
ftood by Greek and Latin Authors That
this Perfian Superftition and feveral o-
thers were known to them. The ancient
Church honoured a great number of Mar-
tyrs who fuffered Death, in the cruel Per*

fecution?



PREFACE. xxy,

fecutions of Sapor and Jfdcjerd, rather than
worihip Fire : Believe not a Word of it
fays Hyde, the Greeks and the Latins knew
nothing at all of the Perfian Religion,
and thefe Martyrs were obftinate head-
Urong People. In ihort, to prove this
Paradox, he has no Authority but
a wretched Per/tan Poet, who wrote a-
bout two hundred Years ago : Any Soul
alive may be milled this way, and efpeci-
ally when ignorant of the worth and au-
thenticity or the Authors relied on.

Thefe Digreflions may feem needlefs; ^
but they are far from being lb, with re- we a av ^
,gard to the Ufe we are to make of On- make ofo
ental Literature^ we muft not extend it Cental
farther than is juft and right, as the Learnw S-
common Curtom has hitherto been * where-
as it ought to be laid down as a fure
and certain Principle That for what
concerns ancient Hiitory and Geogra-
graphy, we can hardly reap any advan-
tage by the Arabian and Perfian Books,
and much lefs by the tfurkift. This al-
fo has an Eye to the Differtations, and
Notes inferted at the End of thefe
Accounts; for it had been no difficult
Matter to have added a great deal
from other Arabians and Perfians y as well
as Modern Travellers ; which we thought
incumbent on us to avoid, as much as
fome others have thought it not {o. Bo-
chart) for Example, in his Hicrozoicon, has
moll faithfully amaffed all the Greeks, and
Latins have faid about the Unicorn ; where-
to



xxvi PREFACE.

to he adds a great number of Paflages
from Arabian Authors, to which he might
have added from Authors he was unac-
quainted with ; but every attentive Reader
will at the firrt. Glance obferve them to
be all Copies from Copies and of each o-
ther, and that the Author he particularly
follows, whom he calls Damir, was no-
thing lefs than a Naturalift. It is then a-
muling the Reader with empty Show,
ferioufly to introduce fuch Tertimonies
and not fay a Word of Precaution againft
them, or declare how fir or how far
not they are to be minded. Every Man.
that is familiar with the moft ridiculous
Fables in Cazwini and fuch like Writers,
will never imagin we can depend upon
what they fay, efpecially about China,
which they had fuch confufed Notions
of* and concerning which they have not
a Syllable of Truth that is not taken out
of our two Authors, which again confirms
their Antiquity.
Out two They tell us none of the Stories, fo
Authors common in the Arabian Geographers, a-
oTtheBla- ^ out ^ e E m P eror °f China, nor infift on
mijbescom- the Names Fag fur and Bagbun they be-
won to the flow upon him. What they write of the
other Ara- extent of the Mohammedan Empire agrees
bic Wnt- we |} w j t jj tne ^i me tne y wro te ; and

the reafon given, in the lecond Account,
why Ebn Wahab went to China, futes very
naturally with the Pofture of Affairs a-
bout thofe Times, when the vaft Empire
of the Kal/fs began to be rentfafunder by the

Civil



PREFACE.

Givil Wars caufed by the Rife of fe-»
veral Independant Princes, which hurryed
on its final Ruin. They neither of
them have any Fact that betrays a
later Time than the Epochs they take no-
tice of, which is a farther Token of their
Veracity. For by them it appears That
Perjia, and Siraf, from whence the firft
Traveller departed, were then in Subjec-
tion to the Kalifs, which fhews that nei-
ther the Princes of the Houfe of Buiya, or
thofe that deftroyed it, had yet made their
Appearance in the Eaft*

It isfeemingly plain alfo That the In-
dies, which often occur in our two Au-
thors, were Hill wholly idolatrous, and
that the Mohammedans had not as yet made
any Conquefts there,or introduced Moham-
medifm among them, as they afterwards
did under the Gaznavid Empire of Saba-
ffakin, and fome other Princes lefs con-
fiderable. Till that Time the Mohamme-
dans on the Coaffc of Afric, in the Indies,
and in China, tho' pretty numerous, were
there as Merchants only ; they traded on
the {ame foot with the Jews and Chrifiians,
and had no manner of Superiority. In the
fame State they ftill continue in China^nd.,
as is faid by Perfons very much to be be-
lieved, they adhere to their Law with
fiich ftri&nefs that they refufe the Degrees
taken by the Literati, becaufe they think
they cannot in Confcience go through the
ufual Ceremonies, ,



xxvu



itffe In-
dians were
almoji all
Idolaters
in their
Time, and
there were
hut few
Moham-
medans in
the Coun-
try.



Moffi



XfcVM



ttkefr *fe*

flimony as
to the num-
ler of Chri-
stians in
China is
very re-
markable.



PREFACE,

Moft of the Things, our Accounts con-
tain, concerning the Manners and Cuftoms
of the Indians j are confirmed by Modern
Travellers, and the Portuguefc, as alfo by
the Arabian and Per/tan Geographers.

The Defcription of the Tea-bufh, and
the Drink the Chinefe make of its Leaf,
is the more remarkable^ as many very-
great Men of our Times, have reported it
not to be of fuch ancient Date } and by
what our Authors fay of it in general, it is
plain they were perfectly informed about
it. As much may be faid of the Musk
Creature they dwell on ; and feveral other
Rarities, illuftrated in the Notes.

We never before heard that Chriftians had
been formerly numerous in China ; for all
that has been written by the Portuguefe, and
others about St. tfhomass Preaching there,
can never ftand upon the feeble Support oi
far fetched Conjec~ture,and bare Probabili-
ty : The Chinefe and Syriac Infcription in-
deed, difcovered in the Year MDCXXV,
aflured us the Faith had been taught in
China in the eight Century at the lateft ;
but no Trace of this Million was left, and
Kircher and Miller are widely out in their
Explanations of this Monument ; but here
you will have it illuftrated in a Diiferta-
tion apart, by which it will appear That
when our two Authors fay, there were
numbers of Chriftians involved in the uni-
verfal Maflacre,at the time a total Revolu-
tion befel the Empire, it is not impoffible
but thofe who thus perifhed were defend-
ed



PREFACE. xxix.

ed of thofe mentioned on the Chinefe
Stone.

The fame Paflage gives us to underftand 'The Lights
what City is meant by the Name of Cum- the y a ff ord
dan^ mentioned in the Infcription as be- Geography.
ing at that Time the Capital of the Em-
pire. Tho' moft of the Arabs confirm
-what is faid in the Infcription, and have
the Name of this City of Cumdan^ and
among the reft the Nubian Geographer ; yet
was this City unknown, his Tranflators
miitaking it for the Name of the River
that wafhed the City, inftead of the City
itfelf. Thofe who undertook to explain
the Syriac Infcription, aflbrded us nothing
but empty Conjectures; whereas by our
two Mohammedans we learn two important
Fa£ts which carl a great light upon the
Chinefe Hiftory ; Jirft that Cumdan was for-
merly the Capital of the Empire, and
fecondly that the fame was Nankin^ a Thing
unknown to the beft that have written about
China.

By them alfo we underftand That the oftheGty
City of St. Thome was not fo called by ^f * Tho ~
the European Navigators, as many have
thought, feeing it was known by the fame
Name in the ninth Century. They may
be of great Ufe alfo for the Coafts of the
Indian Ocean, if we ferioufly examin into
the little they fay, and compare it with



* Mr. Renaudot writes if Cumbdan throughout the
qvhle Preface,

what



Sxx PREFACE.

what is in the old Greek Geographers,
feemingly unknown to the Arabs, if we
except Ptolomy's Tables. By them again,
we might clear up many Paflages in the
Nubian Geography, which is by no means
fb contemptible a Book as fome of the
Learned would have had it; tho' on the
other hand it is not deferving of the very
high Account iome have made of it.Such as
it is, it may ferve for a Sample of the Eaft-
ern Geographies ; for it is void of Politions,
a Defect it has in common with mort of
the reft ; and indeed they might as well
he omitted as given with the Variety, and
Incertitude in Abnlfeda, There is nothing
of this kind tolerably exact among the
Per/tan and Arabian Geographers, but the
Tables of Ulug Beig, and Naffir Eddin
tranflated by Greaves. The Nubian Geo-
grapher, tho' his Work has r been printed
in Arabic, and turned into Latin, has been
of no great Service, becaufe the Tranila-
tors having nothing but the printed Copy
before them, which is very erroneous,
could not reftore their Text by Manu-
fcripts, which are very fcarce.
In what The proper Names are in the Tranfla-
manner the t j on? i n the Notes- and in the Diflertati-
^Names r ons ex P re ^ ec ^ * n ^ m °ft fimple manner
cx^ejfe/ 6 poffible, and according to the Power of
our Alphabet, regardful not to depart from
Cuftorn, which has fixed the Pronunciation
of feveral of them. Thus for many Cen«
turies paffc we have been ufed to pronounce
the Word v/hich iignifies a King or Prince

flfeH'k)



P R E FACE. xxxi

JAelik, and thus it is written in Roderic of
Toledo, and in other SpamJJj, and Portuguese
Authors. All the Learned have written ..
and pronounced Melik Cbab, in fpeaking or
writing of that great Seljukid Soltan, who
reformed the Calendar, and erected the
Jelakan Epoch ; fo that a Reader that un-
aerrlands no Arabic, or is unacquainted
with Eaftem Hiftory, would not know him
again by the Name of Makk Cbab. The
fame it is with the Names of Cities and
Provinces, which are varioufly written by
Europeans, according to their ieveral Rules ■
of Orthography, which are oftentimes hard
to be understood. Thus what the Arabs call
Aderbijan [_Adarbejanj is fpelt one way by
a German, and another way by a Portu-
guefe. Okarius writes it Aderbitzian, Tei-
xeira writes it,Aderbajon, who alfo clofes all
the Perftan Terminations in AT, with mM^
becaufe the Natives themfelves pronounce
the final an almoft as the Portuguese do their
as or am. Others of the Learned have ima-*
gined we are to adhere to the preient
Rules ; and fo one of the greateft of them
has lately intranflatingthe Hiftories which
mention the Province of Kowarzem, fpelt
it Karifme^ and will have it that the fa-
mous Hiftorian Emir Cond, is to be fpelt
Emir Cavend, Ung-khan Emperor of the
Moguls, defeated by Jengbiz-kban, Aveng-
kban, and the fame of many others. We
do not difpute the prefent Laws of Pro-
nunciation, as to them we murl hearken to
travellers j bu£ we may venture to fay

Tte



sxxii PREFACE.

The Eajfern Tongues have not been lefs
fubject to changes of Pronunciation than
the European. This is eaiily underftood ;
for the Geographers of thofe Parts, aware
of the Dete£t of their Characters or
Letters for fettling the due and genuin
Pronunciation, afcertain it as well as they
can, by naming every Vowel in proper
Names ; and feldom it is they agree with
the common way of pronouncing. We
pafs over the Method taken with the Eaft-
em Names by the Tranflator of Elmacin
\Erpenius~]* as for the Tranflator of the
Hiftory ot Tamer Ian \Vaniei\ he is quite
particular and by himfelf ; for what Soul
alive could ever guefs that Gali> k Guebafej
Gabdolk) are, Hali \_Ali~\ Abb as ^ Abdalla y
and fo on, which muft make all fuch
Tranflations unintelligible.*



Some Account of the Orthography and Pro-
nounciation of the Eaftern Names.

* tfhis is very jujily faid t and is a Point which well
deferves to he considered at large ; but the Reader will not
expect us to launch into the Particulars offo wide a Subjeft,
when he -perceives that we confine our Views to the. narrow
Limits of a jingle Note. Mr. Renaudot is perhaps wore
accurate in his way of fpelling the Eajlem Names , than
any other of Us Nation, or perhaps any Foreigner what-
foever ; but tho\ fenjibje of the DefeB of the French
Alphabet, he often calls in the K and W to his ajfift-
ance, yet he is not always equal and alike in feveval of
his Names ; nor has he fettled them fo } that his Reader jhall
never be at a lofs to know how they are really to fo
pronounced.

others



PREFACE. sxxiif

The Difiertations are rather loofe Effays of the
On what might be done towards the Re- ityfata*
covery of fome very obfcure, tho' impor- thns '
tant, Points, than Traas in Form, We
have endeavored to open the way to thofe

There are two ways of pronouncing the Arabic, the
one peculiar to Afric, the other to Aiia ; which loft being
the Parent of this extenjive tongue, it feems as if we
had no room to doubt but the Pronunciation there, ii
to be preferred to the fame in Afric : But that the A-
frican Way Jhould, on the other hand, chief y prevail
in Europe, is no Wonder, confidering how long, and
how nearly we have had Commerce with the Moors. The
Africans pronounce el for al, and Melik for Malec or
Malek, andfo on ; the Afiatics being more open and full
in their Utterance. But it is not only as to Vowels that
we are at fome Uncertainty, but even with regard to Confo~
wants ; whence you have the Ambiguities to he obferved in
fome parts of this Book, as the Wood called Hairzan in one
Place, and Chairzan in another; the Kingdom cfGt-
zaz [Jeraz] or Haraz ; the Province of "Curiftan or Cuzi-
ftan. Now thefe fever al Ambiguities arife from the exact
refemblance of fome Arabic Letters with others which "
are barely dijiinguijhed from them by a Point, or two, or
three, either above the Letter, or below it ', for ex ample ,

rfhe firfl Letter of Hairzan is naked thus ^ , of Chair-
zan the fir ft Letter is with a Point thus £ ; of Geraz
the firft Letter is with a Point thus g- , of Haraz the
fir ft Letter, as in Hairzan, is naked thus £ ; in Curiftan
the K is naked thus j , in Cuziftan the Z is with a
Point thus j : tfhere is another R and Z, but the Cafe
between them is exactly parallel It appears then that thefe
Variations are produced either by Omiffion, or Redundancy,
if by Omiffon the Points are wanting : But if by Redun-
dancy, the Points are too much ; and that the mofi diligent
Tranfcriber may, in the Courfe of along Copy, be guilty
of both, muft be readily granted.

The Arabs are often very careful to prevent any Mif*

take in the Pvorwumiatm of proper Names, and efpecially

* G as



xxxiv PREFACE.

who may hereafter attempt deeper Inqui-
ries, upon the principal Heads that occur.
Two or three Authors, who but copy
from each other, fuffice to give birth to a
Notion which fpreads unexamined by thofe

as to Vowels ; fo that when we negleB them, and, run-
ning Riot after our Fancy, deviate from them, nothing
can excufe us. Upon this Head many might be /evenly
accufed, but we will only inftance in Pe'tis de la Croix,
Senior, who, in his Hiflory of Genghis Khan, has
all along Capfchac /crKipjak, Alfchafche for Alfliafh,
or the County of Shaft, Carizme for Chowarazm,
and infinit others ; fo that it is with too much Reafon
Few Gentlemen who have not fome previous Notion of
Eaflern Geography and Hifiory, care to read the Books
that might injlruB them therein. In Jhort, the Evils
of this Prefumption, or Vanity, or Negligence, or call it
what you will, are of the mofl difcouraging Kind, and,
fuch as claim a thorough and fpeedy Reformation.

Hifiorians, and Geographers jhould agree upon the mofb
powerful Alphabet they could form cut of the fever al in
Europe, and adhere thereto in their uranflations from
Eaflern Works : Nor ever prefume to alter the Names
cf Perfons and Places, or clip them, or flretch them to
what they are pleafed to call their own Standard, which
if they did not, we Jhould always know whereabouts we
are, and who is meant. If a little Care were taken y
and Men wrote rather to inflruB and inform, than to
raife themfelves a Name, which when their Works come
to be ftriBly examined they mufl infallibly lofe ; we jhould
not in rf French Author, read JBlocquet/w Blackheath,
§r fee the thoufan-ds of the fame Abufes which fo abound in
their Hiflories and Geographies. *to conclude, If Men were
fure tfhat Accuracy and Amplication would be more required
at their Hands, by the Public, than they feem to be', the
World would not be peflered with the offenfive Lumber of
the many Books which fland in fuch great need of Puri-
fication by Five, or Ablution by Water, no matter which.

But to digrefs no farther, we Jhall only add TJMt we
Imve, as near as we have been able, confined o fife Ives
to the tms and genu'm Orthography of the Names ; and

thai



PREFACE. xxxy

who follow them; this throws a Mift
over Hiftory, and gives an Opportunity to
confound Truth with Falfhood, and what
is Certain with what is mere Conje&ure.
For Example, Father Trigaut mifunder-
itanding fome Palfages of Syriac , de-
clares it very probable That St. Thomas
preached in China. A few Years after-
wards, they find the Chinefe and Syriac In-
fcription, which talks of a MifHon from
Jttdaa or Syria j whereupon it was by fome
aflerted, That the Peri on, therein men-
tioned, mull have been St. Thomas \ and at
once they prick you down the Track he
muft have followed, and give you a Map
to convince you it was fo : But thefe Sy-
ftems being confefledly abfurd, others

that the Learned Reader is dejired to take Notice, That
the Ch in ChorafTan, Chowarazm, Chanbalig and
the like, is to he pronounced like the Greek Xr cr ari
Englifh Kh, to make it thefironger ; and that the Englifh
Reader may pronounce it as in Choir, Chimera, Che-
miftry.

That the U, wherever it occurs, is to be pronounced
nearly like our Dipthong ou, or rather our oo, as in Moon,
Soon,Boon ;fo Almamunmujl be pronounced Almamoon,
Hud, Hood ; Afud, Albod ; the fame is to be ohfewed
generally, wherever the u occurs in the Eajlern Names, in
this Book.

The i is to be pronounced as our ee ; fo Rafhid muft
he Rafheed ; Walid, Waleed ; Yazid, Yazeed.

The a and the o muft, in general, he pronounced a
little more open than the Englifh do, but not quite fo
hroad as the French.

IVe had thoughts of ujing the Circumflex to mark
fome of thefe Diflinffions, but we apprehended it might
perplex the mere English Reader, as much as it would
"Jpft the Scholar.

*C a would



sxxvi PREFACE,

would have had this Infcription to be 3
Forgery, tho' it is certainly a moft pre-*
cious Monument, and of the cleareft Au-
thority • as will be proved in one of the
Difiertations, which wiJl evince That all
hitherto offered upon this Head, and par-
ticularly by Midler ^ is Intolerable.
Of the As for the Cbinefe Learning, we have

Chinefe perhaps expofed our felves to great Con*
Uamwg. tra diction, many of the Learned having
a long while been of a quite contrary Opi-
nion, tho' not a Soul of them could be an
immediate Judge of what he advanced,
ignorant of that dreadful Tongue which
requires no lefs than the Life of Man to
be duly attained. The Miffionaries, in-
deed, thought they might fafely make the
Cbinefe' Phiiofophers inftrumental towards
the Conversion of the whole Nation, and
their view was laudable enough : But others,
and efpecially Libertins have ftrangely
perverted the exceflive Things which have
been reported of the Chinefe Antiquities;
and have aflumed them as a Weapon where
with to attack the Authority of Scrip-
ture, and its Super-ftrufture, the Chriftian
Religion ; as alfo the Univerfality of the
Flood, and to maintain that the World is
much older than it is thought to be. The
fabulous Accounts which fo abound in the
Perjjan Hi&ory, all abfurd as they are, have
to ibme feerned worthy of being efpoufed.
Ignorant People, iuch as the Author
pf the Preadamitic Syftem^ are apt to be-
lieve whatever flatters their own Con-
cept!-



P R. E F A C E. xxxvii

captions, and efpecially when fuch Stories
are ferioufly told by great Men, tho' they,
it has iince appeared, knew nothing beyond
the Titles of the Books they have fo
vaunted. Vojfius, who, it muft be owned,
was "deeply read in Greek and Latin Lite-
rature, found wherewithal,in the Ancients,
to confirm all he faw, or heard fay con-
cerning the Chinefe. And upon fuch Au-
thorities have Evil difpofed Perfons, per-
verted by a falfe Metaphyiics , given
out Opinions which, to them, feemed
new ; tho' moft of the fame were familiar
to the old Phiiofophers, and the flrrl: He-
retics ; and tend to no lefs than the ut-
ter Subversion of all Religion. What we
are taught by Jeff is Chrift^ is too well
grounded to want the Concurrence of the
Chinefe Philofophy } and if any believe,
it may perfect the Mind, and reform the
Manners, tho' they know nothing there-
of, but by Paraphrafes as obfcure as the
Text; they are to be advifed fairly to inquire
into what may be objected to the Antiquity
of this proud Nation, to their Hiftory and
their Philofophy, and compare the Advan-
tages thence to be deduced, with the Abufes
that have been made of the Contrary.
We hope it will,at leaft,be grantedThat we
may be well skilled in every Science, great
Phiiofophers, and great Mathematicians,
without being beholden to the Chinefe
Books,

THE



j'hr Reader is defired to take Notice, That the Capitals
in the Margin of the Two Accounts, are added in
this Edition, and refer to the fame in the Margin of
the Notes, which are in exact Alphabetical Order.
And that [DD] in the Margin of Page 84 of the
Accounts, 6 Lines from the bottom, is wanting.
The Reader is alfo defired to excufe and cor reel the fol-
lowing ?nofi Material Errors of the Prefs.
In the Two Accounts.

PAG. 2. line 3. from the Bottom, for J acquets read
Jackets- p. 9. 1. 10. from the bottom,^ Sugar,
Canes, read Sugar-canes. p. 18. for Kafchbin read
Kajhbin. p. 22. for Tufng read Tufang. p. 38. for the
Country of Kakhan or Thibet, read the Country of the
Kakhan of Tibet, p. 47. 1. 6. for loved read love. p. 62.
for Tygris read Tigris, p. 83. 1. 8. for the King read one
of the Kings, p. 87. Gozar read Goraz.

In the Notes and Dijertations.
Page 3. Line 1 8. for poffibly mz^pofiible. p. 7. 1. 20.

for KctX&i read ttciXc/a. p. 17. 1. 22. for than read
then. p. 35. for Acbem read Achem. p. 46. for Fan-
fur read Fa? fur. p. 47. 1. 6. from, the Bottom for as
being a read as that a. p. 48. for Tontang read ?oa-
/##£. p. 62. 1. 12. from the Bottom for fplit Horn

' read cloven Hoof. p. 71. for Xahicang read Xahiang.
p. 72. for ££a» of Tibet read Kakhan of 7/$*/. p. 104,
1. 8. from the bottoms/or Seet ««<? Seel. p. 108. for
Mar-Amba read Mar- A ma. Ibid, for Selibazaba read
Selibazaka. p. 1 1 1 . for an ^/i r<W and ^/i. p. 115.
for Thadaus read Thaddaus. p. 121. 1, 21. yar Catho-
lics read Catholic, p. 122. for Abajha-Khan read
Abaka-Khan. p. 134. for EbaShalikan read Ebn Ka-
li kan. p. 135. 1. 2. from the Bottom y»r Sping read
Spring, p. 150.yorEryth.ssan read Erythraean, p. 175.
for cay Tagazgaz read call Tagazgaz. p. 177. for
#£<?« or Emperor read Kakhan or Emperor, p. 197. for
Kari or A"a*/£ read Kari and j?«r7£. p. 209. 1. 6. ^or
exprefs r*W exprelTed. p. 214. for Catuian read Ca-
talan, p. 225. for Epocha Ctkbrires read Epocha? Ce~
kbr:ares.




ANCIENT

ACCOUNTS

O F

INDIA and CHINA;

BY

Two Mohammedan Travellers,

Who went to thofe Parts in the pth Century*
Tranflated from the Arabic.



LACCOUNT.

[The Beginning is wanted^
*************
*************

HE third of the Seas we have _
to mention, is the Sea of Lf op

s Q1V6S«

Harkand. Between this Sea
and that ofDelarowi, are ma- [_A J
ny Iflands, to the Number,
as they fay, of 1900. They, [B]
infome fort, part thefe two Seas from each
B other,




a ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

other, and are governed by a Queen. A-
mong thefe lilands, they find Amber greefe
in Lumps of extraordinary bignefs; as alio
in lelfer Pieces,in Form of Plants -forcibly
torn up. This Amber is produced at the
Bottom of the Sea, as Plants are upon
Earth; and when the Sea is troubled, the
Violence of the Wave tears it up from
the Bottom, and wafhes it to the Shore, in
form of a Mulhroom, or a Truffle.
Coco-nut Thefe Iflands governed by a Woman, are
frees. f u n of that kind of the Palm-tree which
Nub.'pii b ears ^ e Coco-nut ;. and are one, two,
three, or four Leagues diftant from each
other, all inhabited, and planted with Co-
co-nut Trees. The Wealth of the Inha-
bitants coniiiis in Shells [Cowries,^ and
even the Queen's Treafury is full of them.
They lay there are no Artificers more-
expert than thefe Iilanders ; and that of
the Fibres of the Coco-nut they make
whole Shirts, all of one Piece, Sleeves,
Gullets and all, as alfo half Veils [or Jac-
qittisJ] With the fame induftry, and with
the fame Tree they build Ships and Houfes;
and they are skilful in all other forts of
Workmanfhip. Their Shells they have
from the Sea, at times when they rife up
to the Surface ; at which times the Inha-
bitants throw Branches of the Coco-nut-
tree into the Sea, and the Shells Hick to
them. They call them Kabtaje.
I -^ I Bevond thefe Iflands, in the Sea of Har-

1%JI"$L kand -> is Sarmd ' ib -> °. r Cc y hn -> the chief of

§r Ceylon, all thefe Iflands, which are called Dobijat.

It



Of IND I A and CHINA. 3

It is all encompafTed by the Sea, and on
certain parts of its Coaft they fiih for Pearl.

Up in the Country there is a Mountain AdamV
called Rahunj to the top of which it is Peek.
thought Adam afcended ; and there left the Geo £ r '
Mark of his Foot in a Rock, on the top
of this fame Mountain. There is but one
Print of a Man's Foot, which is feventy
Cubits in Length ; and they fay that Adam
at the fame time ftood with his other Foot
in the Sea. About this Mountain are Mines
©f the Ruby, Opal, and I\.mtthy&. This
Ifland, which is of great extent, has two
Kings * and here you may have Wood-
Aloes, Gold, precious Stones, and Pearls,
which are riihed on the Coaft: • as alfo a
a kind of large Shells, which they ufe
infbead of Trumpets, and which they much
value.

In this fame Sea, towards Sarandib^ there |"C"1
are other Illes, but not fo many in Num- Great IJles
ber, tho* of vaft extent and unknown Name. ^Ramni.
One of thefe Iilands is called Ramni y and
is under feveral Princes, being eight or
nine hundred Leagues in dimenfion. Here
are Gold Mines, and particularly thofe
called Fanfur } as alfo an excellent fort of
Camphire. Thefe Iilands are not far from
fome others, the Chief of which is Alnian^ ^ L j n j an#
where is great plenty of Gold. The Inhabi-
tants here have Coco-nut Trees, which
fupply them with Food -and therewith alfo
thev paint their Bodies, and oil themfelves. d remark*
The Cuftom of the Country is, that no f^uch
one may marry, till he has flain an Ene- ingM*r~
mv in Battle., and brought off his Head, riage.

B 2 If



4 . ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

If he has killed two, he claims two Wives,
and fo on in proportion • fo that if he has
flain fifty, he may marry fifty Wives. This
Cuftom proceeds from the Number of ho-
itile Nations which furround them ; fo that
he,among them,who kills the greateit Num-
ber, is the moft confidered.

Thefe Iflands of Ramni abound with
Elephants, Red-wood, and Trees called
Chairzan^ and the Inhabitants eat Human
People that Flefh. Thefe Iflands part the Sea of Har-
eat Human kand from the Sea of Sbcla bct^ and beyond
Fle fe' them are others called Najabaliis, which
are pretty well peopled. Both the Men
and the Women there go quite naked, ex-
cept that the Women conceal their Parts
with the Leaves of Trees. When Shipping
is among thefe Iflands, the Inhabitants
come on in Embarkations, little and big,
Amber- and bring with them Ambergreefe, and
greefe. Coco-nuts, which they truck for Iron :
For they want no Cloathing, being free
from the extremes either of Heat or ol Cold.
"TheSea of Beyond thefe two Iflands lies the Sea of
Andaman. Andaman ; the People on this Coaft eat
Canibah. Human Flefn quite raw ; their Complexion
is black* their Hair friz-led; their Coun-
tenance and Eyes frightful ; their Feet are
very large and almoft a Cubit in length ;
and they go quite naked. They have no
Embarkations ; if they had, they would
devour all the Paflengers they could lay
Hands on. When Ships have been kept
back by contrary Winds, they are often,
in thefe Seas, obliged to drop Anchor, on
this barbarous CoafL for the fake of Wa-
ter,



Of WD I A and CHINA. y

ter,when they have expended their Stock;
and upon thefe Occaiions they often lofe
fome of their Men, but moll efcape.

Beyond this there is a mountainous |/j
and inhabited Ifland, where, as they fay, ^ n un ~ ir _
are Mines of Silver; but as it does not i^d^vdre
ly in the ufual Track of Shipping, many are Mines
have fought for it in vain ; tho' remarka- ofSifoer*
ble for a very lofty Mountain, which is
called Kajbenai. It happened that a Ship
failing in this Latitude, had Sight of the
Mountain, and fhaped her Courfe for it;
and being come up with the Land, fent a
Boat on ihore, with Hands to cut Wood.
The -Men kindled a Fire, and faw Silver
run from it ; which gave them to under-
ftand there was a Mine of this Metal in
that Place; wherefore they ihipped as-
much of the Earth, or Ore, as they faw
good. But as they were proceeding on
their Voyage, the Sea was ruffled by fo
furious a Guft of Wind, that, to lighten
their Ship, they were under a neceffity of
throwing all their Ore overboard. Since
that time the Mountain has been carefully
looked for, but it has never lince been feen.
To conclude, there are many fuch Iflands
in the Sea, more in Number than can be
faid ; being partly too dangerous to be ap-
proached by Seamen, and partly unknown
to them.

In this Sea there is often beheld a white tqi
Cloud, which at once fpreads over a Ship, j white
and lets down a long thin Tongue, or Cloud, or
Spout, quite to the Surface of the Wa- Y ater
■ B 3 ter, s ^



6 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

Water, which it difturbs juft after the Man-
ner of a Whirl-wind • and if a VeiTel
happen to be in the way of this Whirl-
pool, fhe is immediately fwallov/ed up
thereby : But at length this Cloud mounts
again, and diicharges itfelf in a prodi-
geous rain. It is not known whether this
Water is fucked up by the Cloud which
makes it rile • or in what manner fo ex-
traordiuary an efte£fc is brought to pafs.
r'fj'j All theie Seas are Subject to great Com-
motions excited dv the Winds, which
make them 'boil up like Water over a
fire. Then is it that the Surf dafhes Ships
againft the Iflands, and breaks them to
pieces with unfpeakable Violence ; and
then alfo is it that Fifh, of all lizes, are
thrown dead afhore upon the Rocks, like
an Arrow from a Bow.

The Wind which commonly blows up-
on the Sea of Harkand y is from another
Quarter, it coming from the North-weft;
but this Sea is alfo Subject to as violent
Agitations as thofe we have juft men-
tioned. And now is Ambergreefe torn
up from the Bottom, and particularly where
it is very deep } and the deeper it is, the
more exquifite is the Amber. It is ob-
ferved that when this Sea rages in this
rj-i violent manner, it fparkles like Fire. In
*- J this Sea, moreover, there is a Fifh cal-
led Lockham, which preys upon Men.
[Here is a Leaf or more wanting in the Ma-

nufcripty where the Author begem to treat

of China,



Of IND I A and CHINA. :

* m * * # which has caufed all Goods Ca nfiu
to lower in their Price. Of the different
Caufes of this Fall, the frequent Fires
which happen at Canfu are none of the
leaft. Canfu is the Port for all the Ships
and Goods of the Arabs, who trade in
China ; but Fires are there very frequent,
becaufe the Houfes are built with nothing
but Wood, or elfe with fplit Cane [Bam-
Ico :~j belides, the Merchants and 'Ships are
often loft in going and coming- or they
are often plundered; or obliged to make
too long a fray in Harbour • or to fell
their Goods out of the Country fubjeft to
the Arabs j and there make up their Cargo.
In fhort, Ships are under a neceffity of
wafting a considerable time in refitting, not
to fpeak of many other Caufes of Delay.
Soliman the Merchant relates, that at Can-
fa, which is the principal Scale for Mer-
chants, there is a Mohammedan appointed hami J e -,
Judge over thofe of his Religion, by the ^ n Q f^
Authority of the Emperor of China ; and
that he is Judge of all the Mohamme-
da?is who relort to thefe Parts. Upon Fes-
tival Days he performs the public Service
with the Mohammedans, and pronounces
the Sermon or Kotbat, which he concludes,
in the ufual form,with Prayers for the Sol-
tan of the Moflems, [or Mujkmen.~\ The
Merchants of Irak who trade hither, are
noway diflatisfied with his Gonduct, or his
Adminiftration in the Poll he is invefted
w ith ; becaufe his Actions, and the Judg-
ments he gives, are juft and equitable, and
B 4 con-



LV



$ ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

conformable to the Koran [or Alcoran^\ and
according to the Mohammedan Jurilpru-
dence.
[Ll As for the Places whence Ships depart,
We Courfe and thofe alfo they touch at , many Perfons
to China, declare that the Navigation is perform , d
in the following order. Moft of the Chi-
nefe Ships take in their Cargo at Siraj\
where alio they Ship their Goods w r hich
come from Bafra or Baffora, Oman, and
other Parts ; and this they do, becaufe in
this Sea, (that is, in the Sea of Perfea
and the Red Sea) there are frequent Storms,
and fhole Water in many Places. From
Bafra to Sir af is 120 Leagues, and when
Ships have loaded at this laft Place, they
there water alfo ; and from thence make
Geog-Nub. ^ail f- ot a Pl ace called Mafcat, which is in
j>. 56. the extremity of the Province of Oman,
about 200 Leagues from Sir of. On the Eaft
Coaft of this Sea, between Siraf and Maf-
catj is a Place called Nafif Bani al Safak,
and an Iiland called Ebn Kahowan ; and
in this Sea are Rocks called Oman, and
a narrow Strait, called Dordur, between two
Rocks, through which fmall VerTels do
venture, but the Chinefe Ships dare not.
Id. Prof. There are alfo two Rocks called KoJJir
f.^Lat. and Eowairy which fcarce appear above
the Water's edge. After we are clear of
thefe Rocks, we fteer for a place called
Shihr Oman, and at Mafcat take in Wa-
ter, which is drawn out of Wells ; and
here, alfo, you arefupplied with Cattle of
the Province of Oman, From hence Ships

take



Of I ND I A and CHINA. 9

take their Departure for the Indies, and
firft they touch at Kaucammali ; and from
Mafcat to this Place, it is a Month's fail,
with the Wind aft. This is a Frontier
Place, and the chief Arfenal in the Pro-
vince of. the fame Name • and here the
Chinefe Ships put in and are in fafety.
Frefh Water is to be had here, and the Chi-
nefe pay a thoufand Drams for Duties ; but <^ ey are
others pay only from one Dinar to ten worth a-
Dinars. hout a

From Mafcat to Kaucammali, it is, as we ^
have faid, a Month's Sail; and then, ha-
ving watered at this laffc Place, you begin
to enter the Sea of Harkand^ and having
failed through it, you touch at a place
call LajabahiSj where the Inhabitants un-
derfiand not the Arabefque, or any other
Language in ufe with Merchants. They
wear no Cloaths, are white, and unftable
on their Feet.

It is faid their Women are not to be l"Kl
feen ; and that the Men leaving the Ifland, An IJland
in Canoes hollowed out of one Piece, <gp ™ hereno
in queft of them, and carry them Coco- T ^ omsnare
nuts, Sugar, Canes, Moufa, and Palm-wine. p"j m ^
This Liquor is white, and, if drank frefh, wine.
has the Tafte of the Coco-nut, and is fweet
like Honey; if kept fomewhat longer
it becomes as ffcrong as Wine ; but if it is
kept for feveral Days, it turns to Vine-
gar. They give it in exchange for Iron ;
and in like manner they truck the little
Amber which is thrown on their Coaft,
for bits of Iron. The Bargain is driven



<* ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

by Signs, and Touches of the Hand, be-
caufe they underitand not the Arabefque :
But they are very fharp, and are apt to
carry off Iron trom the Merchants, and
leave them nothing in return.

Calabar. From this Place Ships fleer towards Ca-
labar, the Name of a Place and a King-
dom on the Coaft,to the right Hand be-
yond India* Bar lignifies a Coaft in the
Language of the Country, and this de-
pends on the Kingdom or Zabage. The
Inhabitants are dreiled in thofe forts of
ft-riped Garments, which the Arabs call
Fauta, and they commonly wear but one
at a time, which is equally obferved by
Perfons of high Rank, and thole of in-
ferior Degree. At this Place they com-
monly take in Water, which is filled from
3ivingWells,and which they like better than
what is drawn out of Citterns and Tanks.
Calabar is about a Months Voyage from
a Place called Kaukam, which is almoft
upon the Skirts of the Sea of Harkand,
[Ml * n ten Days after this, Ships reach a

Betuma. Place called Betmna, where they may wa-
ter if they pleafe. From thence in ten
Days they come up with Kadrange, where
alfo they may water. It is worth the notice,
that in * all the Iflands and Peninfula's of
the Indies, they find Water when they dig
for it.

Senef. In this laft mentioned Place there is a

very lofty Mountain, which is lcarce Peo-
pled by any but Slaves and fugitive Rob-
bers. From thence in ten Days they ar-
rive



Of IND I A and CHINA. 1 1

rive at Senef. Here is frefh Water, and
hence comes the Aromatic-wood, we call
Hud al Senef- : Here is a King ; the Inha-
bitants are black, and wear two ftriped
Garments.

Having watered at this Place, it is a ten Sandarfu-
Days PalTage to Sandarfulat, an Ifland lat.
where is frelh Water. Then they fleer
upon the Sea of Sanji, and fo to the
Gates of China ; for fo they call certain
Rocks and Sholes in that Sea, between
which is a narrow Strait, through which
Sips pafs. It requires a Month to Sail
from Sandarfulat to China, and it takes up
eight whole Days to iteer clear of thefe
Rocks. When a Ship has got through
thefe Gates, ihe, with the Tide of Flood,
goes into a frefh Water Gulf, and drops
Anchor in the chief Port of China, which
is that of Canfu ', and here they have frefh Canfu.
Water, both from Springs and Rivers, as
they have alfo in moft of the other Cities
of China. The City is adorned with large
Squares, and fupplied with all the Necel-
faries of Defence againil an Enemy ; and,
in moft of the other Provinces, there are
Cities of Strength, fortified in the fame
manner.

In this Port it Ebbs and Flows twice in ^ ^
twenty four Hours, but with this Diffe- at c an fu.
rence ; That whereas from Bafia to the If-
land called Bani Kahowan, it Flows when
the Moon is in her mid Courfe, and Ebbs
when fhe rifes and when me fets; from
near Bani Kahowan quite to the Coaft of

China,



;>2 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

China, it is Flood when the Moon rifes,
and when fhe is towards her height it is
Ebb; and fo on, when fhe lets it is flow-
ing Water, and when fhe is quite hidden
under the Horizon, the Tide falls.

Meljland They fay that in the If] and of MuV}M %

gTMuljan. wn i cn is between Sarandib and Cala, on
the Eaftern Shore of the Indies, there are
Negroes who go quite naked ; and that
when they meet with a Stranger, they hang
him with his Head downward, and flice

Man-eat- him into Pieces, which they eat quite raw;

en. Thefe Negroes have no King, and feed

upon Fifh, Moufa, Coco-nuts, and Sugar-
canes : They have Ponds and fome Lakes.
[Nl They report alfo, that in fome parts of

Tlfmgfijh. this Sea there is a fmalliih kind of Fifh
which flies upon the Water, and which
they call the Sea Locujt.

It is moreover faid, that in another Part
there is a Fifh which, leaving the. Sea, gets
up to the Coco-nut Trees; and having
drained them of their Juice, takes to the
Sea again.
ro^ J* ^ s a g a * n added, that in this Sea there

Afyb is another fort of Fifh like a Lobfter,

which pe- w y c h petrifies as foon as taken out of its

Element; they pulverife it, and it is good

for feveral Difeafes of the Eyes.

\y\ They fay alfo, that near Zabage there is

a Mountain called the Mountain of Fire,

AYulcz- w hich no one may approach ; that, in the
day time, it fends up a thick Smoke ; and
that, in the Night, it throws out Flames.
At the Foot of this fame Mountain are

two



no



Of INDIA and CHINA ij

two Springs of frefh Water, the one hot
and the other cold.

The Cbinefe are drefled in Silk both ^ chi-
Winter and Summer; and this kind oivefedrefi
drefs is common to the Prince, the Sol-**^*-
dier, and to every other Perfpn, though
of the lower! Degree. In Winter they
wear Drawers, of a particular make, which
fall down to their Feet. Of thefe they put
on two, three, four, five or more, if they
can, one over another ; and are very careiul
to be covered quite down to their FQQt y
becaufe of the Damps which are very great,,,
and much dreaded by them. In Summer
they only wear a fingle Garment, 'of Silk,
or fome luch Drefs, but have no Turbans.

Their commun Food is Rice, which Their com
they often eat with a Broth like what/»*»*W#
the Arabs make of Meat, or Fifh, which Rtc * m
they pour upon their Rice. Their Kings
eat Wheaten Bread, and all forts of A-
nimals, not excepting Swine, and fome
others.

They have feveral fort of Fruits; Apples, Fruits of
Lemons, Quinces, Moulds j Sugar-canes, China.
Citruls, Figs, Grapes, Cucumbers of two
forts, Trees which bear Meal, Walnuts,
Almonds, Filberds, Piftachips, Plums, A-
pricocks, Services, and Coco-nuts ; but
they have no ftore of Palms; they have on-
ly a few about fome private Houfes.

Their drink is a kind of Wine made of j) rin £
Rice; they have no other Wine in the modi >of
Country, nor is there any brought to &*«*
them ; they know not what it is, nor do

they



i 4 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

they drink of it. They have Vinegar al-
io, and a kind of Comfit like what the
Arabs call Natef] and fome others.

They are not very nice in point of
cleanlinefs, and wafh not with Water when
they eafe Nature, but only wipe themfelves
with Paper. They eat alfo of dead Ani-
mals, and practice in many other things
like the Magians, and, in truth, the Reli-
gion of the one and the other is much the
The Orna- lame. The Chinefe Women appear uncover'd,
ment of the a nd adorn their Heads with iinall Ivory and
Chmefe ot h er Combs, of which they fhali wear fome-
times a Score together. The Men are co-
vered with Caps of a particular make.

The Law they oblerve with regard to
Thieves, is to put them to Death as fooa
as caught.

Some Particulars relating to the Indies and
to the Kings of the fame Countries.

TR1 Both the Indians and Chinefe agree, that
fj^^ there are four great or principal Kings
Kings. in the World ; they allow the King of
the Arabs to be the firft, and to be, with-
out difpute, the moft Powerful of Kings,
the moft wealthy, and the moft excellent
every way • becaufe he is the Prince and
Head of a great Religion, and becaufe no
other furpaiies him in Greatnefs,or Power.
The Emperor of China reckons himfelf
next after the King of the Arabs, and
after him the King of the Greeks ^ and
TheBal- laftly, the Balhara, King of Moharmi al

Adan %



hara.



Of IND I A and CHINA. 15

Adan, or of Thofe who have their Ears
bored. This Balhara is the moft illuftrious
Prince in all the Indies ; and all the other
Kings there, tho' each is Mailer and in-
dependant in his Kingdom, acknowledge
in him this Prerogative and Pre-emi-
nence. When he fends Ambafladors to
them, they receive them with extraordi-
nary honours, becaufe of the refpect they
bear him. This King makes magnificent
Prefents after the manner of the Arabs ;
and has Horfes and Elephants in very
great Number, and great Treafures in Mo-
ney. He has of thole Pieces of Silver cal-
led Thartarian Drams, which weigh half
a Dram more than the Arabefque Dram.
They are coined with the Die of the
Prince,and bear the Year of his Reign from
the Jaft of the Reign of his Predeceflbr.
They compute not their Years from the
Mid. of Mohammed as do the Arabs, but
only by the Years of their Kings. Moft
of thefe Princes have lived a long time, and
many of them have reigned above Fifty
Years * and thofe of the Country believe
that the length of their Lives, and of
their Reigns, is granted them in recom-
pence for their Kindnefs to the Arabs. In
truth, there are no Princes more heartily
affectionate to the Arabs ; and their Sub-
jects profefs the fame Friendfliip for us. ^

Balhara is an Apellative common to all Bau^ a
thefe Kings, as was Co/roes, and fome others, Name cam-
and is not a proper Name. The Country mon to all \
which owes Obedience to this Prince, be- the f* Kiu Z u

gins



16 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

gins on the Coait of the Province called
Kamkam, and reaches by Land to the
confines of China. He is furrounded by
the Dominions of many Kings, who are
at War with him, and yet he never
marches againfb them. One of thefe Kings
is the King of Haraz, who has very nu-
merous Forces, and is ftronger in Horfe
than all the other Princes of the Indies ;
but is an -Enemy to the Arabs, tho' he at
the fame time confefles their King to be
the greateft of Kings ; nor is there a
Prince in the Indies who has a greater
Averfion to Mohammedifm. His Domi-
nions are upon a Promontory, where are
f- much riches, many Camels, and other

Cattle. The Inhabitants here Traffic with
Silver they warn for; and they fay there
are Mines of the fame on the Continent.
There is no talk of Robbers in this Coun-
try, no more than in the reft of the /»-
dies.
We King- On one fide of this Kingdom lies that
domofT^r of Tafek, which is not of very great ex-
fek - tent; this King has the fineft White

Women in all the Indies ; but he is fubjecl:
to the Kings about him, his Army being,
but fmall. He has a great Afte&ion for
the Arabs, as well as the Balbara.
Rahmi. Thefe Kingdoms border upon the Lands

of a King called Rahmi) who is at War
with the King of Haraz, and with the
Balbara alfo. This Prince is not much
r confldered either for his Birth, or the

Antiquity of his Kingdom; but his Forces

are






Of India and china if

Are more numerous than tbofe of the BaU
hara, and even than thofe of the Kings of
Harazy and TafeL They fay that when he
takes the Field, he appears at the Head of
fifty thoufand Elephants j and that he com-
monly marches in the Winter Seafon, be-
caufe the Elephants not being able to bear
with thirfl, he can move at no other Time*
They fay alfo that in his Army there
are commonly frdmten to fifteen thoufand
Tents. In this fame Country they make
Cotton Garments, in lb extraordinary a
manner, that no where elfe are the like to be
feen. Thefe Garments are for the moll part
round, and wove to that degree of finenefs,
that they may be drawn through a Ring
of a middling Size.

Shells are current in this Country, and «
ferve for fmallMoney,notwithftanding thas
they have Gold and Silver, Wood-Aloes,
and Sable-Skins of which they make the
Furniture of Saddles and Houilngs. In
this fame Country is the famous Karkandan
or Uhi com jY/ho has but one Horn upon his
Forehead, and thereon a round Spot with
the Reprefentation of a Man. The whole
Horn is black, except the Spot in the mid-
dle, which is white. The Unicorn is much qfa Un&i
fmaller than the Elephant • from the Neck corn,
downwards he pretty much refembles the
Bufflar} for Strength he is extraordinary,
therein furpaffing ail other Creatures; his
Hoof is not cloven ; and from his Foot to
his Shoulder he is all of a Piece. The Ele-
phant flies from the Unicorn, whofe low-
C ing



18 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

xng is like that of an Ox, with fomething
of the Cry of a Camel. His Fleih is not
forbidden, and we have eaten of it. There
are great Numbers of this Creature in the
Fens of this Kingdom, as alfo in all the
other Provinces of the Indies ; but the Horns
of thefe are the moft efteemed, and upon
them are generally feen the Figures of
Men, Peacocks, Fifties, and other Refem-
blances. The Cbinefe adorn their Girdles
with thefe forts of Figures; fo that fome of
thefe Girdles are worth two or three thou-
fand pieces of Gold in Cbina y and fome-
times more, the Price augmenting with the
Beauty of the Figure. All the things, we
have here enumerated, are to be purchafed
in the Kingdom of Rabmi for Shells, which
are the current Money.

K&fchl\ru After this Kingdom there is another
which is an inland State, diftant from the
Coait, and calFd Kafcbbin. The Inhabi-
tants are white, and bore their Ears : They
have Camels, and their Country is a Defart,
and full of Mountains.

Hitrange. Farther on, upon the Coaft, there is a
fmall Kingdom called Hitrange y which is
very poor ; but it has a Bay, where the Sea
throws up great Lumps of Ambergreefe.
They have alfo Elephants Teeth and Pep-
per : but the Inhabitants eat it green, be-
cause of the fmallnefs of the Quantity they
gather.

Jtfujet. Beyond thele Kingdoms, here mention-

ed, there are others of number unknown,
and among the reit that of Majet. The In-
habitant*



Of INDIA and CHINA. >$

habitants are white, and drefs after the
Chincfe Mode: Their Country is full of
Mountains with white Tops and of very-
great Extent. Here are great Quantities
of Musk, eiteemed the moft exquiiite iri
the World. They have War with all the
neighbouring Kingdoms. The Kingdom
of Mabed is beyond that of Mitj'et ; therein MabecL;
are many Cities, and the Inhabitants have
a great Refemblance of the Chinefe, evert,
more than thofe of Mitjet ; for they have
Officers or Eunuchs like thofe who govern
the Cities among the Chinefe. The Coun-
try of Mabed is conterminous with China,
and is at peace with the Emperor of 'China,
but is riot fubjeft to him.

The Mabed fend every Year AmbafTadors <£h e jyf 2 ^
and Prefents to the Emperor oi China, who bed fend
on his part fends AmbafTadors and Prefents <d™bajfa^
to them. Their Country is of great Ex- ^hina
tent • and when the AmbafTadors of the Ma-
ted enter China, they are carefully watch-
ed, and never once allow 'd to furvey the
Country, for fear they mould form Deiigns
of conquering it, which would be no diffi-
cult Task for them* becaufe of their great
Numbers, and becaufe they aire parted xrorri
China, only by Mountains, or by Rocks.

They fay, that in the Kingdom of 'China tfUNum*
there are above two hundred Cities which farofCitks
have Jurisdiction over feveral others, and 7?2Chlna '
have each a Prince or Governor, and an
Eunuch or Lieutenant. Canfu is one of
thefe Cities, being the Port for all Ship-
ping, and preiiding over twenty Towns.
C z A



$S ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

A Town is dignify 'd with the Title of Ci-
ty, when it is allowed fome of thofe great

tfttwrpeu. Chinefe Trumpets which are fafhion'd after
this manner : They are three or four Cu-
bits in length, and are as much about as
can be grafped with both Hands • but they
grow narrower towards the End, which is
fitted to the Mouth of a Man : On the Out-
fide, they are coloured with Chinefe Ink, and
may be heard a Mile oft Each City has
four Gates, at each of which are five of
thefe Trumpets, which the Chinefe found at
certain Hours of the Day and of the Night.

fyrHms. Moreover, in each City are ten Drums,
which they beat at the lame time ; <ind this
they do as a public Token of their Obedi-
ence to the Emperor, as alfo to flgnify the
Hour of the Day and of the Night ; to which
end they have alfo Dials and Clocks with
Weights.

Copper Mo- They coin a great deal of Copper Mo-

m >'' ney like what the Arabs know by the

Name of Falas. They have Treafures like
other Kings; but no others have this fort
of fmall Money, which, and no other, is
current all over the Country: For tho*
they have Gold, Silver, Pearls, Silk, and
rich Stuffs in great abundance, they confi-
der them only as Moveables and Merchan-
dize, and the Copper Pieces are the only
current Coin. From foreign Parts they
have Ivory, Frankincenfe, Copper in Pigs,
Tortoife Shell, and the Unicorns Horns
which we have mention'd, and with which
they adorn their Girdles. Of their own

Stock,



Of IND I A and CHINA si

Stock, they have Numbers of Beafts of
Burthen- Hories, Afles, and Dromedaries ;
but they have no Arabian Horfes. They PoneJame
have an excellent kind of Earth, where-
with thy make a Ware of ecjual Finenefs
with Glafs, and equally tranfparent.

When Merchants enter China by Sea, Vid. M. P.
the Chinefc leize on their Cargo, and con- 1-a- c - 79-
vey it to Warehoufes; and fo put a Hop to ^ erc ^ff
their Buiinefs for fix Months, and till the c^na.
laft Merchantman be arrived. Then they
take three in ten, or thirty per Cent, of
each Commodity, and return the reft to
the Merchant. If the Emperor wants any
particular thing, his Officers have a right to
take it preferably to any other Perfons
whatsoever ; and paying for it to the utmoft
Penny it is valued at, they difpatch this
Buiinefs immediately, and without the leaft
Injuftice. They commonly take Camphire,
which they pay for after the rate of fifty
Fakuges per Man^ and the Fakuge is worth
a thoufand Falus or Pieces of Copper,
When it happens that the Emperor does
not take Camphire, it fells for half as
much again. *

The Chinefe bury not their dead till the <fht B*ri-
Day twelvemonth of their Deceafe. Till ah of the
the Expiration of this Term, they keep Chmefe,
them in Coffins ; for having previoufly'dried
them with quick Lime, that they may keep,
they place them in fome part of their
Houfes. The Bodies of their Kings are
embalmed with Aloes and Camphire. They
mourn for three whole Years, all which
time they weep their dead 3 and whofo-*
C 3 ever



ii ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

ever mould not do fo, would be chaftifed
with the Bamboo, a Punifhment both Men,
and Women are liable to, at the fame time
that they are reproached, What then thou art
not concerned at the Death of thy Torrent [or
Relation] ? They bury their dead in deep
Pits, much like thofe in ufe with the Arabs,
till which is done, they conitantly fet Vic-
tuals before the Corple ; and as it is in
the Evening that they thus adminiiter
meat and drink to their dead, if the
next Morning they find nothing left,
they ima'gine that they have both eaten and
drank, and fay, 'The deceafed hath eaten.
They ceafe not from bewailing their dead,
nor from fetting Meat and Drink before
them as long as they are kept in the Houfe ;
infomuch that their Expences upon thefe
Occaiions, and in thus paying the laft Du-
ties to their departed Relations, are fo ex-
orbitant, as often to ruin them, and con-
fume their Wealth and Eftates. Formerly
they, with the dead Bodies of their Kings
or others of the Royal Blood, buried very
% rich Apparel -and thofe forts of Girdles

which we havl obferv'd to coil fo much ;
but this Cuilom is now no more * becaufe
it has 'happened that the Bodies of fome
have been dug up by Thieves, for the fake
of what was buried with them.
tfhe Chi- The Chinefe both poor and rich, great
nefe kam and fmall, learn to read and to write. The
foreadavd Titles of their Kings or Governors are va-
IW#* r [ ec [ t0 the Dignity and Rank of the Ci-
ties under them ; thofe of the fmaller Ci-
ties are called Tufn^ and this Word fig-*

nifies



Of IND I A and CHINA. ij

nifies the Governor of a Town. Thofe of
the greater Cities, as Canfu for Example,
are ftiled Difii, and the Eunuch or Lieute-
nant is titled Tukam. Thefe Eunuchs are
fele&ed from the Inhabitants of the Cities.
There is alfo a fupreme Judge, and him
they call Lakfhi-ma-makvan } other Names
they have for other Officers which we
know not how properly to exprefs.

No one is raifed to the Dignity of a Governors
Prince or Governor of a City, till he cf Cities.
has attained his fortieth Year, For then^
(ay they, he hath Experience. When one
of thefe Princes or petty Kings, keeps
his Court in a City, he is feated upon a
Tribunal, and receives the Petitions or
Complaints of the People. Behind his Tri-
bunal, is an Officer called Lieu, who keeps
Handing, and, according to the Order he
receives from the Prince, commits his An-
fwer to Writing ; for they never anfwer by
Word of Mouth to any Bulinefs whatfo-
ever, nor will they give any Anfwer at all
to any thing that is not written. Before
the Parties prefent their Petitions to the
Prince, they get them examined by an
Officer, who, ■ if he difcovers any Fault,
fends them back again. For no Man may
draw up thefe Writings which are to be
prefented to the Prince, except a Clerk
verfed in Bulinefs, and at the Bottom of
each Writing they put, Written by fiich a
one, the Son of fiich a me\ and if, in this
Cafe, there happen any Blunder or Miftake,
the Clerk is bamboo a. The Prince never
C 4 feats



%4 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

feats himfelf on his Tribunal, till he has
eaten and drank, for fear he ihould be mif*
taken in fomething* and each of thefe
Princes or Governors has his Subiiftance
from the publick Treafury of the City he
commands.
ffheEmbe- ^ ne Emperor °f China, who is above
rprtfChi-i all thefe Princes or petty Kings, never ap-
jia, ' pears in public but once in ten Months ;

faying, That if he ihewed himfelf oftner
/ to the People, they would lofe the Vene-^
/ ration they have for him. For he holds
it as a Maxim, That Principalities cannot
fubiift but by force, and that the People
know not what Juftice is • and that thusCon-
ftraint and Violence murt be ufed to main**
tain, among them, the Majefly of Empire.
'$ojh6 They have no Import, upon their Lands,

but are fubje6i: only to a Poll Tax, which
is levied upon Men only, and that, accords
ing to their Condition and Capacity. When
any Arabs, or other Strangers are in this
Country, the Cbinefe tax them in propor-
tion to their Subftance, When any Dearth
makes NecefFaries very dear, then does
the King open his Storehoufes, and fell all
Sorts of Provifions much cheaper than
they are to be had at Market ; and hence
no Dearth is of any long Continuance a-
mong the Chine fe.
ffhepffic The Sums that are gathered from the
Qhafury. Capitation Tax, are laid up in the pub-
lic Treafury ; and, I believe, that, from
this Tax, fifty thoufand Dinars are eve-
iv Day paid info the Treafury of Canfu
\ *4onej



OflND I A and CHINA. $f

alone, although this City be none of the
larger! in China.

The Emperor alfo referves to himfelf <fheEmpe~
the Revenues which arife from the Salt ror'sRm-
Mines, and from a certain Herb which mes '
they drink with hot Water, and of which
great Quantities are fold in all the Cities,
to the amount of great Sums. They call it
Sab, and it is a Shrub more buihy than the
Pomegranate-tree, and of a more taking
Smell, but it has a kind of Bitternefs with
it. Their way is to boil Water, which
they pour upon this Leaf, and this Drink
cures all forts of Difeafes. Whatever Sums
are lodged in the Treafury arife from the
Poll Tax, and the Duties upon Salt and
upon this Leaf.

In each City there is a fmall Bell hung jf ma q
to the Wall above the Prince's or Gover- Bell.
nor's head; and this Bell may be rung by
a String which reaches about three Miles,
and crofTes the high Way, to the end
that People may get at it. When the
String is pulled, the Bell ffcrikes over the
Governor's Head, and ffcrait he com-
mands, that the Perfon, who thus demands
Juftice , be brought before him ; and accor-
dingly the Complainant fets forth his Cafe
in Perfon, and the Wrongs he. fuflers. And
the fame Practice is in ufe throughout all
the other Provinces.

If a Man would travel from one Place to p a fles/w
another, he muft take two Pafles with him j ^travellers..
the one from the Governor, the other from
the Eunuch pr Lieutenant. The Gover-
nor's



grf ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

nor's Pafs permits him to fet out on his
Journey, and takes notice of the Name of
the Traveller, and of thofe alfo of his
Company,, the Age and Family of the one
and the other : For every body in China ,
whether a Native, or an Arab, or any o-
ther Foreigner, is obliged to declare all he
knows of himfelf, npr can he poffibly be
excufed the fo doing. The Eunuch's or
Lieutenant's Pafs fpecifies the Quantities of
Money or Goods which the Traveller and
thofe with him, take along with them. And
this is done for the lntbrmation of the
Frontier places, where thefe two Pafles are
examined ; for whenever a Traveller ar-
rives at any of them, it is regiflered, 'That
fuch a one j the Son offuch a one, of finch a
Family, paffed through this Place on fuch a
Day, in fuch a Month, in fuch a Tear, and
in fuch Company. And by this means they
prevent any one from carrying off the Mo-
ney or Effects of other Perfons, or their
being loft : So that if any thing has been
carried off unjuftly, or the Traveller dies
on the Road, they immediately know what
is become of the Things, and they are ei-
ther reftored to the Claimant, or to the
Heirs.
'Jdmmi- The Chine fe adminifter Juftice with great
f ration of Strictnefs in all their Tribunals. When
Jupce, an y p er f on enters his Action againft ano-
ther, he fets down his Claim in writing,
and the Defendant writes down his De-
fence, which he iigns, and holds between
This Fingers. Thefe two writings are de-
livered



Of INDIA and CHINA zf

livered in together, and being examined,
Sentence is pronounced in writing, and
the Parties have each his Paper returned to
him • but firft they give back to the Defen-
dant his writing of Defence, that he may-
acknowledge it. When one Party denies
what the other affirms, he is ordered to re-
turn his Writing ; and if the Defendant
thinks he may do it fafely,and according-
ly delivers in his Paper again, they alio
call for that of the Plaintif, and then they
fay to him who denies what the other
feems to have reafon to maintain, Exhibit
a Writing whereby to make it appear that your
Antagmift has no right to demand ofyou-.what
is in debate ; but if it clearly betrays the Truth
cf what you deny^you /hall undergo twenty Strokes
of the Bamboo upon the Backfide^ and pay a Fine
of twenty Fakuges, which make about two
hundred Dinars. Now this Punifhment is
fuch as the Criminal could notfurvive: It
is fo grievous that no Perfon in all China y
may, of his own Authority, inflict it upon
another, upon pain of Death, and Confis-
cation of goods And fo no Body is ever
fo hardy as to expofe himfelf to {o certain
a Danger; wherefore Juftice is well admi-
niftred, and very exactly diftributed to
every one. They require no Witnefs, nor
put the Parties upon Oath.

When any Man becomes a Bankrupt, <tW m*.
and has wafted the Subftance of his Cre^ Mods with
ditors, they throw him into a Prifon in #*»*«?'&
the Governor's Palace, and 1 he is imme-
diately put upon his Declaration. After
he has been a Month in Prifon, he is re-

leafe4



*8 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

leafed by the Governor's Order, and Pro-
clamation is made, That fitch a one, the Son
cf fitch a one y has confumed the Subftance of
fitch a one } and that if he has any EffecJs in
the Hands of any Perfon y Lands, Reverfions y
or Wealth in any other Shape whatfoever^it muji
be made knoivn within the Term of a Month*
In the mean time the Bankrupt is bamboo'd
on the Backiide, if Diicovery is made of any
Effe&s of his, and at the iau.e time is up-
braided with having been a Month inPrifon,
eating and drinking, tho' he had where
withal to latisfy his Creditors. He is chaf-
tifed in the lame manner, whether he makes
Declaration of his Efiecb or not. They
reproach him that his Buiinefs is to get the
Subftance of private Perfons into his Hands,
and embezzle it ; and that he ought not
fo to defraud thofe he had dealings with,
by ftripping them of their Property. But
after all, it they cannot difcover him to
have been guilty of any Fraud, and if it
is proved to the Prince that the Man has
nothing in the World, the Creditors are
called in, and receive a part of their Debt
put of the Treafury of the 'BagbiWy (this is
the ordinary Title of the Emperor ofGfo'-
va y and fignifies The Son of Heaven • but we
commonly pronounce it after a different
manner, and call him, Magbun*). Then it
is publickly forbidden to buy of, or fell
any thing to this Man upon pain of Death,
and fo he. cannot defraud any of his Cre-
ditors by concealing their Money. If difr*
covery be made that he has any Sums in

the



Of IND I A and CHINA. if

the Hands of another, and if the Perfori
he intrufts makes no Declaration, he is
bamboo'd to death, and nothing is faid to '
the Proprietor or Bankrupt. The Sums
that they difcover are divided among the
Creditors, and the Debtor or Bankrupt murr.
nevermore concern himfelf with Trade.

The Cbinefe have a Stone ten Cubits nigh, J Stone m
erected in the public Squares, and on this w ^ u
Stone are graved the Names of all forts of J'm&-
Medicines, with the exact rates of each- cms.
and when the poor ftand in need of any
Relief from Phyiic, they go to theTrea-
fury, where they receive the Price each
Medicine is rated at.

There is no Land Tax in China ^ they JWZaag"
only levy fo much per Head, according to
the Wealth and Poileffions of the Subject.
When a Male Child is born, his Name
is immediately entered into the King's
Books, and when this Child has at-
tained his eighteenth Year, he begins to
pay for his Head} but they demand it
not of the Man who has feen his eighti-
eth Year ; on the contrary he receives a
Gratification, by way of Penfion, from
the public Treafury ; and in doing this,
the Cbinefe fay, That they give him this
Gratification in his old days, in acknow— ,
ledgment for what they receiv'd af him
when he was young.

There are Schools in every Town for Scfatfq
teaching the Poor and their Children to
write and read, and the Mailers are paid
at the public Charge. The Women wear

nothing



Ivert*



la ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

nothing on their Heads but their Hair*.
whereas the Men are covered.

In China there is a Hamlet called Tayu,
which is a Cattle advantagiouily feared on
a Hill, and all rhe Strong-holds in China
are called by the fame Name.

The Chinefe are for the moft part hand-
fom, of comely Starure, fair, and by no
means addicted to Exceffes of Wine ; their
Hair is blacker than the Hair of any other
Nation in the World • and the Chinefe Wo-
men curl theirs.
p S ~| In the Indies, when one Man accufes a-
Proof by nother of a Crime punifhable with Death,
red ~ht it is cuftomary to ask the Accufed if he
is willing to go thro' the Tryal by Fire ;
and if he anfwers in the affirmative, they
heat a Piece of Iron till it is red hot :
This done ? they tell him to ftretch forth his
Hand, and upon it they put feven Leaves
of a Tree they have in rhe Indies, and
upon thefe Leaves rhey put the red hot
Iron ; and in rhis Condition he walks
backwards and forwards for fome time,
and then throws off the Iron. Imme-
diately after this, they put his Hand in-
to a leathern Bag, which they feal with
the Prince's Signet • and if at the End of
three Days he appears and declares that he
' has fuffered no Hurt, they order him to
take out his Hand, when, if no Sign of
Fireisfeen, they declare him innocent,
and delivered from the Puniihment which
threatned him • and his Accufer his con-
demned to pay a Man of Gold as a Fine
to the Prince. Some-



Of IND I A and CHINA. 31

Sometimes they boil Water in a Caldron Scalding
till it is fo hot that no one may approach Water.
it ; then they throw an Iron Ring into
it, and command the Perfon accufed to
thruit his Hand down, and bring up the
Ring. I faw one who did this, and «

receiv'd no manner of Hurt. The Ac-
cufer is in this Cafe alfo to pav a Man of
Gold.

When a King dies in the Ifland of So- [ T j|
randibj they lay his Body on a Car, in ^ j^
fuch a manner that his Head hangs back- ra \ R ites
wards till it almoit- touches the Ground, of the King
and his Hair is upon the Earth- and this °f Saraa-
Car is followed by a Woman with a Broom
in her Hand, therewith to fweep Dnft on
the Face of the deceafed, while ihe cries
out with a loud Voice; O Men! behold
your King who was yefierday your Mafter *
but notv the Empire he exercifed over you is
vamped and gone. He is reduced to the State
you behold^ having left the World ^ and the Ar-
biter of Death hath withdrawn his SouL
Reckon therefore no more upon the uncertain
Hopes of Life. This Cry, and fome others
like it, they continue for three Days, after
which the dead Body of the King is em-
balmed with Sandal Wood, Camphire,
and Saffron, and is then burnt, and the
Aihes are fcatter'd abroad to fc^e Wind.
It is a univerfal Cuftom all over the Indies^
to burn the Bodies of the dead. The Ifland
of Sarandib is the lafh of the Iflands of the
Indies. When they burn a King it is ufual \_ AA J
for his Wives to jump into the Fire^ and

to



fi ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

to burn with him ; but this they are not
conftrained to do if they are not willing.
Indian In the Indies there are Men who protefs

Penitents, t0 y lYt j n ^g \y ooc j s anc l Mountains, and

to defpife what other Men more, value.
Thefe abitain from every thing but fuch
wild Herbs and Fruits as fpring forth in
the Woods, and put an Iron Buckle upon
their natural Parts, that they may not be
able to have any Commerce with Women.
Some of them are quite naked, or have
onl£ a Leopard's Skin thrown over them,
and in this Plight keep ftanding with their
Faces turned to the Sun. I formerly faw
one in the Pofture I have defer ibed, and re-
turning to the Indies about fixteen Years
afterwards, I found him in the very fame
Attitude, and was aftonifhed he had not
loft his Eyefight by the Heat of the Sun.
*theSuc- i n a }i t^efe Kingdoms the fovereign

cejjionof p Qwer refldes in the Ro i Fam il y and

families -, r . J , . s> J *~ ., .

in one and never departs from it* and thole of this
the fame Family fucceed each other. In like man-
Bufmefs. ne r there are Families of Learned Men, of
Phyficians, and of all the Artificers con-
cerned in Architecture, and none of thefe
ever mix with a Family of a Profemon dif-
ferent from their own.
Balhara. The feveral States of the Indies are not
fubjeel: t© one and the fame King, but each
Province has its own King * nevertheless
the Balhara is, in the Indies* as King of
[U'j Kings.
The Chi- ^ ne Cbinefb, are fond of Gaming and all
gtvtn'tQ manner °f Efcverfions : On the contrary,
fllne. thSf



Of WD1A and CHINA ft

the Indians condemn them, and have no
Pleafure in them. They drink no Wine,
nor admit Vinegar, becaufe it is made of
Wine; and yet they abrtain not therefrom
as a religious Duty, but for another Kea-
fon : They fay that if a King is given to
Wine, he ought not to be deemed a King;
for, add they, as there are frequent Wars
with the neighbouring States, how fhould
a Drunkard manage the Affairs of his King-
dom ?

The Wars they wage with the neigh- iPhvs&itl
bouring Princes, are not ufually underta- &**
ken with a view to poflefs themfelves of ?*$h
the adjoining Dominions ; and I never
heard of any, but the People bordering upon
the Pepper Country, that have feized on
the Polleffions of their Neighbours after a
Victory. When a Prince makes himfelf
Mailer of fome Kingdom, he confers the
Government thereof upon fome Perfon of
the Royal Family of the conquered Coun-
try, and thus he keeps it in Subjection
to himfelf, apprehending the Natives would
never agree to be otherwife governed.

When any one of the Princes or Cover- $% e pa-
nors of Cities, within the Dominions of mjhment
the Emperor of China^ is guilty of a Crime, °f had G ?1
he is put to death, and eaten; andingene-
neral it may be faid, that the Chinefe eat all
thofe that are put to death.

When the Indians and Chinefe are about Mama*
to marry, both Parties come to an Agree- i es -
ment, then Prefents are made, and at
laft the Marriage is celebrated with the
D Sound



£S ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

Sound of many forts of Inftruments and

Drums. The Prefents they fend confift of

Money, and in this every one dpes what

he can afford.

<fhe Pu- If any Man in the Indies runs away with

mjbment of a Woman, and abufes her Body, they kill

a Rape. ^ Qt ^ ^ m an j t ^ e \y omail) un lefs it be

proved that ihe was forced, then the Man

only is punifhed with death • but if the

Woman confented to the evil Deed, they

are punifhed with death, both the one and

the other. Theft is always death, as well

in the Indies as in China, whether the

Oftfheft. Theft be confiderable or inconfiderable •

and particularly in the Indies, where if a

Thief has itolen but the value of a fmall Peice

of Money, or a thing of greater worth,

they take a long, rtrong, and fharp Stake,

which they apply to his Fundament, and

thrult it through, till it comes out at his

Neck.

*fbt De- The Chinefe are addicted to the hateful

baucheryof y^ an d tn e filthy Practice of it they

nefe" H ~ num b er among the indifferent things they

perform in honour of their Idols.

Buildings. The Chinefe Buildings are of Wood;

whereas the Indians build with Stone, Pla-

fter, Brick and Mortar. After the fame

manner they build in many parts of China.

Polygamy. The Chinefe and Indians are not fatis-

fied with one Wife ; but both the one

and the other marry as many as they

pleafe.

Rice their Rice is the mofl common Food of the

ehkf Focd. Indians, who eat no Wheat ; whereas the

Cbinefi



t)£ INDIA and CHINA 35

Vbinefe eat of Rice and Wheat indifferent-
ly. Circumciiion is pra&ifed neither by
the Indians nor the Chmefe.

The Chinefe woriliip Idols, pray to them, Idolatry.
and fail down before them ; and they have
Books which explain the Articles of their
Religion.

The Indians fuffer their Beards to grow: Beards;
and I have feen one of them with a Beard
three Cubits long. They wear no Whiskers ;
but the Chinefe, for the morl part, have no
Beard, and lhave all fmooth. The Indians y
upon the death of a Relation, lhave both
Head and Face.

When any Man in the Indies is carl: in- Vide Bar-
to Prifon, they allow him neither Victuals bo%3o5.
nor Drink for feven Days together* and dm
this, with them, anfwers the end of other
Tortures to extort from the Criminal a
Confeflion of the Truth.

The Chinefe have Judges, befides the Go- Judges in
yernors, who decide in Caufes between private
Subject and Subject, and the fame they Cau fa-
have in the Indies.

Both in China and in the Indies there No Don.
are Leopards and Wolves ; but no Lions
in the one Country or the other. High-
way Robbers are punifhed with death.

Both the Chinefe and the Indians imagine Superfti-
the Idols they worfhip fpeak to them, and ti6n -
give them Anfwers.

Neither the one nor the other kill their Vide Mar,
Meat by cutting the Throat, as do the Mo- PoL 1 2 -
hammedansj but by beating them on the ff^ €r **
Mouth till they die. j^f

X> a They



3<J ANCIENT ACC0UNT9

Chanlinefs They wafh not with Well- Water. The
T^g- *• Cbinefe wipe themfelves with Papery where-
"" ' ' as the Indians waih every Day before they
eat.

The Indians touch not their Wives while
their Cuffom is upon them, but turn them out
of their Houfes and avoid them. The Cbi-
nefe, on the contrary, have -commerce with
them during that time; and turn them not
out of their Houfes.

The Indians waih, not only the Mouth,
but the whole Body alfo, before they eat,
which the Cbinefe obferve not.
Extent of ^he Country of the Indies is more in
China. Extent than that of China, and exceeds it
by the one half. The number of King-
doms is greater in the Indies than in Cbina y
but China is the molt populous of the two.
It is not ufual to fee Palm-Trees either
in the Indies or in China*, but they have
all other forts of Trees, and Fruits which
we have not. The Indians have no Grapes,
and the Cbinefe have not many ; but both
abound in numbers of other Fruits, tho*
the Pomegranate thrives more plentiiul-
ly in India than in China.
2^* Chi- The Cbinefe have no Sciences, and their
nefe Ythe R- e ligi° n ari( l moil; of their Laws are deri-
Sciences.' veo ^ Irom tne Indians; nay, they are of
Opinion, that the Indians taught them the
Worfhip of Idols, and coniider them as a
very religious Nation. Both the one and
£Yj the other believe the Metempfycbofis ; but
they differ in many Points touching the
Precepts of their Religion.

Phyfic



Of WD I A and CHINA. 37

P hylic and Philofophy are cultivated Theve-
among the Indians, and the Chinefe have notv^.f
fome Skill in Medicine ; but it almoft I/0 '
wholly confifts in the Art of applying hot
Irons, or Cauteries. They have alfo fome
finattering of Aftronomy ; but therein the
Indians furpafs the Chinefe, ,

I know not that there is any one of e ^ ra ^ e
either Nation that has embraced Moham- Moham-
wedifm or fpeaks Arabic. medifm.

The Indians have but few Horfes, and Horfes and
there are more in China ; but the Chinefe Elephants.
have no Elephants, and cannot endure to
have them in their Country, for they ab-
hor them.

The Indian Dominions furnifh a great Soldiers.
number of Soldiers, who are not paid by
the King, but when they are rendezvoui-
ed for War, take the Field entirely at
their own Expence, and are no charge to
the King; whereas the Chinefe allow their
Forces much the fame the Arabs allow
theirs*

China is a pleafant and a fruitful Coun- Beauty of
try. Moffc of the Indian Provinces have the Colfn ~
no Cities; whereas in China they are ma- **?' 8
ny in number, great in Extent, and well
fortified.

The Climate of China is more whole- <fhe CH~
fom, and the Country itfelf is lefs fenny; maU -
the Air there is alio much better; and
fcarce is their a One eyed, or a Blind Per-
fon to be leen, or any one iubject to the
like ASiftions: and the fame Advantage
is enjoyed by feverai Provinces of the In-
J) 1 dm



3*



Kaim.



. ¥be Per-
Jons of the
Chincie.



Targaz-
gaz.



fi



'(S of
ila.



ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

dies. The Rivers of thefe two Countries
are large and furpafs our greater! Rivers.
Much Rain falls in both theie Coun-
tries. In the Indies are many Defarc
Traces; but China is inhabited and peo-
pled throughout its whole Extent.

The Chinefe are more handfom than the
Indians, and come nearer to the Arabs y
not only in Countenance, but in their
Brefs, in their way of Riding, in
their Manners, and in their proceffio-
nal Ceremonies. They wear long Gar-
ments, and Girdles in form of Belts, or
Baldrics.

The Indians wear two ihort Veils ; and
the Men as well as the Women wear gol-
den Bracelets, adorned with precious
Stones.

Beyond the Continent of China, there
is a Country called Tagazgaz, from the
Name of a Nation of the Turks, who
there inhabit; and alfo the Country of
Kakhan or Tibet* which is conterminous
with the Country of the Turks.

Seaward are the Iflands of Sila, inhabi-
ted by white People, who fend Prefents
to the Emperor of China, and who are
perfuaded that if they did not fend him
Prefents, the Rain of Heaven would not
be fhowered down upon their Country.
None of our People have been there to in-
form us concerning them. They have
white Falcons.



THE



(39)




THE

Second Account:

OR, THE

DISCOURSE

O F

Abu Zeid alHafan of Siraf.



Concerning the Voyage to the Indies and
China.

HAVE carefully examined £^
the Book I have been or- face.
dered to perufe, that I might
confirm what the Author re-
lates, when he agrees with
what I have heard, concer-
ning the Things of the Sea, the King-
doms on the Coafts, and the State of the
Countries ; and that I might alfo add, upon
this Head, what I have elfewhere gathered
concerning them, and is not to be found
in this Book*




D



I find



4 o ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

I find it was written in the Year of the
Of 7 C H?J ra CCXXXVII, and that the Accounts
DcccLir the Author gives touching the Things of
v the Sea were, in his Time, very true and
agreeable to what I have underftood from
Merchants who depart from Irak, to fail
upon thofe Seas. I find alfo that all
the Author writes is agreeable to Truth,
excepting fome Pafiages.
Meat fet Speaking of the Cuftom of fetting Meat
before the before the Dead, which he attributes to
' the Cbinefej he fays, When they have
ferved up the Meat over Night, and find
nothing the next Morning, they cry the
Deceafed hath eaten. This fame Thing we
had been told and believed it, till we
met with a Man of undoubted Credit,
whom he asked concerning this Cuftom ♦
and he anfwered that the Fact was not
(o y and that this Notion was groundlefs,
as well as what is vulgarly laid of the
idolatrous Nations, that they imagin their
Idols fpeak to them.
Jliera- He told us alfo that fince thofe Days

thm in t k e Affairs of China had put on quite a-
nother Face ; and fince much is related, to
fhew the Reafcn why the Voyages to
China are interrupted, and how the Coun-
try has been ruined, many Cuftoms a-
bolilhed, and. the Empire divided, I will
here declare what I know of the Caufes
of this Revolution.

The great Troubles which have em-
broiled the Affairs of this Empire,, which
have put a Stop to the Juftice and Righ-

teoufnefs



Of INDIA and CHINA 4l

teoufnefs there formerly pra&ifed, and
which have, in fine, interrupted the ordi-
nary Navigation from Siraf "to China, fprang
from this Source.

An Officer, who was considerable for j gY eat
his Employ, though not of the Royal Revolution
Family, revolted lome Time ago. This * n China.
Man's Name was Baichu, and he began
with Hoftilities in the Country, march-
ing his Arms into many Places to the
great Lofs of the Inhabitants, till win-
ning a Party over to him by his Libera-
lities, he got together a Multitude of Va-
fabonds and abandoned People, whom
e formed into a confiderable Body of
Troops. His Hands thus strengthened,
and himfelf in a Condition to undertake
any Thing, he betrayed his Deiign of
fubduing the Empire to himfelf, and
ftrait marched to Canfu, one of the moft
noted Cities in China, and, at that Time,
the Port for ^11 the Arabian Merchants.
This City ftands upon a great River, fome
Days diftant from the Entrance, fo thai:
the Water there is frelh : But the Citizens
mutting their Gates againil him, he refol-
ved to befiege the Place, and the Siege
lafted a great while. This was tranfac-
ted in the Year of the Hejra CCLXIV,
and of Cbrift DCCCLXXV1L At laft
he became Matter of the City, and put
all the Inhabitants to the Sword. There
are Perfons fully acquainted with the A£*
fairs of China, who afliire us, that befides
the Cbinefe ? who were mafiacred upon this

Occafiqn s



4 i ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

Occafion, there perifhed one Hundred and
twenty Thoufand Mohammedans, Jews,
Chnfiians, and Parfees, who were there on
Account of Traffic. The Number of the
Profeflbrs of thefe four Religions, who
thus perifhed, is exactly known; becaufe
the Chinefe are extremely nice in the Ac-
counts they keep of them. He alio cut
down the Mulberry Trees, and almoft
all the Trees of other Kinds; but we
fpeak of the Mulberry in particular, be-
caufe the Chinefe carefully cultivate it for
the fake of its LeafJ wherewith they
fubfift and propagate their Silk-worms*
This Devaluation is the Caufe why Silk
has failed, and that the Trade which us'd
to be driven with it, in the Countries
under the Arabs, is quite flagnated.
Many G- Having facked and deftroyed Canfu, he
ties taken pofieffed himfelf of many "other Cities,
h Zt he ^ e ~ which he attacked one after another, the
Emperor of China not having it in his
Power to Hop his Progrefs. He advan-
ced then to the capital City called Cum-
dan\ and the Emperor left this his royal
Seat, making a confined Retreat to
the City of Hamdu, on the Frontiers to-
wards the Province of Tibet. Mean while
the Rebel, puffed up by his great Suc-
cefles, and perceiving himfelf Matter of
the Country, fell upon the other Cities,
which he demolifhed, having firft flain
moll of the Inhabitants, with a View in this
general Butchery to involve all the Bran-
ches of the Royal Blood, that no one

might



bet.



OfIND I A and CHINA. 4 |

plight furvive to difpute the Empire with
him. We had the News of thefe Re-
volutions and of the total Ruin of Chi*
na y which Hill continues.

Thus were Affairs, and the Rebel v'heKhg
flood uncontroled by any Difadvantage of TagaV
that might take away from his Power g az - *##*
and Authority. At 1 aft the Emperor of tbe ^r
China wrote to the King of Tagazgaz, m^/ ,
^Turkeftauj which whom, belides the near-
nefs of his Dominions, he was in fome
degree allyed by Marriage; and at the
fame Time fent an Embafly to him to
implore his Deliverance from this Rebel.
Upon this the King of Tagazgazdifyatched
his Son, at the Head of a very nume-
rous Army, to fight the Rebel ; and af-
ter many Battles, and almoft continual
Skirmifhes, he utterly defeated him. It
was never known what became of the Re-
bel. Some believe he fell in Battle, while
others think he ended his Days another
way.

The Emperor of China returned then <ffeEmpe-
to Cumdan ; and altho* he was extremely *w returns
weakned, and almoft difpirited becaule ^Cumdan
of the Embezzlement of his Treafures,
and the Lofs of his Captains and beft
Troops, and becaufe of all the late Ca-
lamities j he neverthelefs made himfelf
Mafter of all the Provinces which had
been conquered from him. However
he laid no Hands on the Goods of his
Subjects, but fatisfied himfelf with what
remained in his Coffers, and the Frag-?

ments



44 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

ments of the Public Money. His Con-
dition indifpenilbly obliged him to take
up with what his Subjects would give
him, and to require nothing from them
but Obedience to his Mandates, forbear-
ing to fqueeze Money from them, be-
caufe the Kings or Governors had made
away with it,
0%e Diui- Ariel thus China became almoft like the
fon of Empire of Alexander ^ after the Defeat and
China in- Death of Darius, when he divided the
& many Provinces, he took from the Perftan, be-
*£**$* *- tween feveral Princes, who erected them—
felves into fo many Kings. For now
each of thefe Cbinefe Princes joined with
fome other to wage War upon a third,
without confulting the Emperor; and
when the ftrongeii had fubdued the wea-
ker!, and become Mailer of his Province,
all was wafted, and unmercifully plun-
dered, and the Subjects of the vanquiihed
Prince were unnaturally devoured; a Cru-
elty allowed by the Laws of their Re-
ligion, which even permit human Flefh
to be expofed to Sale in the public Mar-
kets.
D/firders From thefe Combuftions there arofe ma-
confequent n y un j u ft Dealings with the Merchants
%*arf. m w ^° tra ded thither, which having ga-
thered the Force of a Precedent, there
was no Grievance, no Treatment fo bad
but they exercifed upon the foreign A-+
rabs, and the Matters of Ships, They ex-
torted from the Merchants what was un-.
cuftomary, they feized upon their ErFecls,

ana



Of IND I A and CHINA. 4 j

and behaved towards them in a Method of
Procedure quite contrary to the ancient
Ufages. And for thefe Things has God
puniihed them by withdrawing his Blef-
lings from upon them in every Refpect,
and particularly by caurlng the Naviga-
tion to be fbrfaken, and the Merchants
to return in Crouds to Siraf and Oman y
purfuant to the infallible Orders of the
Almighty Matter, whole Name be blefled.

The Author, in his Book, notes fome <fu p^
Cuttoms and Laws of the Chinefe^ but ijbmm*f
mentions not the Punifhment infli&ed on -Adultery^
married Perfons, when conviaed of A- %f^%
dultery. This Crime, as well as Homicide, *
and Theft is puniihed with Death, and
they execute the Criminal in this Man-
ner : They bind both the Hands together,
and then force them backwards over the
Head till they reft upon the Neck ; they
then fatten the right Foot to the right
Hand, and the left Foot to the left Hand ;
fo that both Hands and Feet are ftrongly
bound behind the Back, and thus bundled
up it is impoflible for the Criminal to ftir,
nor wants he any Body to hold him.
This Torture disjoints the Neck, makes
the Vertebrae ftart from their Connections,
and dillocates the Thighs; in fhort, the
Party is in fo miferable a Condition,
that were he to continue therein but for
a few Hours, there would be no need
of any Thing elfe to make an End of
him. But when they have bound him,
as we have faid, they ftrike him with a

Staff



tf ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

Staff T Bamboo ] which they always ufer
upon the like Occafions, and which alone
were fufficient to kill the Criminal. With:
this they give him a certain Number of
Blows, a Number they never exceed, and
then leave orl^ when he is at the very laffc
Gafp of Life, and forfake the Body to
People who eat it.
Puhlic There are Women in China who re-

Women* fufe to marry, and chufe rather a diflb-
lute Life, and perpetual Debauchery. The
Cuftom is, for thefe Women to preienc
themf elves in full Audience before the
commanding Officer of the Garrifon in
the City, and declare their Averfion to
Marriage, and their Deiire to be num-
bered with the public Women. They then
deiire to be regiftred in the ufual Fon%
among thefe Prortitutes, and the Form
is fuch : They write down the Name of
the Woman, her Family, the Number of
her Jewels, the feveral Items of her At-
tire, and the Place of her Abode } thus is
ihe admitted a public Woman. After this
they put about her Neck a String, at
which hangs a Copper Ring, with the
King's Signet; and deliver to her a Wri-
ting, which certifies that ihe is received
into the Lift of common Prortitutes, and
intitles her to a yearly Stipend of
fo many Fahts to be paid her out of the
public Treafury, and threatens with Death
the Perfon who mould take her to Wife*
They every Year give public Notice of
what is to be obferved with regard to

thefe



Of IND I A and CHINA 47

thefe Women; and turn off thofe who are
too barren of Charms. In the Evening
thefe Women walk abroad in D reffes of
different Colours, without any Veil, and
proftitutethemfelvesto all new comers that
loved Debauchery; but the Chinefe them-
felves fend for them to their Houfes,
whence they depart not till the next Mor-
ning, Praifed be God, who hath refcued
us from the like Infamy !

The Chinefe coin no Money belides the Copper
little Pieces of Copper, like thofe we call M <>wy.
FaluSj nor will they allow Gold or Silver to
be wrought into Specie, like the Dinars and
Drams that are current with us. For, fay
they, if a Thief goes, with an evil In-
tent, into the Houie of an Arabj where is
Gold and Silver Coin, he may carry off
ten thoufand Pieces of Gold, and al-moft
as many Pieces of Silver, and not be
much burdened therewith, and fo be the
ruin of the Man who ihould fuffer this Lofs;
whereas if a Thief has the fame Deiigii
upon theHoufe of a Chinefe Artificer, he can-
not ,at moft, take away above ten thoufand
Falus or Pieces of Copper, which do not
make ten Miticals or Dinars of Gold. Thefe
Pieces of Copper are allayed with fomething
of a different kind, and are of the Size
of a Dram, or Piece of Siver called Bagliy
and in the middle they have a pretty large
Hole to firing them by. A thoufand of
them are worth a Mitical of Gold, or a
Dinar ; and they firing them by thoufands,
with a Knot between every hundred. All

their



4 S ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

their Payments in general are made with
this Money, whether they buy or fell
Lands, Furniture, Merchandize, or any
thing elfe. There are fome of thefe Pieces
at Sir of ^ with Chinefe Characters upon them.
Chinefe. There is no particular Remark to be
Buildings, made upon the frequent Fires which hap-
pen in China) and the Chinefe manner
of Building. The City of Canfu is built
in the manner he- defcribes, that is, of
Vawijb. Wood; with Canes interwoven juft like
our Works of fplit Cane. They do the
whole over with a particular confidence
they make of Hemp-Seed, which becomes
as white as Milk, and when the Walls are co-
vered therewith,theyhave a wonderfulGlofs.
Irificte of They have no Stairs in their Houfes,
their Hot*- nor do they build with different Stories ;
f es * but put every thing they have into Chefts

which run upon Wheels, and which, in
cafes of Fire, they can eafily draw from
place to place, without any hindrance from
Stairs, and fo fave their things prefently.
Eunuchs As f° r tne inferior Officers in their Cl-
ip office, ties, they commonly have the Direction
of the Cuftoms, and the Keys of the
Treafury. Some of thefe have been taken
on the Frontiers, and caftrated } others of
them have been cut by their own Fathers,
who have fent them as a Prefent to the
Emperor. Thefe Officers are at the head
of the principal Affairs of State, of the
Emperors private Affairs, and of hisTrea-
fures ; and thofe, particularly, who are fent
to Canfiiy are fele&ed from this Body.

It



Of IND 1A and CHINA. 4?

It is cuftomary for them, as well as the fkehfo-
Kings or Governors of all the Cities, to lem »^W-
appear abroad, rrom time to time, in io- t fcQ t i eu
lemn Proceflion. At thefe times they are
preceded by Men who carry great Pieces
of Wood, like thofe the Chriftians, of the
Levant, ufe inftead of Bells. The Noife
they make is heard afar off, and as foon
as it is heard, no Man ftands in the way
of the Eunuch, or Prince. If a Man is
at his Door, he goes into his Houfe, and
keeps his Door fhut, till the Prince, or Eu-
nuch of the City is gone by. So no Soul
is to be feen in the way; and this is in-
joined that they may be held in the greater
Veneration, to ftrike a Dread, that the
People may not fee them often, and that
they may not grow fo familiar as to fpeak
to them.

The Eunuch or Lieutenant, and the ^ eh
principal Officers wear very magnificent ® re f s '
Silk Drefles, of fo fine a kind, tfrat none
thereof is brought into the Country Sub-
ject to the Arabs, the Cbinefe keep it up at
fo high a rate* One of the chief Mer-
chants, whofe words cannot be called
in queftion, relates that he waited on an
Eunuch, whom the Emperor had fent to
Canfuy in order to purchafe fome things
he wanted from among the goods that are
carried thither from the Country of the
Arabs : And that upon his Breaft he per-
ceived a ihort Veft, which was under ano-
ther filk Veil, and which feemed to be even
between two other Veils of the fame kind}

E that



jpv



Jo ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

that the Eunuch obferving him to look
ftedfaftly upon his Breaft, faid, I fee you
keep your Eyes fixed upon my Stomach } what
may be the meaning of it? The Mer-
chant anfwered; lamfurprifed at the Beau~
ty of that little Vefi^ which appears under your
other Garments. The Eunuch laughed and
held out his Shirt Sleeve to him, County
fays he, how many Vejls I have above it.
He did fo, and counted five, one upon ano-
ther, and the Waftecoat or fliort Veil was
underneath. Thefe Garments are wove
with raw Silk which has never been wafh-
ed nor fulled • and what is worn by the
Princes or Governors is Hill more rich,
and more exquifitely wrought.
n&ntert The Chinefe furpafs all Nations in every
^ r t}fi s kind of Art, and particularly in Painting;
*# j, and, with their Hands, they perform fuch

perfect Works as others can but faintly
imitate. When an Artificer has finifhed a
fine Piece, he carries it to the Prince's Pa-
lace to demand the Reward, he thinks he
deferves for the beauty of his Performance;
and the Cuftom is for the Prince to order
him to leave his Work at the Palace Gate,
where it muft Hand a whole Year. If du-
ring that time no Perfon finds a Fault in
it, the Artificer is rewarded, and admitted
into the body of Artifts } but if the leaft
Fault he found, it is rejected, and the
Workman is fent away empty. It happen-
ed once, that one of their Painters drew
f an Ear of Corn, with a Bird perched on it,

upon a piece of Silk; and his Performance
1 wa$



Of IND I A and CHINA. 5 \

/Was fo exceeding fine, that all who be-
held it were ailoniihed thereat. This
Piece flood expofed to public View, till,
one Day, a crooked Fellow, palling by the
Palace, found Fault with the Picture, and
was immediately conducted to the Prince
or Governor of the City, who at the fame
time fent for the Painter. Then he asked
this crooked Fellow what Fault he had to
find with this piece of Paint; to which
he aniwered, Every body knows that a Bird
never fettles upon an Ear of Corn but it bends
under him ; and here this "Painter has reprefen-
ted his Ear bolt upright y though he has perched
a Bird upon it 7 and this is the Fault I have
to find. This was pronounced a very juffc
Obfervation, and the Prince bellowed no
Reward upon the Artift They pretend
by this, and other means, to ftirnulate
their Workmen to the Attainment of Per-
fection, by thus engaging them to be ex-
tremely nice and circumfpecl: in what they
undertake, and to apply their whole Mind
to what is to go out of their Hands.

There was formerly a Man of the Tribe tfheStcvi'
of Koreifi r whole Name was Ebn Wahab y of anKub
defcended of Hebar the Son of Al Afud, ™ ho lWent
and he dwelt at Bafa. This Man left '" c hlna '=
Bafra, when that City was facked, and
came to Sir of, where he faw a Ship rea-
dy to make foil for China. The mind
took him to go on board of this Ship, and
in her he went to China y where in the
Sequel he had the Curioiity to travel to
the Emperor's Court; and leaving Canfu
E 2, he



j* / ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

he reached Cumdan after a Journey of two
Months. He ftaid a long Time at the
Emperor's Court, and prefented feveral Pe-
titions, wherein he iignified that he was
of the Family of the Prophet of the A"
vabs. Having waited a considerable while,
the Emperor at laft ordered him to be
lodged in a Houfe, appointed for him, and
to be fupplied with every thing he mould
want. This done, the Emperor wrote to
the Governor of Canfu^ commanding him
carefully to inform himfelf, among the
Merchants, concerning the Relation this
Man pretended to bear to the Prophet
of the Arabs : And the Governor, by his
Anfwers, confirming the Truth of what
he had laid, touching his Extraction, the
Emperor gave him Audience , and made
him rich Prefents, wherewith he retur-
ned to Irak.
His Dif- This Man, when we faw him, was well
courfewith advanced in Years, but had his Senfes
theEmpe- perfectly about him; and told us that,

7tn° n thT when he ha . d his Audience > the Em P e ~
Atabs.* ror asked him many Queftions about the
Arabs, and particularly how they had de-
ftroyed the Kingdom of the Per/tans. Ebn
Wahab made anlwer, that they did it by
the AfMance of God, and becaufe the
Per/tans were involved in Idolatry, ado-
ring the Stars, the Sun, and Moon, in-
stead of worfhipping the true God. To
this the Emperor replied, that the Arabs
had conquered the moft illuftrious King-
dom of the whole Earth, the beft culti-
vated,



Of IND I A and CHINA. 5 j

Tated, the moft opulent, the moll preg-
nant of fine Wits, and of the moft ex-
teniive Fame. Then faid he, What Ac-
count do the People in your Parts make of
the other Kings of the Earth? To which the
Arab replied, that he knew them not.
Then faid the Emperor to the Interpreter,
Tell him we efleem but five Kings ; that he
whofe Kingdom is of widefi Extent is the
fame who is Mafter of Irak, for he is in the
midfi of the World, and furrounded by the
Territories of other Kings', and we find he
is called the King of Kings. After him we
reckon our Emperor, here prefent, and we
find that he is ftiled the King of Man-
kind*, for no other King is inverted with
a more abfolute Power and Authority over
his Subjects, nor is there a People, under
the Sun, more dutiful and fubmiffive to
their Sovereign than the People of this
Country • we therefore, in this refpeft, are
the Kings of Men. After us is the King
of the Turks, whofe Kingdom borders up-
on us, and him we call the King of Li-
ons. Next, the King of Elephants, the
fame is the King of the Indies, whom we
alfo call the King of lYifdom; becaufe he
derives his Origin from the Indians. And,
laft of all, the King of Greece, whom we
ftile the King of Men*, for, upon the face
of the whole Earth, there are no Men of
better Manners, nor of comlier Prefence
than his Subjects: Thefe, added he, are
the moft illuftrious of all Kings, nor are
the others to compare with them.

E 1 Thea



S4 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

the Empe* Then, faid Ebn Wahab, he ordered the
Zfo % s^$n~ * nter P reter to as ^ me > V I knew my Ma-
ierningthe fi er an( ^ W ^ or ^y meaning the Prophet, and
Arabs and tf I had fcen him? I made anfwer, Horn
ethers. fhould I have fcen him, who is with God? He
replyed, That is net what I wean, I ask
you what Sort of a Man he was in his Perfon*
I replyed, that he was very handfom.
Then he called for a great Box, and, o-
pening it, he took out another contained
therein, which he fet before him, and faid
to the Interpreter, Shew him his Mafter
and. his Lord, and I faw in the Box the
Images of the Prophets, whereat I mov-
ed my Lips, praying to my felf in honour
of their Memory. The Emperor did not
imagin I iTiould know them again, and
faid to the Interpreter, Ask him why he
moves his Lips ? I anfwered, I was pray-
ing in Memory of the Prophets. How do
you know them? Said the Emperor. I re-
plied, that I knew them by the Repre-
sentation of their Hiftories; there, faid I,
Noah. Is Noah in the Ark y who was faved with
thofe that were with him, when Gcd fent
down the Waters of the Flood \ and he af*
terwards peopled the whole Earth with thofe
that were with him at the fame time ; and I
made the ufual Salute to Noah ancl hi3
Company, Then the Emperor laughed and
faid; Thou art not miftaken in the Name of
Noah, and thou haft named him right; but
*fht Flocl as for the univerfal Deluge it is what we
know not. It is true, indeed, that a Flood co»
vend apart of the Earthy hut it reached not

car



Of IND I A and CHINA. % $

our Country j nor even the Indies. I made my
Anfwer to this, and endeavoured to remove
his Objections the befl: I could, and then
faid again to him, There is Mofes with his Mofes.
Rod and the Children <f Ifrael. He agreed
with me as to the finall Extent of their
Country, and the Manner how the anci-
ent Inhabitants, there, were destroyed by
Mofes. I then laid to him, He there, is Je- Jefus
fus upon an Afs, and here are his Apoftles Chrift.
with him. He, faid the Emperor, was not
long upon Earth, feeing that all he did was
tranfa:fed within the Space of fomewhat bet-
ter than thirty Months. After this Ebn Wa-
hab faw the Hiftories of the other Pro-
phets, reprefented in the fame Manner we
have briefly declared, and he fancied that
what was written in great Characters un-
der each Figure, might be the Names of
the Prophets, the Countries whence they
were, and the Objects of their Prophe-
cies.

Then, faid the fame Ebn Wahab, I faw
the Image of Mohammed riding upon a Car Moham*
mel, and his Companions about him on their med,
Camels, with Shooes of the Arabefque Mode
on their Feet, and leathern Girdles about their
Loins. At this I wept, and the Emperor com-
manded the Interpreter to ask me why I wept?
I anjwered, There is our Prophet, and our
Lord, who is alfo my Coufin. He faid I was
right, and added that he and his People
had fubdued the fineffc of all Kingdoms;
but that he had not the Satisfaction of en-
joying his Conquefts, tho' his Succeflbrs had*
E 4 I after*



5 tf ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

Indian I afterwards faw a great Number of o~

Prophets. trier Prophets, fome of them ftretching
forth their right Hand, and with their three
Fingers bent down between the Thumb and
the Fore-finger, juft like thofe who lift
up the Hand to make oath. Others were
Handing and pointed to the Heavens with
their Finger, and others were in different
Poftures. The Interpreter took them to
be the Figures of their Prophets and thofe
of the Indians.
gmftions. The Emperor then asked me many Que-
concerning ftions concerning the Kalifsj their Mode
the Kalifs. of Drefs, and concerning many Precepts
and Injunctions of the Mohammedan Re-
ligion, and I anfwered him the beft I
could.
ffh e j geo f After this he faid. What is your Opinion
ths World, concerning the Jge of the World? I made
anfwer, that Opinions varied upon that head ;
that fome were for fix Thoufand Years;
that others would not allow fo many j
and that others reckoned it at a ft ill high-
er Rate ; but that it was, at leaft, as old
as I had faid. At this, the Emperor and
his firft Minifter, who was near him, broke
out into a Laughter, and the Emperor made
many Objections to what I had advanced.
At laffc laid he, What does your Prophet
teach upon this SubjecJ ? Docs he fay as you
do ? My Memory failed me, and I allured
him that he did. Hereupon I obferved
J had dilpleafed him, and Jiis Difpleafure
appeared upon his Countenance.

Then



Of IND I A and CHINA. %j

Then he ordered the Interpreter to
fpeak to me in the following ftrain : 'Take
heed of what you fay y for Kings never /peak
but to be informed of the Truth of zvhat they
would know. What did you mean by giving
the Emperor to underhand that there are y a-
mongyouj variousXtpinions concerning the Age
of the World ? If fo it be y you are alfo divi-
ded upon the Things your Prophet has faid y
at the fame time that no Diverfity of Opi-
nion is to be admitted on what the Pro-
phets have pronounced, all which mufi be
revered as fare and infallible. Take heed y then y
how you talk after fuch a Kate any more.
To this he fubjoined many other Things
which, through Length of Time, have es-
caped my Remembrance.

At laft he asked me, How is it that thou «&?»*/ °f
haft forfaken thy King y to whom thou art ff t £°™ e . r :
nearer y not only by the Place of thy abode y t he°EmpL
but by Blood alfo y than thou art to us? In ror.
return to which, I informed him of the
Revolutions which had hapned at Baffora 7
and how I came to Siraf where I faw a
Ship ready to fpread Sail for China ; and
that having heard of the Glory of his
Empire, and its great abundance of Ne~
ceflaries; Curiofity excited me to a De-
fire of coming into his Country, that I
might behold it with mine own Eyes.
That I fhould foon depart for my Country,
and the Kingdom of my Couiin, and that
I would make a faithful report of what I
had feen of the Magnificence of the Empire
of China, and of the vaft extent of the Pro-
vinces



$S ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

vinces it contains ; and that I would make
a grateful Declaration of the kind Ufage,
and the Benefactions I there met with;
which feemed to pleafe him very much.
He then made me rich Prefents, and or-
dered that I mould be conducted to Corfu
upon Poll Horfes. He wrote alfo to the
Governor of the City, commanding him to
treat me with much Honour, and to furniih
me with the like Recommendations to the
other Governors of the Provinces, that they
might entertain me till the Time of my
Departure. Thus was I treated every where,
being plentifully fupplied with all the Ne-
ceflaries of Life, and honoured with many
Prefents till the Time of my Departure
from China.
Cumdan. We as ked Ebn Wahab many QuefHons
concerning the City of Cumdauj where the
Emperor keeps his Court. He told us that
the Ci ty was very large, and extremely po-
pulous} that it was divided into two great
Parts, by a very long and very broad
Street ; that the Emperor, his chief Mini-
fters, the Soldiery, the fupreme Judge, the
Eunuchs, and all belonging to the impe-
rial Houfehold, lived in that Part of the
City which is on the right hand Earl ward;
that the People had no manner of Commu-
nication with them; and that they were
not admitted into Places watered by Ca-
nals, from different Rivers, whofe Bor-
ders were planted with Trees, and ador-
ned with magnificent Dwellings. The
Fart on the left hand Weflward, is in-
habited



Of INDIA and CHINA 53

Jiabited by the People and the Merchants,
where are alfo great Squares, and Mar-
kets for all the Necefiaries of Life. At
break of Day you fee the Officers of the
King's Houfehold, with the inferior Ser-
vants, the Purveyors, and the Domeilics
of the Grandees of the Court, who come,
fome on foot others on Horieback, into
that Diviiion of the City, where are the
public Markets, and the Habitations of
the Merchants; where they buy^ whate-
ver they want, and return not again to the
fame Place till the next Morning.

This fame Traveller related that this Ci-
ty has a verypleafant Situation, in themidft
of a moft fertile Soil, watered by feveral
Rivers. Scarce any Thing is wanted, ex-
cept Palm-Trees, which grow not there.

In our Times, Difcovery has been made €> ommu nU
of a Thing quite new, and unknown to ^unfa
thofe who lived before us. iNo Body ima- o cean and
gined that the Sea which extends from the the Medi-
Indies to China, had any Communication twraman,
with the Sea of Syria, nor could any one
take it into his Head. Now behold "what
has come to pafs in our Days, according to
what we have heard. In the Sea of Rum,
or the Mediterranean, they found the
Wreck of an Arabian Ship which had heert
Shattered by Temper! ; for all her Men pe-
riling, and me being darned to Pieces by
the Wave, the Remains of her were driven
by Wind and Weather into the Sea o£Cho~
%ats, and from thence to the Canal of
the Mediterranean Sea, and at laft were

throws



[E]



tSo ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

thrown on the Shore of Syria. IPhis evin-
ces that the Sea fur rounds all the Country of
China, and of Cila, [or Si la, ] the uttermoit
Parts of Turkeftah, and die Country of the
Chozars, and that then it .enters at the
Strait till it wafhes the Shore of Syria. The
Proof of this is deduced from the Built of
the Ship we are fpeaking of; for none but
the Ships of Siraf are fo put together
that the Planks are not nailed [or bolted],
but joined together in an extraordinary
Manner as if they were fewn; whereas
the Planking of all the Ships of the Medi-
terranean Sea, and of the Coaft of Syria, is
nailed and not joined together the other way.
We have alfo heard fay, that Amber-
greefe has been found in the Sea of Syria y
which feems hard to believe, and was un-
known to former Times. If this be as is
faid, it is impoffible that Amber fhould have
been thrown up in the Sea of Syria, but by
the Sea of Aden and of Kolzum, which has
Communication with the Seas where Amber
is found. And, becaufe God hath put a Se-
peration between thefe Seas, if tnis Story
be true, it mail neceflarily have been that
this Amber was driven firft from the Indian
Sea into the others, and that, from the one ta
the other, it at laft came into the Sea oi Syria.

Of the Province of Zapage.

Province of We will now begin to fpeak of the Pro-

Zapage. vince of Zapage, which is oppoliteto Chi-

na 7 and a Month's Sail diftant therefromf



Of tND I A and CHWA 6t

by Sea^r lefs, if the Wind be fair. The
King Sithis Country is called Mehrage,
and they fay it is nine hundred Leagues
in Circumference, and that this King is
Mailer of many Iflands which ly round
about; thus this Kingdom is above a thou-
fand Leagues in Extent. Among thefe
Iflands there is one called Serbeza, which
is faid to be four hundred Leagues in
Circuit, and that alfo of Rahmi which
is eight hundred Leagues in Compafs, and
produces Red-wood, Camphire, and ma-
ny other Commodities. In this fame King-
dom is the Ifland of Cak, which is in the
Mid-pafiage between China and the Coun-*
try of the Arabs. This Ifland, they fay,
is fourfcore Leagues in Circumference* and
hither they bring ail Sorts of Merchan-
dife, Wood Aloes of feveral Sorts, Cam-
phi re, Sandal-wood, Ivory, the Lead call-
ed Cabahi, Ebony, Red-wood, every Kind
of Spice, and many other Things too te-
dious to enumerate. At prefent the Com-
merce is moll ufually carried on from O-
man to this Ifland, and from this Ifland to
Oman. The Mehrage is fovereign over all
thefe Iflands, and that which he makes his
Abode, is extremely fertile, and fo very
populous that the Towns almoft croud one
upon the other. A Perfon of great Pro-
bity relates, that when the Cocks here
crow at their accuftomed Hours, jufl as
with us, at roort upon Trees, they an-
fwer each other a hundred Leagues around
and morej becaufe of the Proximity of the

Villages



*i ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

Villages which almoft touch e^i other;
and he adds that no Part of i|Ps unin-
habited, nor any of its Land uncultiva-
ted. Thofe who travel in this Country
may Hop at every Step, and find Shelter
from the Beams of the Noon-day Sun,
and if they are tired they may repofe
themfelves every Day at Noon, go which
way they will.
Partku- Now what follows, which we have from
lan of the the Teftimony of feveral Peribns, is the
Country of rnoft remarkable Particular we have heard
Zapage. concerning the Ifland of Zapage. There
was formerly a King, who was called
Mehrage. His Palace is ftill to be feen on
a River as broad as the Tygris at Bagdad
or at BaJJora. The Sea intercepts the
Courfe of its Waters, and fends them
back again with the Tide of Flood; and
during the Tide of Ebb, it ftreams out
frefh Water a good way into the Sea.
This River is let into a lmall Pond clofe
to the King's Palace, and every Mor-
ning the Officer who has Charge of his
Houfehold, brings an Ingot of Gold
wrought in a particular Manner, which is
unknown, and throws it into the Pond
in the Prefence of the King. The Tide
riflng with the Flood covers it with ma-
ny others, its fellows, and quite con-
ceals it from Sight ; but low Water
difcovers them, and they appear plain
by the Beams of the Sun. The King
comes to view them at the fame Time
that he repairs to m Apartment of State

which



Of IND 1A and CHINA f>%

which lggks upon this Pond. This Cuft-
om is l^y fcrupuioufly obferved, and
thus they every Day throw an Ingot
of Gold into this Pond, as long as the
King lives, nor touch the fame upon a-
ny Account. When the King dyes, his
Succeiior caufes them all to be taken out,
and not one of them is ever milled ;
They count them, and melt them down,
and this done, the Sums provening from
this great Quantity of Gold, are diftri-
buced to thofe of the Royal Houfehold,
to the Men, to the Women, and to the
Children, to the fuperior and to the in-
ferior Officers, esjch receiving a Part, in
Proportion to the Rank he bears, and ac-
cording to the Order eftablifhed, among
them, for this Diftribution * and the Sur-
plus is given away to the Poor, and to
the infirm. Then they reckon up the
Number of Ingots, and what they weigh,
and fay * Such a one reigned fo many Years,
for he left fo many Ingots of Gold in
the Pond of the Kings, and they were
diflributed, after his Death, to the People
of his Kingdom. K is a Glory, with them,
to have reigned a long while, and to have
thus multiplied the Number of thefe In-
gots, to be given away at their Death.

Their ancient Hiftory relates, that one J Story of
of the Kings of Kumar would have waged the King of
War with him of this Ifland. This Coun- ^omar
try of Komar is the fame from whence they Mchrage;
bring the Wood Aloes called Hud al Ko-
inari 3 nor is there a Kingdom proportion-
ably



tf 4 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

ably more populous than that of Komdr.
The Inhabitants are all very cdtfrageous,
and Debauchery with Women, and the
Ufe of Wine are forbidden among them,
nor have they any Wine in their Country,
This Kingdom was at Peace with that of Ztf-
page, where reigned the Mebrage. They are
divided from each other by a PaiTage often,
or twenty Days fail, with a very eafy Gale.
They fay that in former Days there was a
young and turbulent King in this Ifland of
Kcmar. This King was one Day in his Pa-
lace, which looks upon a River much like
the Euphrates at the Entrance, and but a
Day Diftant from the Sea. His prime Mini-
ster was with him, and, in the Difcourfe they
had together, mention was made of the
Kingdom of the Mebrage and its Glory, how-
well it was peopled and cultivated, and the
Croud of Iflands which owed Obedience
thereunto. Then faid the King of Komar
to his Minifter, J am taken with a Defire,
which I moft earnefily could wijh to fee accom-
pliftjed. The Minifter, who was a wife and
a prudent Man, and no Stranger to the Le-
vity of his Mafter, addreffed him; My Lord,
what is your Deftre ? I could wifh, replied the
King, to fee before me, in a Dijb, the Head of
the Mehrage King ofZapage. The Minifter,
w ell aware it was Jealoufy that infpired him
with this Irregularity, made Aniwer, My
Lord) I could wijbyou would not difiurb your
Mind with fuch noughts, Jince nothing ever
hapned between tbcfe People and us, tofumifb
ys with Matter of Complaint ^ feeing they never \

offended



Of IND I A and CHINA. 6$

iffiended us either by Word or deed, and never
did us the leafi Injury. Moreover, they are in
an I /I and divided 'from us, and have no Manner
of Gmmunhdtion with our Country ; nor do
they betray any Thoughts of making a Conqacft
of this Kingdom. No one therefore ought to
hearken to filch Dfcourfe, or make one Word of
Anfwer upon this Head. The King was en-
raged at this Return,, and replyed not there-
to : -at vv ithout any Regard had to the fage
Advice of his firil Minifter, he opened the
fame Thing to the principal Officers of State,
and to allthofe of his Court that were pre-
fent.

This Matter being rumored about by fe- <f heEmi ,„
veral Perfons, became of public Notoriety, p^fe fthe
and at length reached the Ears of the Meb- Mehrage
rage. He, who then reigned, was a wife and *g?inft the
an a£tive Prince, of coniummate Experience, ^'^ ^
and as yet in the Flower of his Days. He
called for his firrt Minifter, and having ac-
quainted him with what he had heard,
faid to him ; It is by no means proper to declare
the Behavior of this giddy Prince, or to be~
tray how little we efieem him, becaufe of his
Youth and little Experience. Nor is it proper
to divulge what he has faid againfi me ;fbrfuch
Speeches, cannot but be prejudicial to the Dig-
nity of a King, make him contemptible, and take
away from his Reputation. Having thus in-
joined his Minifter to conceal what had paf-
fed between them, he, at the fame Time,
commanded him to prepare a thoufand Ships
of middling Burthen, and to equip them
with all Things necelfary, Arms and Am-
F munition.



66 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

munition, and to man them with as many
of his belt Forces as they could carry ^ then
he gave out That he would take a Voyage a-
mong the neighbouring Iflands, under his
Dominion, to divert himfelf. He wrote to
all the tributary Princes of thefe fame I-
ilands to acquaint them That he defigned
them a Vifit, to recreate himfelf in their I-
flands: And this being the public Talk, each
of thefe Kings prepared for the Reception
of the Mehrage. Mean while, when every
Thing was in readinefs as he had ordered y
he went on board his Ships, and with a
powerful Army failed over to the Kingdom
oiKomar. The King and thofe belonging
to his Court were effeminate Creatures, who,
all the Day long, did nothing but confult
their Faces and rub their Teeth, eternally
with Mirrors and Tooth-picks in their
Hands, or carried after them by Slaves. So*
the King of Komar difcovered nothing of
the Mehrage s purpofe, till he appeared in
the Mouth of the River, which was. crowned
by the Palace of the King of Komar, and
till he had landed his Troops, who imme-
diately inverted him with great vigor, and
took him. The King was taken in his Pa-
lace, and all that belonged to him fled
without fighting.

Then the Mehrage inftantly caufed Pro-
clamation to be made,That he granted entire
Security of Life and Effects to all the Inha-
bitants of the Country ; and feating him-
felf on the Throne of the King of Komar y
now a Captive, he ordered him to be

brought



Of IND I A and CHINA 6j

brought into his Prefence, together with his
firft Minifter. Then faid he to the King of

Komar : Who was it filled your Head with a
Proje& unequal to your Strength, and abfo-
htely impojjtble for you to compafs? What
would you have done if you had gained your
End? This Prince, who had nothing to
fay for himfelf, made no Anfwer. Then
continued the Mehrage, If you had enjoyed
the Pkafureyou wiped, of feeing my Head in ct
Dip before you, you would have [piled- my
Kingdom, and made your felf Mafter thereof
lifter you had committed all Sorts of Violence : I
will not fo behave with regard to you ; .but yet I
will execute upon you, what you wiped concern
ning me, and then will I return into my King"
dom, without touching any Thing in your Do-
minions, and wit bout carrying away ought fe-
ver of great Value or finally dejirous only that
you may be recorded an Example for the Inft ruc-
tion ofthofe who pall come after you\ that no
one may exceed the Bounds of his Power, that
each may be contented with his own, and that
thofeyou haw difturbedmaybe reft or ed to perfect
Security. This faid, he ordered them to
fmite off his Head; and then turning to the
Minifter, he faid; Ton have done all a
good Minifter could do, I know you offe-
red good Advice to your Mafter, and that he
hearkened not unto you. Cmfult who may beft
fucceed this Fool, for the good of the Kingdom^
and fet him upon the Throne : Then {trait the
Mehrage departed for his own Territories,
and neither did he, or any of his, lay Hands
on the leaft Thing in the Kingdom of Komar.
F 2 When



£t ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

When he arrived in his own Kingdom,
he fat down upon his Throne, and, be-
ing in the Place which looked upon the
Pond before-mentioned, he caufed the Head
of the King of Komar to be put into a Bafon,
and fet before him} and calling in the
Chiefs of his Kingdom, he acquainted them
with all he had done, and with the Rea-
fons which had induced him to the Expedi-
tion we have related ; And they approved the
Deed with Acclamations and Prayers for his
Profperity. Then he ordered the Head of
the King of Komar ', to be wafhed, and em-
balmed, and put into a Coffer; and fent
it back to the King Komar who had been
appointed in the Room of him he had put
to Death, at the fame time writing a Letter
to this new Prince, couched in the follow-
ing Terms ; What inclined us to do what we
did to your Predeceffor, and your Lord, was his
known Malevolence towards us, and that we
might fet an Example to his Equals. We have
leenfo happy as to treat him as he zvould have
treated us : But we think it convenient to fend
his Head back to you , having had no Dcftgnof
detaining it y or of arrogating any Glory to our
[elves from the Advantage we obtained over him.
The News of this A6tion being com eyed
to the Kings of the Indies and of China, it
added to the Refpe& they before had for
the Mehrage: And from that Time it has
been a Cuftom with the Kings of Komar y
every Morning they rife, to turn to-
wards the Country of Zapagc, and to pro-
ftrate themfelves on the Ground, and to

make.



Of IND I A and CHINA. i 9

make the molt profonnd Inclinations, in
Honour of the Mehrage.

AH the Kings of the Indies and of China f Y "1
believe the Metempfychoils or Tranfmigra- qfo Indi-
tion of Souls, and make it an Article of ans ^ld
their Religion. A Perfon of Credit relates, ihe Me ~
That one of thefe Princes being newly reco- ^f^
vered of the Small-Pox, and beholding him-
felf in a Glafs, was deeply troubled to fee
how fadly his Face was disfigured- and that
turning himfelf towards one of the Sons of
his Brother, he faid to him, Sure it never hap-
ned to any Man as to me, to remain in his
Body after fuch a Change ; but this Body is
only a Veflel puffed out with Wind, and
when the Soul leaves it, ihe migrates in-
to another • go get upon the Throne, for
I am about to feparate my Body from my
Soul, until I return in another Body. At
the fame Time he called for a fharp and
keen Cangiar^ with which he commanded
his Nephew to cut off his Head, which the
other did, and he was afterwards burnt.

The Author begins again tojpeak of China and
feveral Affairs relating to that Country.

The Chinefe were wonderfully regular ^the Story

in their Government, before the laft Revo- °f an A ; a ~

lutions entirely deftroved and reduced i* Mer ~
in «'...- r hr ., chant, a

it to the State it is in at preient. There

was a certain Merchant, a Native of Cho-

rajfan^ who coming into Irak, did there

deal to a confiderabie Amount, and having

bought up a Quantity of Goods went to

F 3 CkmO)



70 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

China. This Man was extremely Selfifh
arid of invincible Avarice. It hapned that
the Emperor of China had fent one of his
Eunuchs to Canfit) the City for all the Ara-
bian Traders, there to purchafe what he
wanted, and was to be had on board of the
Ships that: were arrived. This Eunuch was
one of thofe who fhared the moft coniide-
rably in his Matter's good Opinion and Con-
fidence, and was Keeper of his Treafure
and of all his moll precious Things. A Dis-
pute arofe between this Eunuch and this
Merchant, about fome Pieces of Ivory and
other Goods, and it ran fo high, that the
Merchant refufed to deal with him : But
this Affair making a great Noife, the Eu-
nuch pufhed it fo far, that he forced from
him the Choice of his Goods, regardlefs of
whatever the other could fay to him.
tfhelitth The Merchant withdrawing himfelf^
jBtjl. went privately to Cumdan, where the Em-

peror reiides, and which is two Months di-
ilant from Canfu>\ and being arrived he
went to the String of the Bell mentioned in
the firlfc Book. The Cuftom was, That who-
ever pulled it lliould be fent a sen Days Di-
ftance from thence, as a Kind of Banifh-
ment \ it, was ordained alfo, that he ihould
be committed to Prifon, there to remain
for two whole Months, which expired, the
King or Governor of the Province releafed
him, and faid, Ton have involved your felf in
an Affair which may turn to your utter Ruin y
and to the Lofs of your Life, if you /peak, not
the real Truth * forafmuch as the Emperor hath

appointed



Of IND I A and CHINA. 71

appointed Minifiers and Governors to dijfribute
Jufiice to you and to your Fellows, nor is there
any om eft hem that would not right you. If, when
you appear before the Emperor, your Wrongs are
not fuch as may intitle you to have recourfe to
him, it will, mojr certainly, cofl you your Life •
to the end that every Man who would prejume
to do as you have done, may be deterred from
the fame. Withdraw therefore immediately ', and
le gone about your Bujinefs. Now if the Party
endeavoured to fly he was, chaftifed with fifty
Strokes of the Bamboo, and was then fent back
to theCountry whence he came ; but if he per-
iifted in his Demand of Redrefs, he w^as ad-
mitted to an Audience of the Emperor.

The Ghoraffanian ftrenuoufly perflfted in
his Demand of Juftice, and of leave to be
admitted to the Emperor, which was at
length granted him. The Interpreter ask-
ing him his Buiinefs, he related what had
befallen him with the Emperor's Officer,
and how he had forced from him a Part
of his Effects. This Thing was foon di-
vulged, and noifed about at Canfu. In the
mean time the Emperor commanded the
Merchant to be cart into Prifon, and that
Care fhould be there taken he wanted for
neither Victuals nor Drink, At the fame
time he ordered his prime Minifter to write
to the Governor of Canfu, charging him to
inform himfelf concerning the Complaints
of this Merchant, and to examine into the
Grounds thereof At the fame Time alio
three principal Officers received the fame.
Qrder, Thefe Officers are called of thz
F 4 Rtght t



7 2 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

Rights of the Left, and of the Midft, and, ac-»
cording to their Rank, have the Com-*
mand of the Emperor's Forces, under the,
prime Minfter; he trufls them with the
Guard of his Perfon, and when he takes the
Field for fome military Enterprife, or on
any other Account, each of them, according
to his RanK., marches near him, Thefe
three Officers wrote, each apart, what they
had, upon the ftricleft Enquiry, difcovered
of the Matter ; and allured the Emperor that
the Merchant's Complaint was juft and
true. Thefe firft Informations w r ere follow-
ed and confirmed by many more, fent to
the Emperor from divers Parts, and the
Eunuch was cited to appear. No fooner
did he arrive than the Emperor feized on
$11 his Eitects, and deprived him of his.
Office as Treasurer, and then faid to him ;
J)eath ought to be thy Doom for giving this
Man, who is come from Choraffan, o# /#<? Fron-
tiers of my Kingdom, catife of Complaint againft
me. He hath been in the Country of the Arabs,
whence he came into the Kingdoms of the Indies,
and at laft to my City, feeking his Advantage
by Trade ♦ and thou wouldft have had him re-
turn, crofs thefe Kingdoms, and have faid to
all the People in his way, I have been abufedin
China, where they have ft rip me of my Sub-
fiance. I grant thee thy Life, in Conftdera-
tion of thy former Services in the Rank
thou holdeft in my Houfe ', but I will conferr on
thee a Command among the Dead, forafmuch
as thou haft not been able to acquit thy fclf of
thy Duty in that thou heldeft^over the Livings

And



Of IND I A and CHINA. 7 j

ftrait he ordered him to be fent to the
Tombs of the Kings, to guard them, and
there to remain for Life.

One of the Things moil worthy to be ad-? &he Orde*
mired in China, before the late* Commoti- *£%£'**
ons, was the good Order they obferved in JJ fe £.
the Adminiitration of Juftice, and the Ma- h ma fa
jeity of their Tribunals. To fill them they
made Choice of fuch Men as were perfectly
verfed in their Laws, and fuch, confequent-
ly, as were never at a Stand when they were
to pafs a Judgment- Men of Sincerity, zea-
lous in the Caufe of Juftice upon every Oc-
caiion, nor to be byalled by what the Great
could oiler to embroil a Difpute^fo that Jut-'
tice was always adminifhred to him who
had Right on his fide. In a Word, they
made Choice of upright Men, of Men who
equally abftained from the ilender Sub-
ffcance of the Poor, and from the Prefents
of thofe who would have bribed them there-*
with.

When they defigned to promote any tfhePro-
Man to the Office of principal Judge, they nwtkn of a
previoufly fent him to all the chief Cities fa nmQ
of the Empire, in each of which he ftaid %* ge '
a Month or two. In the mean time it was,
his bufinefs, moil: minutely, to inquire into
the Afiairs of the People, into all that
pafied in the City, and into the various
Cuftoms. He informed himfelf of all fuch
as deferved to be believed upon their
Word of Teftimony, and this Knowledge
was of ufe to him in the Sequel, as Occaii-«
qn required. After he had gone through

all



74 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

all the Cities, in the Manner abovefaid, and
made a Stay of fome Time in the moil: con-
siderable of them, he repaired to the impe-*
rial Court, where he was inverted with the
Dignity of fupreme Judge. To him then
the Emperor referred the Nomination of
all the other Judges, and by him were they
appointed, after he had acquainted the Em-
peror with thofe, who, in his whole Domi-
nions, were moit worthy of exerciiing Ju~
rifdi£tion, each in his own City, or in others ;
for he knew thofe who were commendable
for their Underftanding, and fo no one was
raifed , who poneffed not the fame En-
dowments, or who bore not Tertimony ac-*
cording to Truth, when he was interrogated.
The Emperor allows none of his Judges
to write to him upon any Affair, when he
is informed of the contrary, and even de-
prives them of their Office. The fupreme
Judge cauies Proclamation, every Day, to he
made before his Gate, and in his Name they
cry out, If any Man hath been wronged by
the King or Governor, who is not to be
feen of the People, or by any one of his
Relations or Officers, or by any one of the
Body of the People ; I will do him ample
Juftice, as foon as the Offender is put into
my Hands, and that I have Charge of him :
This Proclamation is thrice repeated. It
is an ancient Cuftom with them,never to de-
j grade a King or Governor of a City, but by

(virtue of Letters hTued out by the Council
or Divan of Kings: and this is commonly
executed for fome flagrant Malverfation, or
\ ' when



Of IND I A and CHINA 7 J

when Judgment is fufpended or delayed.
But when the Governor avoids theie two
Things, it is feldom he is difturbed with
Letters of Revocation, which are never
drawn up but on a lawful Account. The
Polls of Judicature are conferred on none
but Perfons of Probity and Lovers of Ju-
itice ; and fo is good order maintained in
the Kingdom.

Of Choraflan.

This Province is almoft conterminous
with China. From China to xhzSogd it is
about a two Months Journey, through im-
practicable Defarts, and through a Country
all over covered with Sand, where no Water
is to be found. It is not watered by any
Rivers, nor is there any Habitation in the
Purlieus of this Province; and for this
Reafon it is that the Choraffamans can make
no Irruptions into China. That Part of this
Empire which lies farther!: w r eftward, is the
Province of Madu, which borders upon £?- MaduJ
fret, fp that on this fide the two Nations are
at perpetual War with each other. Among
thofe of our time who have travelled into
China, we were acquainted with one who
told us he had feen a Man that had a VerTel
with Musk in it, on his Back, and had travel-
led on Foot fromS aware and to Canfu, the Port
for all Merchants from Siraf. He had, by
Land, traverfed all theCities of Chindpnt af-
ter another, which he might eafily do, be- „ ^ *
caufe the Provinces of ChimmdTifet) where Tibet

the



k.?






7* ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

the Musk-creature is met with, are contiguous
and not divided by any Separation. The Chi-
nefe carry off as many of thefe Creatures as
they can lay Hands on, and thofe of 'Tibet , on
their Part, do the fame. But the Musk of
Tibet is far preferable to that of China for
two Reafons: Firjt in Tibet this Creature
feeds on aromatic Paftures, while in China
he has nothing to fubfirt. him but what is
common. Secondly the Tibetians preferve
their Bladders or Cods of Musk ia the pure
natural State, while the Chinefe adulterate
all that come into their Hands. They dip
them alfo into the Sea, or elfe expofe them
to the Dew, and having kept them fome
time, they take off the outward Membrane,
and then clofe them up ; and this Musk
paries in the Country of the Arabs for Musk
of Tibet) becaufe oi its Excellence.

The moft exquifite of all die Sorts of
Musk, is what the Roe-Bucks, that yield
it, leave behind them when they rub them-
felves againlt the Rocks in the Mountains •
for the Humor, whence it is generated,
falling down towards the Navel of the
Creature, it there gathers into a Quantity
of turbid Blood, jurl after the Manner of
Biles, and fuch like Tumors. When this
Swelling is ripe, the Creature, who is fen-
fible of a painful Itching, feeks out for
Stones and rubs himfelf againft the fame,
till he opens his Sore, and the Contents run
out. Now as foon as this Matter falls from
tbeCreature, it coagulates, the Wound clofes,

and



Of IND I A and CHINA, ft

and the fame Kind of Humor gathers to a
Head again as before.

In Tibet, there are Men who go in quert
of this Musk, and are very ready at know-
ing it: and having found it, they carefully
collect it, and put it up in Bladders ; and
k is carried to their Kings. This Musk
is more, exquiiite when it has, as we may
fay, ripened in the Bladder of the Crea-
ture which bears it : It furpafles all others
in goodnefs, juft as Fruit is better when it
is gathered ripe from the Tree, than when
it is pulled green.

There is ftill another way of getting Anoihet
Musk. They infnare the Creature in Toils,. Sort of
and fhoot him with Arrows: But it often Mus1 ^
happens that the Hunters cut the Tumors
of the Creature before the Musk is elabo-
rated } and in this Cafe it has, at firfc, an ill
Scent that prevails till the Matter is thick-
ened, which fometimes does not happen in a
great while, but as icon as it coagulates it
turns to Musk.

The Musk-Creature is like our Roe- MeMtuk.
Buck, his Skin and Colour the fame, with Creatfire '
flender Legs, a fplit Horn, ftrait, but fome-
what bending withal. On each fide, he has
two fmall white Teeth, which are ftrait, and
rife above his Muzzle, each half a Finger,
or fomewhat lefs, in length, and in turn
not unlike the Teeth of the Elephant ; and
this is the diftinguiihing Mark between thefe The Em*
Creatures and other Roe-Bucks. prcr of

The Emperors of China write to the ^ hlnaV
Kings or Governors of Cities, to. the Eu- JL^hy^

nuchs pijiHerfis



Several

Chinefe

Qtjtoms.



78 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

nuchs or Lieutenants, and their Letters ar£
conveyed by Poft-Horfes with a cut Tail,
difpofed almoit like the Pofts among the
Arabs, in the Order every Body knows.
/ Befides what we have here related con-
cerning the Chinefe Cuftoms, it is ufual for
the Princes, and even the People, to make
Water ftanding. Perfons of Dignity, as the
Kings and the principal Officers, have gil-
ded Canes, a Cubit long, which are bored
through ; and thefe they ufe when they
; make Water, Handing upright all the time,
and the Tube carries the Water a good Di-
ffcance from them. They are of Opinion that
Pains in the Kidneys, the Strangury and-
Stone, are cauled by making Water in a lit-
ting Pofhire ; and that the Reins cannot free
themfelves of thofe Humors but by ftanding
to evacuate, and that thus this Porlure con-
tributes to the Prefervation of Health*

They fuller their Hair to grow, for the
Men will not round the Head of a Child,
when he comes into the World, as do the
Arabs : For they fay it caufes a conlidera-
ble Alteration in the Brain, and that com-
mon Senfe is notably impaired thereby*
They fufter the Head then to be all cove-
red with Hair, which they carefully comb.
*n<ewmr- ^ s ^ or t ^ le ^ r Marriages, they obferve the
tiagcs. Degrees of Confanguinity after this Manner.
They are divided, among themfelves, into
Families and Tribes, like the Arabs, and
fome other Nations ; and they know each
other by the Difference of their Defcents.
No one marries in his own Tribe, jurt as-

the



Of INDIA and CHINA. 72

the Children of tfhummhn among the Arabs,
take not to Wife a Daughter of the Race
pf Thummini, and a Man of one Family ef-
poufes not a Woman of the fame ; but, for
Example, a Man of the Family of Rob ay at
marries into that of Modzar y and, inverfely,
a Modzar conjoins -with a RobayaU They
are of Opinion that fuch Allyances add to
the Nobility of the Children.

Some Particulars concerning the Indies.

In the Kingdom of the Balhara, and in all [ A A ]
the other Kingdoms of the Indies y there are Indians
Perfons who burn themfelves. This Cut* % a *J?™ s
torn proceeds from their Notion of a Me-
templycholis or Tranfmigration, which they
firmly believe as a Truth never to be called
in Queftion among them.

There are Kings who- upon their Accef- r 7 1
lion obfervethe following Ceremony. They L ^ J
drefs a great Quantity of Rice, and pour it
out upon Leaves oi the Moajk, in Sight of
the King. Then three or. four Hundred
Perfons come of their own accord, without
the leait Conftraint on the part of the
King, and prefent themfelves before him.
After he has eaten fome of this Rice, he
gives a little of it to each of them, as
fait, as they come up to him, one after a-
nother, and they eat it in his Prefence.
By eating of this Rice they all engage to
burn themfelves on the Day the King dyes^
or is flain, and they punctually fulfil,
their Promife, throwing themfelves into the'

Fire






to ANCIENT ACCOUNT^

Fire till the very laft, fo that not one Soul

of them is left behind,
f AA] When a Man is determined to burn him-*
<fheir feli> he firfb goes to the King's Palace to
Mannfr of ask leave fo to do ; and having obtained it,
burning h e goes round the public Squares of the City,
mmfefoesi anc ^ ma k es hi s wa y t0 t h e p] ace where the

Pile is heaped up with Store of dry Wood 5
while round about it Hand many Ferfons who
feed the Fire, fo that it is very violent and
blaxes prodigioully. At laft the Perfon comes
preceded by a Number of Mufical Intern-
ments, and lurrounds the Place in the'midft
of his Friends and Relations* During which,
fome put upon his Head a Garland of Straw
or dry Herbs, which they fill with burning
Coals, whereon they pour Sandarae^ which
catches Fire as ftrongly as Naphtha. Ne-
vertheless he continues the Proceihon, al-
though the Crown of his Head be ail on
Fire, and the Stench of his burnt Flelli be
* fine.lt, not fo much as changing Counte-
nance, in the leaft Degree, or betraying the
leaft Senfe of Pain. At laffc he comes to
the Pile, throws himfelf into it, and is foon
reduced to Allies.

A certain Perfon fays he faw one of thefe
Indians burn himfelf; and avers that when
he came near to the Pile, he drew out a
Cangiar, and with it ript down from his
Breaft to the Rim of his Belly ; and that
this done, he with his left Hand pulled
out a Flap of his Liver, and with the Can*
par cut off a Piece of it, which he gave to
one of his Brothers, talking all the Time,

and



Of INDIA and CHINA 81

and difplayirig an invincible Contempt of
Death, and a wonderful Patience under his
Torments, till at laft he leaped into the Fire,
to go to Hell

The Perfonwho told this, added that, in Indian*
the Mountains of this fame Country, there rd ^°. ha J ;e
are Indians who, in Opinions and Manners, q^^**
differ but little from thofe we call Kanifians
and Jelidtans, and who are addicted to all
Manner of Superrtition and Vice. There is
a great Emulation between thefe Mountai-
neers and the People on the Coaft ; the latter
continually going up to the Mountains to
dare the Inhabitants there to do as they doj
and the Mountaineers, on their part, as fre-
quently coming down to the Coarl with De-
fiances' of the fame Nature.

Among others, There once came down a A **y t*
Man on this Errand, and having gathered a ^ *
Number of the Inhabitants of the Coaffc a- ■ '
bout him, who came as well out of Curiofity
to fee the Sight as with Intent to imitate
him ; He told them to do what he was a*-
bout to perform, or, if they defpaired of
doing it, acknowledge themfelves overcome, /
He fat himfelf down then in a Place plan-
ted with Canes, and directed them to bend
one of them down to the Ground. Thefe
Canes are like our Sugar-Canes, bend like
them, and have a very large Stem : When
they are laid hold on at Top, they obey
and Hoop to the Ground ; but as foon as
they are let go, they violently fly up to
their firft Rectitude. One of' the larger*
of thefe he caufed to be bowed down to
G his



Z% ANCIENT ACC0UNT8

his Height, and fattened his Hair ftrongly
thereto; when taking in hand his Cangiar
which fparkled like Fire, fo keen it was,
he laid to thofe about him, J am going to
cu: off my Head with this Cangiar, ~as foon
as it is j ever ed from my Body, let go the Cane,
and when it flies up with my Head I will laugh,
and Jo yea jtoall hear me do. The Peo-
ple of the Coaft had not Courage enough
to imitate him. The Perfon who related
theie Things to us, did it without Emotion
or Wonder, and in our Times thefe Facts
are very generally known ; for this part
of the Indies is in the Neighbourhood of
the Country of the Arabs, and we hear
from thence every Day.

Farthermore, it is a cuftomary Thing
A^' d ^" for Men and Women, of the Indian Blood,
auefi to be to defire thofe of their Family to throw
thrown in- them into the Fire, or drown them, when
to the Fire, they are grown old, or perceive themfelves
to link under the Weight of their Years ;
firmly believing they are to return in other
Bodies. They burn their Dead.
tfkehoM It has oftentimes hapned in the Ifle of
A&ions of Sarandib, where there is a Mine of precious
Indian Stones in a Mountain, the Pearl-Fiihery,
R. Iters. anc [ otner rare anc l extraordinary Things,
That an Indian w ould come into the Bazar
or Market-place, with his Kri, as they call
a Kind oiCangiar they wear, made after a
particular Manner, and feize on the moil
wealthy Merchant there prefent, and hold-
ing his Kri to his Throat, lead him, by the
Vdt ; out of the City, in the midft of a Throng

of



Of IND I A and CHINA. ?|

of People, while not a Soul of them dared
to attempt his Refcue : For if any Attempt
of the Kind was made, the Indian was fure
to kill the Merchant, and make away with
himfelf When he had got him out of the
City, he obliged him to redeem himfelf
with a great Sum of Money. This Outrage
continued till the Kings ordained, That e-
very Indian^ who prefumed upon the like,
fhould be feized; but offering to execute
this Order, the Indian killed the Merchant
firft, and then himfelf The fame Misfor-
tune befel many other Merchants, and after
this Manner did a Number, both of Arabs
and Indians^ perifh; wherefore the Mer-
chants fought after other Means to fecure
themfelves, and the Indians were no longer
apprehended.

In the Mountain of Sarandib they find Mines of
precious Stones of various Colours, Red, frecwus
Green, and Yellow, moil of which are, at ^"J^**
certain times, forced out of Caverns and o- Sarandib
therRecefTes by Waters and Torrents. In
thefe Places the King has his Officers to
keep an Eye over thole who pick them up.
Many times alfo they are dug out of Mines,
juft like Metals, and they fometimes find
precious Stones in the Ore, which muft be
broken to get at them.

The King of this Ifland has Laws which Laws of
are the Groundwork of the Religion and Sarandib.
Government of the Country. Here are r^-p-i
Doctors, and AfTemblies of' learned Men ±~ ~J
like thole of the Hadithis among \hz Arabs. JeRepo-
The Indians repair to thefe AfTemblies and f itar ie S of
G 2 witer



fy ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

the Mo* write down what they hear of the Lives

Tradition of their ^P* 16 ^ anc * ^ various Expo-
fitions of their Laws. Here is a very
great Idol of the fineft Gold ; but concer-
ning the Weight thereof Navigators are
not agreed. Here alfo are Temples where
great Sums of Money are expended.
Jews and * n tms ^ ame M an d there is a very great
other Setts. Multitude of Jews, as well as of many other
Se£b, even Tanwis or Manichees, the King
permitting the free Exercife of every Re-
ligion. At the End of this Ifland are Val-
leys of great Length and Breadth, which
extend quite to the Sea. Here Travellers flay
two Months, and more in that called Gab Sa-
randiby allured by the Beauty of the Coun-
try, bedecked with Trees and Verdure, Wa-
ter and Meads, and blelfed with a wholefcm
Air. This Valley opens upon the Sea called
Harkand, and is tranfcendantly pleafant. You
there buy a Sheep for half a Dram, and
for the fame you purchafe as much of their
Drink as may fuffice many Perfons. This
Drink is made of Palm-Honey boiled, and
prepared with the Tart \Taddi\ or Juice
which runs from the Tree.
*fht Pa* Gaming is the moil ufual Occupation of
(times of the Inhabitants here. They play at Draughts,
the inha- and their other principal Paltime is fighting
httanu. of Cocks, which are very large in this
(Country, and better provided with Spurs
than Cocks commonly are; and befides this
the Indians arm them with Blades of Iron
in the Fafnion of Cangiars. Upon thefe
Combats they bet Gold, Silver, Lands,

Farms,



Of IND I A and CHINA 85

Farms, and many other Things which are
won by the Matter of the Cock that beats*
They play alfo at Draughts, and venture
great Sums upon the Chance of this Game,
but with fuch Fury, That thofe who have not
wherewithal, Debauchees and defperate Peo«*
pie, often play away the Ends of their Fin-
gers. While they are at play, they have a
Fire by them, and thereon a Pot of Wal-
nut, or Sefame Oil ; they have no Oil of
Olives ; and they place a little, but very
iharp, Hatchet between them. When one
of them has won a Game, the other lays his
Hand upon a Stone, and the Winner cuts
off the End of the Lofer's Finger with the
Hatchet ; and the Patient dips his injured
Part into the boiling Oil, to cauterife the
Wound. And yet they cannot fhake off
this evil Habit of Gaming; on the contrary,
they fometimes periift in it fo obftinately
and fo long, that, before they part, they
have all their Fingers thus mutilated. Some
of them will take a Wick, and foaking it
in Oil, apply it to fome Member, fet Fire
to it, and let it burn fo that the Scent of
the burnt Flelh is fmelt by thofe who play
with them, while the Parties themfelves
betray not the leaft Senfe of Pain.

Debauchery runs high in this Country, as &*"$**
well among the Women as among the Men ; Dehau -
for they are laid under no Reftraint. It runs c €r ^
fo high, that fometimes a foreign Merchant,
juft arrived from Sea,fhall fend for theDaugh-
ter of a King of the Country, and ihe ihall
come to him to the Fifhing grounds, with
G 3 to



8<?



Kami in

the Indies.



ffhfe
Rains ft*
cuwdate
the Land.



Bramins,

Indian

Devotees,



ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

her Father's Confent and Privity. Wherefore
the Mohammedan Do&ors of Siraf ftri&ly
warn young People not to go that way.

In the Indies there are heavy Rains, which
the People of the Country call J afar a. They
■laft three whole Months, during Summer,
inceflantly Night and Day, and icarce does
the Winter ftop them. The Indians^ to the
beft of their Abilities, prepare themfelves
againft thefe Rains, fome Time before they
fall ; and no fooner do they come on than
they ihut themfelves up in their Houfes,
made of Wood and Cane interwoven, and
thatched with Leaves. They ftir not out
during all this Time, and no Soul is feen a-
broad, no not even the Artificers, who
now dp their Work at Home ; and during
this Seafon they are fubjefl: to feveral Sorts
of Ulcers in the Sole of the Foot, caufed by
the Pamps.

Thefe Rains are the Life of the Indians*
were they to fail, they would be reduced
to the deepeft Want. For their Fields,
fown with Rice, are watered only by Rains,
and are fecundated thereby; if great Store
of Waper ly upon the Rice Grounds they
need no other help, or to be watered by
Art. But when the Rains are plentifully
fhowered cjown, the Rice thrives abundant-
ly, and even becomes much better in Rind.
It never Rains in the Winter.

The Indians have Devotees and Doctors

known by the Name of Bramins. They

have Poets alfo who compofe Verfes, ftufe

' ed with Flattery, in Praife of their Kings:

Aftrologers



Of IND I A and CHINA. S?

Aftrologers they have, Philofophers, Sooth-
fayers, and Men who obferve the Flight of
Birds, and others who pretend to the Cal-
culation of Nativities, particularly at Ra-
vage, a great City in the Kingdom of Gozar.

In the Indies, there are certain Men called Mian Pe*
Bicar, who go all their Life-time naked, ratents.
and fufler their Hair to grow till it hides
their hinder Parts, and the reft of their
Body. They fufler alfo their Nails to
grow, fo that they become pointed and
iharp as Swords, nor do they ever cut them,
but leave them to break and fall off as it
happens ; and this they obferve as a reli-
gious Duty. Each of them has a String
about his Neck, whereto hangs an ear-
then Porringer ; and when they are prerled
by Hunger, they Hop at the Door of fome
Indian Houle, and thofe within immediately
and joyfully bring outRice to them,believing
there is great Merit in fo doing ; while they
eat out of the Porringer and withdraw,
never returning to make the fame Requeft,
if not by Neceffity urged thereto.

The Indians have many Laws and religi- fangMz
gious Precepts, by which they imagin they Precepts.
pleafe God : Of fuch as thefe it is written
in the Koran, The Wicked have a mighty Pride.
One part of their Devotion conlifts in build-
ing of Kans or Inns, upon the Highways, for [CC]
the Accommodation of Travellers ; where
alfo they fet up Dealers, of whom the Paf-
fengers may purchafe what they may happen
to want. They there alfo fettle public Wo-
men, fuch as are in the Indies^ who expofe
G 4 shenifeivea



88 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

themfelves to Travellers ; all which the
Indians number among their meritorious
peeds.
r EEl i * n ^ e Indies they have public Women call-

Pubticjpb" ^ Wwsift of the Idol, the Origin of whofe In-?

wn. ftitution is fuch : When a Woman has laid

herfelf under a Vow, that fhe may have Chil-
dren ; if it happens that fhe brings forth
a handfom Daughter, fhe carries the Child to
the Bod) fo they call the Idol they worfhip,
and there leave her. When this Girl has at-
tained a proper Age, fhe takes an Apart-
ment in this public Place, and ipreads a
Curtain before her Door, and waits the Ar-
rival of Strangers, as well Indians as Men
of other Sects, to whom this Debauchery
is made lawful. She oroititutes herfelf at a
certain rate, and delivers her Gains into
fhe Hands of the Idol's Prieft, to be by
him difpofed of, for the ufe and Support of
the Temple. We praife the Almighty and.
Glorious God, who hath chofen us to be
free from the Sins which defile the Men in-
volved in Infidelity.
rFFl ^ ot ver y ^ ar -fr° m ^Wnfur there is a far
yhe id J of mous Idol called Multan^ whither they re-
Multan. fort in Pilgrimage from the remoter!: parts,
. even from diftances of feveral Months.
Some of the Pilgrims bring with them the
odoriferous Wood Hud al Camruni) fo call-
ed from the City of Camru^^whexe they
have an excellent Wood Aloes, which they
offer to this Idol ; delivering it to the Prieft
pf the Temple that he may burn it before
his God. Some of this Wood is worth two

hundred



Of IND I A and CHINA. Zg

hundred Dinars the Man y and is com-
monly marked with a Seal, to diftinguifh it
from another kind of the fame Wood, of
lefs Value. It is ufual for Merchants to buy
it of thefe idolatrous Priefts.

There are, among the Indians^ certain Particular
Men who make Prbfeffion of Piety, and pemhn.
whofe Devotion conlifts in feeking after
unknown Illands, or fuch as are newly dis-
covered, there to plant Coco-nut Trees,
and to fink Wells of Water for the Ufe
of Ships that fail to thofe Parts.

There are People, at Oman 7 who crofs Whole
over to the Illands that produce the Coco- Shi P s b ™?*t
nut, carrying with them Carpenters and ^'^ tth
all fuch like Tools ; and having felled as n # <^~
much Wood as they want, they let it
dry, then ftrip off the Leaves, and with
the Bark of the Tree tjiey fpin a Yarn,
wherewith they few the Planks together,
and fo build a Ship. Of the fame Wood they
cut and round away a Maft ; of the Leaves
they weave their Sails, and the Bark they
work into Cordage. Having thus com-
pleated their Vefiel, they load her with
Coco-nuts, which they bring and fell at
Oman. Thus is it that, from this Tree alone^
fo many Articles are convertible to ufe,
as fuffice not only to build and rig out
a VelTel, but to load her when fhe is com-
pleated, and in a Trim to fail.

The Country of the Zinges or Negroes is <fhe Om-
©f vail Extent. They there commonly fow **% of the
Millet, which is the chief Food of the Ne- ^ n §^ or
grpes. Sugar-canes alfo they have, and e & toes "

other



j£ ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

other forts of Trees; but their Sugar is
very black. Thefe People have a Number
of Kings, who are eternally at war with
each other. About their Kings they have
certain Men called Moharamin, becauie each
of them bores his Nofe, and there wears a
Ring. They have Chains alfo faftned about
their Necks ; and when they are at war,
and going to fight, they each take one end
of his N eigbour's Chain, and pafs it thro*
the Ring that hangs under his Nofe ; two
Men hold this Chain, and fo prevent the
reft from advancing towards the Enemy till
Deputies have been, from Side to Side, to
negotiate a Peace, which if it is concluded,
they take their Chains about their Necks
again, and retire without fighting: But
when they once begin to unfheath the
Sword, no Soul of them quits his Port till
he is flain.
ffhey have In their Hearts they have all a profound
great Re- Veneration for the Arabs, and when they
fP e &f or tfo chance to fee any one of them, they tall
down before him, and cry, This Man
comes from the Kingdom where flouriihes
the Date-bearing Palm, for they are very
fond of Dates.
Berwfes, Among thefe People there are Preachers,
Preachers. w ^ naran g Ue them in their own Tongue,
nor may the Catebs or Orators of any other
Nation whatfoever be compared with them.
Some of thefe profefs a religious Life, and
are covered with the Skin of a Leopard or
Ape. One of thefe Men, with a Staff in
his Hand, ihall prefent himfelf before therp 5

and



Of IND I A and CHINA ?i

and, having gathered a Multitude of People
about him, preach all the Day long to them ;
he fpeaks of God, and recites the Actions
of their Countrymen who are gone before
them. From this Country they bring the
Leopards Skins called Zingiet, fpotted with
red and black, very great and very broad. fGGl

In this fame Sea is the Ifland of Socotra,
whence the Sccotrin Aloes. This Ifle lies near V^J^
the Land of the Zingcs, and near alfo to the y.Geogr!
Country of the Arabs, and moft of its Inhabi- Nubi.
tants are Christians, which is thus account- p. w*
ed for : When Alexander fubdued the King-
dom of the Perjians, his Preceptor, Arifiotle,
to whom he had by Letters communicated
his Conquefts, wrote back to him to defire
That by all means he would feek after the
Ifland of Socotra, which afforded Aloes, an
excellent Drug, and without which they
could not make up the famous Medicament
called Hiera. That the belt way would be
to remove the Inhabitants thence, and, in-*
Head of them, plant a Colony of Greeks,
that they might fend Aloes into Syria,
Greece, and Egypt. Accordingly, Alexander
gave the neceiiary Orders to difpoflefs the
Inhabitants, and to fettle a Colony of
Greeks in their ftead. Then he command-
ed the Kings of the Nations, who divided
his Empire, after he had flain the great Da- rfhis is tU
rius, to execute the Orders he had ifiued Eaftem
out for the Prefervation of thefe Greeks. ^ 0ti07i *
They remained then as a Guard upon this
Ifland, till God fent Jefus Chrifi into the
EWorld j when the Greeks of this fame Ifle,

being



$i ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

being informed concerning his Advent, em-
braced the Chriftian Faith, as the other
Greeks had done before them ; and in the
Profeflion of this Faith have they perfevered
to this Day, as well as all the Inhabitants
of the other Iiles.
The Seas of j n t he fir ft Book, no mention is made of
tbofe Parts. t j le g ea w hi c h ftretches away to the right >
as Ships depart from Oman and the Coaft of
Arabia^ to launch into the great Sea : But
the Author defer ibes only the Sea on the
left hand, in which are comprehended the
Seas of India and China, which he feems to
have particularly had in his Eye. In this
Sea, which is, as it were, on the right of
the Indies j as you leave Oman, is the Coun-
try of Sihar \Shihr~\ where Frankincenfe
grows, and other Countries poiieiied by the
Thefe are Nations of Ad, Hamyar, Jorham, and
Tribes of fhabateba. The People of this Country
T HR'I k ave tne Sonna in Arabic, of very ancient
L " J Date, but, in many things, different from
J what is in the Hands of the Arabs,, and
containing many Traditions to us unknown.
They have no Villages, and they lead a
hard and a very miferable Life.

The Country they inhabit extends almoft
as far as Aden and Judda upon the Coait of
Taman or Arabia the Happy* From Judda
it ftretches up into the Continent as far
as the Coaffc of Syria, and ends at Kolzum*
The Sea is, in this part, divided by a Slip
pf Land, which God hath fixed as a
Line of Separation between thefe two Seasj
g§ it is written in the Koran, from Kol-

mm



Of INDIA and CHINA. p$

mm the Sea ftretches along the Coaft of
the Barbarians to the Weil Coaft, which is
pppoiite to Taman, and then along the
Coaft of Ethiopia, from whence you have
the Leopard Skins of Earbary, which are the
beft of all, and moft skilfully drefled ; and
laftly, along the Coaft of Zeilah, whence
you have Amber and Tortoife-fhell.

When the Siraf Ships arrive in this Sea, efy j^ av ^
which is to the right of the Sea of India, gatbnof
they put into Judda, where they remain } the Siraf
for their Cargo is thence tranfported to Ka- &*&?**
hira [Cairo^ by Ships of Kolzum, who are ,
acquainted with the Navigation of the Red
.Sea, which thofe of Siraf dare not attempt,
becaufe of the extreme Danger, and becaufe
this Sea is full of Rocks at the Water's
Edge } becaufe alfo upon the whole Coaft
there are no Kings, or fcarce any inhabited
Place , and, in fine, becaufe Ships are every
Night obliged to put into fome Place of v.Lud.
Safety, for Fear of ftriking upon the Rocks-; Barth. p.
they fail in the Day time only, and all J 55-
the Night ride faft at Anchor. This Sea,
moreover, is fubjecl: to very thick Fogs,
and to violent Gales of Wind, and fo has
nothing to recommend it, either within or
without. It is not like the Sea of India, or of
China, whofe Bottom is rich with Pearls and
Ambergreefe; whofe Mountains of the Coaft
are ftored with Gold and precious Stones ;
whofe Gulfs breed Creatures that yield Ivo-
ry -, and among the Plants of whofeShores are
Ebony, Red-w r ood, the Wood of Hair zan,
Aloes, Camphire, Nutmegs, Cloves, San-
dal



$4 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

dal Wood, and all the other Spices and
Aromatics ; where Parrots and Peacocks
are Birds of the Foreft; and Musk and Ci-
vet are collected upon the Lands. In fhort,
fo productive are tnefe Shores of eftimable
things, that it is impoflible to reckon thern
up.
Amler- Ambergreefe, which is thrown upon the

pvefe. Coaft of this fame Sea, is walhed to Shore
by the Swell : It begins to be found on the
IndianSz&y but whence it comes is unknown.
We only know that the beffc of it is thrown
upon the Barbarian Coaft, or upon the Con-
fines of the Land of Negroes, towards Si-
har, and Places thereabouts. It is of a blu-
ifh white, in round Lumps. The Inhabi-
tants of this Country have Camels trained
up to the Buiinefs, , which they mount by
Moonfhine, and ride along fhore. Theie
Camels are broke to this, and as foon as
they perceive a piece of Amber, they bend
their Knees, and their Rider picks it up.
Jnothet There is another fort which fwims in

f°2f great Lumps upon the Surface of the Sea,
Ambey almoft ^ the Body q( ^ Q ^ of fl j^

lefs, and weigh a great deal. When a cer-
tain Fifh of the Whale-kind, called Taly
fees thefe floating Lumps, he fwallows the
fame, and is killed thereby. Then they fee
the Whale floating upon the Surface, and
inftantly the Men who are accuftomed to
this fort of Fiihery, and know when thefe
Whales have fwallowed Amber, go out to
him in their Boats ; and darting him with
Iron Harpoons, they tow him to fhore,

where

\



Of INDIA and CHINA $j

tyhere they fplit him down the Back, and
take out the Amber : What they find about
the Belly of the Creature is commonly
fpoiled with the Wet, and contracts an un-
pleafant Scent. You may buy the Bones
of this Fifh, at the Druggifts of Bagdad
and Bajjora. The Amber which has not
been infected by Ordure, in the Belly of
the Whale, is perfectly good. It is a ufual
thing to make Stools of the Vertebra of the
Back-bone of this Whale called Tah

They fay, that in a Village, ten Leagues Butldingi
from Sirafy called Tain, there are old Houfes of JVbah
neatly enough built, the Lintels of whofe &&*•
Doors are of the Rib of this Whale. I
have heard aPerfon fay, That formerly one
of them was thrown upon the Coaft, not very
far from Siraf^ and that going to view him
he faw People getting upon the Back of this
Creature with Ladders ; and that the Fiiher-
men expofed him to the Sun, diced away
his Fleih, and having digged a Pit, gather- ^ aJ * ° 1 *
ed up the Greafe which was melted by the
Sun ; and that having drained off all theOil,
they fold it to the Matters of Ships. This
Oil, mixed up with another kind of Stuff,
in ufe with Seamen, ferves for calking of
Ships, to fecure the Seams of the Planking,
and to Hop up Leaks. This Whale Oil is
negotiated for great Sums of Money.

Of Pearls.

Before we fpeak of Pearls, and the man-
ner of their Formation, Let us praife God,

who



P 6



*fhe For-
mation of
Pearls.



Different
Opinions
upon this
Head.



ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

who hath created them by his Providence^
who hath produced all Creatures upon
Earth, and who even from them produces
others, and many and various Things which
Men know not, wherefore do we afcribe
unto him all Majerty, and blefs his mighty
and glorious Name.

Pearls begin to be formed of a Subitance,
at firrt, fomewhat like the Plant called An"
jedana, being of Size the fame, in Colour
and Figure pretty alike, fmall, thin,
and tender, juft like the Leaves of this
Plant. At firii it fwims feebly on the Sur-
face, and Hicks to the Sides of Ships, under
Water ; where, in time, it hardens, grows^
and gets covered with a Shell. When thefe
Oy Iters become heavy, they fall down to
the Bottom of the Sea, where they fubiift
after a manner to us unknown. They ap-
pear no other than a piece of red Flein,
like the Tongue towards the Root, with-
out Bones, Sinews, or Veins.

But there are various Opinions touching
the Production of Pearls ; and fome fay,
When it rains the Oy iters rife up to the
Surface, and that, gaping, the Drops of
Water they catch turn to Pearls. Others
fay they are generated in the Oy iters them-
felves, which is molt likely, and is con-
firmed by Experience. For molt that are
found in Oyrters, are fixed and move not :
When they are loofe the Merchants call
them Seed Pearl. God alone knoweth how
this Matter is. Now this is the molt won-
derful thing we have heard concerning the
Subfiftance of Oyfters, A



Of INDIA and CM IN" J. 9^

A certain Arab came formerly to BaJJbra, wStoryef
&nd brought with him a Pearl worth a great a FearI *
Sum of Money : He ihew'd it to a Drug-
girl of his Acquaintance, and, ignorant of
the Value thereof, asked him what he
thought of it. The Merchant telling hint
it was a Pearl, the Arab asked him what it
might be worth ; and he valued it at a hun-
dred Pieces of Silver. The Ardb, all afto-
nifhed at his Words, asked if any Perfon
would be willing to give him what he had
faid ; whereupon the Merchant counted out
a hundred Drams to him • and with this
Money did the Arab purchafe Corn td
carry back into his own Countty. The
Merchant, on the other hand, brought the 1
Pearl to Bagdad, and fold it at a very high
rate, which inabled him to deal very con-
iiderably thereafter. Now this fame Mer-
chant declared, that he had examined the
Arab touching the Origin of Pearls, and
that he delivered himfelf to the following
EfFea.

I was going along; laid he, by Saman, in Rn\ut
the Dirlricl: of 'Bahrein, not Very far diftant touching
from the Sea ; and upon the Sand I faw a the °«kj#
dead Fox, with fomething, at his Muzzle > - P€ar &'
that held him fare, i drew near, and faw \
a white, lucid Shell, in which I found the
Pearl I took. Hence he gathered, that
the Oyfter was upon ia^ Shore, driven thi-
ther by Tempeft, which very often hap-
pens. The Fox pairing by, and leering at
the Meat of the Oyrter, whofe Shell iiood
$Den, did jump thereon, and thruft in his
H ' Muzzle



y8 ANCIENT ACCOUNTS

Muzzle to feize the Fifh, who, doling,
locked him fall, as has been faid. For it is
a Property of theirs, never to let go their
hold of any thing, except forcibly opened
by an Iron at the Edges. This is the Oy-
fter that breeds Pearls, which it as carefully
keeps as a Mother her Child. When there-
fore it was feniible of the Fox, it withdrew,,
as to avoid an Enemy; and the Fox feeling
himfelf fqueezed, did beat the Ground on
each hand, till he was ftifled, and fo dyed.
The Arab found the Pearl, and God would
have it that he mould apply himfelf to the
Merchant, a very happy thing for him.
kinss of The Kings of the Indies wear Ear-rings
the Indies of precious Stones fet in Gold. They
wear Ear- wear aifo Collars of great Price, adorned
rings, Y/ixh precious Stones of divers Colours, but
efpecially green and red ; yet Pearls are
what they moil efteem, and their Value
furparTes that of all other Jewels ; they at
prefent hoard them up in their Treafures,
with their moll precious things. The Gran-
dees of their Court, trje great Officers and
Captains, wear the like Jewels in their
Collars. They drefs in a half Veft, and
carry a Parafol of Peacocks Feathers to
Iliad e them from the Sun ; and are furround-
ed by thofe of their Train.
Indians There are certain Indians, who never

who refufe eat two out f t h e f ame Difh, or upon the

IZb other fame Tabk > and WOUld deeiB ' lt a Ver ^

great Sin if they iliould. When they
come to Sirafj and are invited by the con-
siderable Merchants, were they a hundred

in



Of IND I A and CHINA }»

in Number, more or lefs, they muft each
have a feparate DifL without the leaft Com-
munication with the reft.

Their Kings, and Perfons of high Quali- Plf*** ant
ty, have frefh Tables made for them every L ^. €S f ,
Day, together with little Dilhes and Plates, ^JJit^
wove of the Coco-nut Leaf; in which they Leaf.
eat what is prepared for their Subfiftance :
And their Meal over, they throw the Table,
the Dimes and Plates, into the Water, to-
gether with the Fragments they have left.
Thus at every Meal they have a new Ser-
vice.

To the Indies they formerly carried the
Dinars j called Sindiat,ox Gold Pieces of the
Sind, and the Dinar there pafled for three
of ours, and even more.

Thither alfo are carried Emeralds from
Eg}P) which are fet for Rings.



REMARKS, or NOTES

UPON THE

CHIEF PASSAGES

Of the Two Foregoing Accounts.

Of the Sea cf Harkand.

TH E Author, doubtleis, intends the Mat- [A }
dives, which, according to the Eaftern Geo-
graphers, divide the Sea or Lelarewi, or the
Sea of the great Gulf of India, as far as
Ras Kemoxi, or Cape Comcrln, from that of Harkand.
The Arabs and the other Orientals have Names
For the Seas, which bear no Affinity with thole of
the other Languages. Thefe Seas, without com-
prehending the Ocean which they call Bab-Mahit,
are, the Sea of China, the Sea of India, the Sea of
Perjia, thejSea ofKoIzum, or the Red Sea, ib cali'd
from a Town' which is thought to "be the Cly/ma : -
of the Ancients ; the Sea of Rum, or of Greece y
which is the Mediteranean ; the 'Sea cal&Jl-Chczar, or
the Caftian, and the Sea oiBont, or the PcnmrEuxi^
91ns. But thefe are not all the Names they give them ;
for the Sea of India is very often called the Green
Sea ; that of Perjia, the Sea of BaJJbra ; and other
Names they have for particular Parts of thefe Seas,
In like manner the Sea of Harkand, the Sea of /)<?-
larowi, the Sea of Zinge, or that on the Coaft of Bar-
bary, and the Dark Sea which was almoft unknown
to the Arabs, it ftretching away beyond the Ifland of
Madagascar or St. Lawrence, have different Names
a from



a REMARKS

from the different Coafts they wafli, and which
they alfb call the Salt Sea.
Geegraph. The Sea of Shelahet our Author mentions to b«
Arabic, divided by the Iflands of Ramn't, that is, by a Part
Qim. i. of the Continent of the Indies } muft be ibmewhere
p. g. in that extent of Sea from Cape Rajalgat to Mala-*

lar : But as this extent feems to be very great, one
would be apt to think this Sea extends but from
Sbelahet, which, according to Abulfeda, is a Town of
the Manibar, which is a Part of the Pemnfula of In-
dia within the Ganges, ftr etching from Gizsrat or
Gitzarat, to CouJam or Coulan.

I B ] In thefe Seas are about 1900 Iflands.

The Arabs had but a very imperfect Knowledge
of theie Iflands, and hence our Authors reckon them
but at 1900; but our exa& Navigators and Travel-
lers, and particularly Pyrard, have it that the Inha-
bitants talk of above twelve thoufand , and that the
King of the Maldives aflumes the Stile of King of
the twelve thoufand Iflands. The Nubian Geographer
calls them, with our Authors, Robaiat or Robihat 9
although the Name Maldive be more agreeable to
the Malabaric Tongue, in which Dive is an Ifland ;
whence we have Sarandib or Savandive, Angedive 9
and many others. Garcias de Orta, a learned Porta-
guefe Phyfician, fays, they muft be written Naledive 9
Dec. 2. 1. or tne Four Iflands, or rather as Bavros, the Thoufand
3. c. 7. Iflands; if after all it would not be better to lay
they borrow their Name from Maly, Maley, or Male %
the chief of them, where the King refides. The
Ancients knew next to nothing of theie Iflands ;
and we cannot tell when the Arabs landed among
them to propagate Mohammedifm, which they profefc
fed when firft discovered by the Povtuguefe. Barros re-
lates that the Pcrtuguefeofhls time had run about three
hundred Leagues along thgfe Iflands, from thofe of
Mamal, a Moor of Canancr who was Mafter of the
Northermoft, about forty Leagues from the Coaft of
Malabar, and in the Latitude of 12 Degrees and
30 Minutes ; and that the 'Southermoft they knew

wcr*



On the Foregoing Accounts. j

were thofe of Candu, and Adu in the feventh De-
gree of the Antartic Hemifphere : But that in the
Sea Charts of the Moors, thefe Iilands hy in a
Clufter along the Coaft of /wfo*, from the Flats or
Shelves of PxduafLO the Parallel of Mount Deli ; and
then ran away Eaftward till they almoft couched Ja-
va-head, and the Coaft of Sunda. The Pcrtuguefe and
Dutch Charts, which place thefe Iflands of Adu and
Candu a little more Northerly, take no Notice of
the others which mould have been found out after
fo many Voyages, to and again, in thefe Seas : But the
Moorifn Cnarrs are fb very inaccurate, that it is very
poflibly they ftretch out this String of Iflands much
farther than it really goes ; for by the later Voyages
k is certain that thefe Iflands, of a Clufter of which,
according to Pyrard, each Province or Group is
formed, each of which they call an Atollon, reach not
farther than 5 Degrees South. The Arabian Geo- Q\m. \\
grapher had certainly feen what our Author writes * g.
of thefe Iflands, which he defcribes accurately e-
nough, except when he relates that the Capital is
call'd Anabwa ; whereas in the original Text, which
is corrupted in the Roman Edition, it is faid that the
King ot the Ifles Robihat 1 the fame with the Mai- ■
dives, refides in the Ifland called Maly, or Male,
which this Geographer writes of the King of the
Ifland or Peninfulaot Comar, which forms the Point
and Part of the Eaftern Coaft of India.

He alfb calls thefe Iflands Robibat ; whereas our
Author fays, that all the Iflands were comprehended
under this Name, not excepting Ceylon or Sarandib ;
and whereas the Original from whence this Tranfla-
tion is borrowed, reads Dobij.at. In the Indian Tongue
Dive is an Ifland or Ifle, but the Arabs write it Dib t
as appears by their Sarandib, or Sielendiba, as it is
written in the Fragment of Co/mas Indopleufies.

Our Author fays, thefe Iflands were governed by Voyages fa
a Queen ; and the Nubian Geographer reports that Thevenct.
they have a King, but that his Wife has all the
Power in her own Hands, that me is uncontrolable Ubi fupra,
by the King, and orders all matters of State and
Property to her own good liking. The Hiftory of
thefe iUands ij too much in the dark for us to exa-
a 2 mine



4 REMARKS

mine into the Origin of this Cuftom, which wai
abolilhed before the Portuguefe firft came hither.
Perhaps the Arabs, who fettled here, introduced*
with Mchammedifm, many of their Cuftoms, and
among the reft that of excluding Women from all
public Employs ; or it may have happen'd that when
the Arabs difcovered thefe Iflands, lome Woman
ruled as Regent during her Son's Minority, iuch
being the known Cuftom over all the Molucca If-
lands ; which alio prevailed among even the Moguls \
whofe Empire, during the Minority^ of Gayuk Khan,
Lebtfarih was governed by Turakia Katun his Mother. And
thus the firft Difcoverers giving it out, that the
Iflands were under a Queen, eafily perfuaded others
that it was the ufual Form of the Government ;
and as Voyages hither did not happen often, they
remained a long time under this Miftake. And fo ic
was with the King of Morocco, who in the Year
1685, fpeaking of the EngUfh, faid, they were not
to compare with other Nations, becaufe they obey'd
a Woman ; for this Prince who valued himielf up-
on his Parts, had in forae of his Hiftories read ma-
fjackfayt n V tnm g s concerning Queen Elizabeth, in whofe
I Edit. p. & e *g n ™ e &*& Treaties of Commerce, with the King-
j ' dom of Morocco, were managed.. by Edmund Hogan, her
Majefty's Ambaffador to Muley Abdal-Malec King of
Morocco, in the Year mdlxxvii. /l rfA

What is faid of the Ambergreafe, which fo abounds
in thefe Iflands, is confirm'd by Garcias de Orta, Py-
rard, Barboja, and many other Travellers.

The Shells are ftill current among the Maldivefe 9
and in many Parts of the Indies, they pafs for final!
Money ; and not only in the Indies, but on the Coaft
of Guinea, and in the Kingdoms of Benin and Congo,
were they^ are uled in Traffic. Bar ros thus expref-
fes himfelf thereon. <Tbey have a kind of Shells a-
hout the Size of a Snail, but they are of another Shape,
hard, white, and lucid ; and fome of them are fa
well illuminated, and flained of divers Colours, that
being fet in Gold for Buttons, they look like enameU-
Sh'p ballafl with thefe Shells for Bengal and Siam,
where they are ufed at Market for change like our f mall
Copper Pieces. The fame Author takes Notice of the

Way



On the Foregoing Accounts. 5

Way they take thefe Shells, and therein agrees with P. 73. !•
our Author ; and Pyrard confirms what he fays of Bath, foe 9
the Treafures of thefe Shells the Princes of the citat.
Country have.

In the fame Sea towards the IJJand of Saran- [C]
dib are many Ijles.

It were to be wiflied our Author had exprefTed
himlelf a little clearer in this Paflage and many-
others, which relate to the Pofition and Place of the
Coafts and Iflands of the Indian Sea ; which can-
not eafilybe gathered from fb imperfect a Defcrip-
tion. He fays, that in the Sea beyond the Mal-
dives, there is a great Number of Iflands, or Penin-
fula's , the Arabs having no Word to exprefs thefe
laft : Wherefore they call Spain, Jezirai-al-Anda-
lus, The Ijland of Andalufia, becaufe it is waihed
by the Sea on three Sides. They therefore called
Illands or Peninlula's that vaft extent of Coaft from
Cape Comorin to China, where, it feems, we lrnift
place thofe Nations, who are but partly known to
us, and under very different Names. In thofe Coun-
tries we find all that our Authors and the Nubian
Geograper, their Copift, attribute to thele great In-
lands, but which cannot hold good of the Iflands
of Sumatra, Java, and Borneo, which poflibly are
ibme of thofe described in the Sequel.

The Ifles our Authors call Ramni, are other-
wife called Rani, or Rana, and at this day give
Title to a Raja or idolatrous Prince of the Indies ,
who derives his origin from King Porus. In the
Arabian Geography this Ifland is called Rami as
in the Oriental Library of Mr. d*Herleht.

The Iflands of Najahalus, or Lajabalus, (for the
Name is fpelt both ways) are, it is probable, the imall
Ifles of Nicobar, where Ships (till generally touch
when bound to . fome Parts of the Indies.

Our Authors obferve, that in thefe Iflands there Q^.AreH
was a barbarous Race of Man-eaters 5 and this r u ^a.
tfeixeira confirms, adding thereto a ftill more bar-
baroys Cuftom of eating their Relations when
3 z they



6 REMARKS

they are grown old. He places thefe Barbarians
P. loo. between the Ifles of Nicobar and Tanacarim or Tan-
afarim : And this Cuftom remains to this Day, if we
may believe Navarettfi ; It is certain they eat alive
thofe Europeans they can cauh.
L.l.c.iS. Marco Polo tells us, that the Inhabitants of the If-
land he calls Andaman, devoured all thofe they
could lay Hands on. 'Teixeira fays alio of the Ja-
vans, that about an hundred Years before he wrote,
that is, about two hundred Year ago, they ate
Human Flefh, a Cuftom they unnaturally adhered to,
till fuch time as they imbraced Mohammedifm.
The Peguavs were guilty of the fame, and fold
Human Flefh publickiy. Moft of the Cafres on the
Coaft of Barbary are Anthropophagites alio, and par-
ticularly thole call'd Zimbas. Thefe in the Year
1589 made an Incurfion into the interior Afric,xo
the Number of 80000, and devoured all the Perfons
that fell into their Hands ; and thus defblated a
Tradfc of above three hundred Leagues. The Mum-
lot and moft of the other Cafres of Afric are Devou-
rers alio of the fame kind ; and the Portuguefe of
Mofambique, and the Neighbouring Parts, agree that
they ate the Bodies of fuch as were executed. M,
Jon. dos Pole, befides other Parts of the Indies and China 9
Santos where he obferves the People to be Anthropopha-
gi/?, de gites, fays, that in the Kingdom of Felech, which
Ethiopia, is one of the eight of the lefler of Java, the Inha-
Or. I. 2. bitants ate Human Flefh as well as thole of the
p. 69. Kingdom of Samara, thofe of Dragcjan, and thofe

L.Tf.c.w. of the greater ^ Java, according to Barthema, who
c 13. 14. fold their ancient Relations to Men, who bought
L. ^.c.iy. them to eat.

The fame M. Polo, fpeaking of the Aftrologers,

or Magicians of the great Khan of the Tartars,

fays, that when a Man was condemned to Death,

they took him, drefs'd him, and ate his Flefh.

» f Barbofa writes almoft the fame of Siam and the

210 " ^ e ^ es i anc * adds, that when a Criminal was to be

* ^" fentene'd to Death, they beggM him of the King

to eat. Nicolo di Conti obferves alfb of the Inhabi-

p. 229. c. tants of the Ifle of Andramania, or that of Andaman ,

and thofe of- Sumatra, that they would eat Human

Flefh;



On the foregoing Accounts. j

Flem ; and according to Pigafetta, there were ccr- P. 364./.
tain hairy People in the Moluccas, who having
killed a Man, ate his Heart with Lemon Juice.

Of the Ifland of Ceylon. c D 3

The Orientals know the Ifland of Ceylon by no y y a j e
other Name than Sarandib, which has fbme affinity cfhevenot.
with the ^.tiKzvS'iCcL of Of mas, the Author of the ^ x
Chrifiian topography. Dive, in the Indian Tongue, y^ e g afm
is an Ifland, and the Arabs, who have no V Con- dcf.p^iz,
fonant, do, after the manner of the Greeks, end e f.
their laft Syllable with a B. Thus all the Indian
Names ending in Dive, give you to underftand that
the Place meant, is either an Ifland or a Penin-
fula ; for moft of the Orientals have but one Word
for the one and the other. From Ceylon the Arabs
have formed Saran ; for the two Liquids L and R
are often converted into each other. Arvian writes,
that Weftward there lies an Ifland called TtrcL^cucrt-
lAMcPis, and by the Ancients Taprobana, where you
muft correct his Text, vno~(& teyb/jfyn n&Keii to,-
T^Ceivi)' TscL^dL q rots &%yd!ioi<; eiwrfyf ^ly^vS'a 5 which
wants it, by a Miftake of the Tranfcribers, who
have of the A and a in 2IAANAOT formed a p.

The fame Ccfmas gives^ u for the Taprobana of
the Ancients. He fays, it is about nine hundred
Miles in Circumference, and that it was governed
by two Kings, one of whom was Mafter of the
Mines oflacintb, or Iacintb, a general Name under
which are comprehended leverai forts of coloured
Stones, which the Arabs call Tacut or Iacu% ; that
fbme Perjian Chriftians were there fettled , and had
a Prieft, a Deacon, and all the Church Liturgy;
that the Kings and moft of the Inhabitants were
Strangers ; that Commodities were brought hither
from all Parts, and even from China, this Ifland
being as # it were in the Heart of all the Indies ;
that it is five Days diftant from the Continent of
the Indies ; and that its chief Scale was calTd Ma*
ratio ; in fine, that there were found the ko^^Wi
or Pearl Oyfters, as our Author confirms,

a 4 Wha*



8 REMARKS

What the Arabs relate of the Print of a Foot

upon the top of a Mountain, which they fay is

\ Adam's Step; is to be found in moft of the Arabian

Authors, who are very fond of fuch Stories ; and

is confirmed, by the Tradition of the Country,

handed down to our prefent Times. Rcbert Knox y

an Englijhman, who lived twenty Years in this If-

land, and who publifh'd an ample Account of it,

in the Year 1681, exprefles himfelf to this effect.

*' Southward of Ccnde-Uda there is a Mountain,

" fuppofed to be the higheft in the Ifland, and

<l called Hamalell in the Language of the Chingu-

41 las, but the Portuguef, and the other Europeans

w call it Adam's Peek. This Mountain is in the

* c Form of a Sugar-loaf, very fteep, and upon the

<f top of it is a flat Stone, on which is feen the

* c Impreflion of a Man's Foot, but larger than the

•* Life, being about two Foot in length. The Peo-

*' pie of this Ifland reckon it a meritorious Work,

11 to vifit this Trace or Impreflion, and fall

*' down before it ; and generally towards the be-

" ginning of their New Year, which is in the

<{ Month of Mavh, the Men, Women and Chil-.

" dren refort to this great and lofty Mountain, there

lud. Bar- " to perform their Devotions.'*

them. I. 3. .It is the common Opinion, that the Chinefe peo-

4. pled part of this Ifland, and that the Name of

Chingitlas or Chingalas, is derived from a Chinefe

Colony, fettled on the Points GaJe > and defcended

Mart. from certain Chinefe driven hither by ftrefs of Wea-

/£/?. 236. ther.

<Teixei/a, I. This, Father Martini confirms, faying, Gngala is Si-
1. p. 184. narum Syrtes, lb called becaufe here periflied a Fleet
V'td. Marc, an Emperor of China had fitted out to conquer this
Pol. I. ;. Ifland ; and that Ceylon, or Sinlan y fignifies Oiin'fe.
c 19 & In another place he takes Notice that the Chmgu-
33. las are much braver than the other Natives of the

Country : But as Navarette very pertinently animad-
verts, This Proof makes quite againft what it is in-
tended to demonftrate, fince it does not feem likely
that they mould inherit from the Chinefe a Courage
they never poflefled,

Some



On the Foregoing Accounts. 9

Some Authors have pretended that Ceylon is not P. 180.

the Taprcbana of the Ancients, but that Sumatra is P. 348.

the Place. Thefe are Andrew Ccrfali, Maximilian P. 184.

of < Tranfylvania J Bartbama^ G a/par Barreyros, Pigafet- P. Z56.

ta> and feme others. P. $7 2 '

Ships built in the Indies. c E ,

This fame fort of Ships is exactly defcribed by /,. 1Ct
Mar.o Polo, under the Name of Ships of Ormuz ; ifi.p. z>
for at that time all the Commerce of Siraf y which
was afterwards trania&ed at the Ifle of Aw, was
remov'd to Ormuz. " The Ships of Ormuz are very
" bad and dangerous, and Merchants often run a very
c( great Rifque in them. For they cannot fatten
" their Planks with Bolts, becaufe the Wood is as
" hard and as brittle as Earthen-ware ; fo that when «

<l they attempt to drive lb much as a Nail into it,
* l the Nail ftarts back and- breaks. Wherefore
" they bore the ends of their Planks as gently as
•* poffible with an Augre, and then drive in Tree-
" nails, and fo make them faft. Then they bind
* c them or rather few them together with a ftrong
** Thread of Coco-nut, which Nut is large, and
** all over cover'd with ftrong Fibres like Horfe
" Hair. They then launch them, and when every
** other part of them is decayed, thefe Threads are
" clean and unhurt ; and 01 the fame they make
* ( Cordage and Cables, which preferve a long time
"- in the Water. They ufe no pitch to fave their
*' Ships from rotting, but ufe, inftead of it, a Fiih
« Oyl. *



* Le naiii d* Ormuz fono pejfime &> perk olofe, on dell
mercanti fpejfa volte in quelle perkolano : Of 3 la caufa e
quejla, par che non fi ficano con chiodi per ejfev il
legno col quale fi fahricano duro y Qp di materia fragile
a modo di vafo di terra, &> fubito che fi ficca il chiodo,
ft rihatte in fe medefimo, &* quaji fi rompe. Ma le
tavclo fi foranno con trivello di ferro piu leggiermente
che pojjbiio mil* efiremita, Qf* doppo vl fi mettono alcune

chiaw



jo REMARKS.

Almofl: all the Modern Writers who have treated ©f
the Maldives and the Coco-nut, agree with our An-
cient Traveller in the manner of building thefe /«-
dian Embarkations ; and add, as a remarkable Circum-
flance, That this Tree alone not only affords Materials
wherewithal to build a Ship, but to load her alfo when
fiie is finifhed. The great Planks of theTrunk ferve
for her Hull and Mails; with the Filaments or Fi-
bres of the Nut they fpin the Cordage and the Sails ;
and they calk her with die coarfer Stuff, and the Oil
extracted from the Tree. They load her with Nuts
both green and dry, and of the Liquor they draw from
them, which is very pleafant and fweet at firft, but
turns into a Vinegar if kept, they make a kind of
Cream, Comfits, Butter, and an excellent Oil for
Wounds.

t F ] An unknown IJle where are Mines of Silver.

Amidft foch a Number of Iflands as are fcatter'd
op and down the Indian Sea, quite up to the Coaft of
China, it is a hard matter to fingle out which of them
our Author means. 1 It feems that even in his Days, the
Courfe to be fleered for this Ifland was loft, and that
Chance only directed Ships thither. There are Silver
Mines in moll of thefe Iflands, as Travellers fay.

( G ] A white Cloudy or Water-fput.

This white Cloud, which has fuch extraordinary E£
fects, is very exactly defcribed in the Second Volume

chiavi di legno, con le quali fi ferrano : doppo le lega-
no, o <vero cuciono con un Jilo grojfo, che Ji cava dijo-
fra il fcorzo della noci d y India, le quali fono grandi :
& fopra <vi fono Jili, como fete di ca<vallo, li quali pojlt
in aqua com e putrefatta la fofanza rimangono mondi f
iff fe ne fanno corde, con le quali legano le na<vi, Cif
durano longamente in aqua: alle qual na<vi non Ji pone
fefce per diffea della putrefattione ma s'ungono con olio
fatto digrafjo de pefci, cif calcafi lafloppa.

of



[HI



On the Foregoing Accounts. it

«f Mr. Thevenot the Younger. It is commonly call'd a

Water-fpout ; and the Arabian Geographer fpeaks of it

in aim oft the fame termj. This fort of Whirlpool is

not only feen all over the Indian Sea, but in the Sea

of Perjia alfo. James Lancajier obferved one of them

in the Straits of Malacca, on the way of Achem, at- Purchas

tended with the fame difturbance and riling oftheWa- VoLI. /«

ter defcribed by our Authors. i$g.

Zufan y T/tffboff) or Whirl-wind.

Our Authors obferve that the Coaft of China is fub-
je& to violent Storms, and particularly to thofe Squalls
or Frets of Wind called, in their Language, Tufan,
from a Greek Word rvqoov, which fignifies almoft the
iame thing. The Portuguefe and Spaniards derive from
the Arabs their Word Tufaon, or fufon, whicb,on the Coaft
of China, comes on from the Eaftern Board, and begins
in the Month of Auguft. Navarette is in the wrong p # a.2%1
when he looks for the Etymology of this Word in the
Chinefe Language, in which, fays he, Tung fung is an
Eafterly Wind. The Indians of Manila call it Bagio,
and it is to the full as violent as the Hurricans among
the American Iflands. Thefe lyfhons are much to
be dreaded, efpecially in the PafTage from the Indies
to China, as we may perceive by many Examples to
be found in the Writings of the moll famous Naviga-
tors of thefe laft Ages. But although this Word is
originally Greek, and fignifies rather a Storm attended
with Thunder than a Tufan or Hurrican, during
which the Wind fhall fhift to every Point of the Com-
pafs ; yet the Arabs derive it from a Word of theirs
which fignifies to turn, believing it a Native of their
Tongue, juft as Navarette took it for an Offspring
of the Chinefe. Varenius fays, the Arabs called it OH- ,
fanf, he means Al-Tufan', but tho' he is out as to this, o* '4*/*
Jie defcribes it very exactly in his Univerfal Geography. z~$'

It appears like Sparks of Fire.

[ J 3

This was obferved by Father Martini on the Coaft
©f 'China : And John Davis, an Englijbman, took No-
tice



'is REMARKS

Vurchas. tice of the fame Phenomenon in the Year 1 604, being'
Vol. 1. p. in 7 Degrees of Southern Latitude, not far from the
132. Iile of Fernand de Noronha ; he fays, the Glare was fo

ilrong he could eafily fee to read by it.

£ K ] -An IJland without Women.

This, very probably, is the Ifland mentioned by
Marco Polo : " Beyond Chefmacoran, about five hundred
** Miles in the main Sea, fomewhat Southerly, there
" are two Iflands, the one Mafculine, and the other
" Feminine, about thirty Miles wide of each other, In
" the one the Men live without the Women, and this
f* is called the Mafculine IJland; and in the other,
* f which is called the Feminine IJland, the Women.
/ live without the Men. The Inhabitants of thefe
44 Ifles are one People, however, and are baptized
" Chriftians. The Men crofs over to the Female
*' Ifland, and flay there three Months together, (viz.}
*' March, April, May, each in his Houfe with hi&
«' Wife ; and then return to the Male Ifland, where
*' they abide for the reft of the Year, following each.
" his Buiinefs, without the Participation of a Wife.
*' The Women keep the Male Children till they are
* f twelve Years old, and then' fend them to their Fa-
" thers : But the Girls they keep till they are of Age
" to Marry, and then difpofe of them to the Men of
** the other Ifland. It feems the Air of the Place will
" not allow the Men to be always with their Wives,
" becaufe they would dye. They have a Bifhop under-
" him of Socotra. " *



*Oltra de Chefmacoran #500 Miglia in alto mare
«verfo mezzo di, <vi fono due I file, Fmia wic'ina alP altra
30 Miglia. Et in una dimorano gli huomini fenza Fe~
mine, & Ji chiama TIJola Mafcolma : NeW altra Jianno
le femine fenza huomini, Cif Ji chiama Ifola feminina-
Quelli che habit ano in dette due Ifcla, fono una cofaMe-
dejima, & fono Chrijiiani battezzati. Gli huomini ''Van
air Ifola delle Femine & dimorano con quelle (re met*

continui



On the Foregoing Accounts. £§

Nicdo di Conti has it, that they, are obliged to re-
tire after a three Months abode, or that otherwife they
would dye by the malignity of the Climate. We can fay
nothing of thefe Iflands, fince it is fo hard to hnd
them out by fuch an imperfeft Defcripticn. But what
Marco Polo fays, can never be true, with regard to the
Time the Men crofs over to the Women ; for being
Chriftians, the Bifcipline which ftill fubfifts in the
Churches of the Levant, would have obliged them to
have abitained from their Wives during Lent, which
they keep much about the fame Time we do. Nor is
it an eaiy matter to underitand how the Women could
live on their Ifland without any outward Worfhip,
which mull have been fufpended in the abfence of the
Clergy, who neverthelefs might crofs over at the Time
mentioned by Marco Polo, which happens to be alfo
the Seafon when they celebrate the Feaft of Eajier.

Hhe Courfe they Jteeredfo'r China. [ L ]

It is very difficult exactly to trace out the Courfe
the Arabs fleered for China, as it is found in our Au-
thors j not only becaufe many Towns they mention
have been deiiroyed, but alfo becaufe the Ancients, who
only coafted it along, held a different Rout from that
now fhaped by our' Pilots.

The Chinefe came . as far as Siraf, Jbut dared not
ftir beyond it, becaufe of the foulnefs of. the Weather,,
and the'heavinefs of. the Sea, which their Ships could
not live in. They did net then venture fo far as Ma-
dagascar,

lontinui, cioe Marzo, ■ Aprile & Maggio, : -Cif ciafcuno ha-
bit a in cafa, con la fua moglie, & deppo ritorna all Ifo-
la Mafcolind, donje dimorano tutto, il rejio dell anno, fa-
cendo le loro arti fenza femina alcuna. Lefemine tengono
fuoi figlioli Jino a dodici anni, & doppo li mandano alii
loro padri : Se ella e femina, la tengeno Jin che ella e
da marito Cif poi la maritano negli huomini della Ifola..
E par che quel aere non patifca che gli huomini continuino.
a flare apprejfo le femine, perche moririano. Hanno il
(gro vefiovo qual e fottopoflo a quello del Ifola di Socotra.



i 4 REMARKS

Hijt. I. 6. dagafcar, as Father Martini pretends they did, becaufe
/. 237. in the Bay of Santa Clara there is a People refem-
bling the Chine fe, and not unlike them in Speech. He
offers nothing in Proof of this but the Report of fome
Seamen : But granting the thing to be as he would have
at, thefe Chine fe may have been driven thither by Tem-
peft, and there have taken up their abode, becaufe they
could not poifibly return back again to their Country.
On the other hand, it is evident that Navarette is
miflaken when he fays the Straits of Sincapor were
their Ne plus ultra.

Siraf v/sls formerly a Maritime Town in the Gulf
Ahdfeda c ^ Y er fi a > 60 Leagues from Shiraz, according to Abul-
r. \\q. f e ^a, or 63 according to Ebn Haukal. They place it
in 78 or 79 Degrees 30 Minutes of Longitude, and in
the Latitude of 26 Degrees 40 Minutes, or 29 and
30. They fay it was a Town of great Fame for
Trade, but that the Country about it was bare and un-
cultivated, becaufe of its fterility ; quite deftitute of Trees
or Gardens ; that the Heat was exceffive ; that the
Town was well built, and that fome of its private In-
habitants were 10 rich, as to have laid out thirty
thoufand Dinars, or fifteen thousand Piftoles French, in
railing and embellifhing their Houfes; and in fhort,
that moft of them were built with Wood brought from
p ^ the Country of the Franks, or Europe. The Arabian

Geographer, alfo mentions this City in many Places, in
the Defcription of the third Climate, as well as moil
Gel. in °f tne other Geographers. Trade ftill flourished
J If rag. p. there in the Days of Abulfeda, or about the beginning
n-r # of the fourteenth Century ; but when it began to mi-

grate to the Ifland of Kis-Ben-Omira, then Siraf foon
fell to decay ; but it made no long ftay at Kis, but
changed Seat for Ormuz, where it entirely fettled.

All the Arabian Ships put into Siraf, and efpecial-
ly when they came from Baffora, the chief Scale for
the Merchants of the Red Sea, Egypt, and even the
Coafl of Ethiopia. The Chinefe and Indian Merchants
brought thither all the Commodities the Eaft could
furnifh, whether from the Indies, the Terra frma, or
the Iflands then known.

They failed from Siraf to Mafcat, io the Country
of Oman, by Ptolomey called Qmannm Emporium, and



On the Foregoing Aaounts* s$

by Arrian, Omana. The Town alfb was called Sohar, Or In ?*rfyl9*
Sohar-Oman, or Shihr Oman. This Paffage is pretty dan-
gerous for the Rocks, Ifles, and Flats which lye in the
way. It is impoffible to fay what Places our Arabs mean,
iince they give us no Pofitions or Situations : But it mould
feem that Kaucamali, or Kaucam, is Cochim, or Cochin,
which it was eafy to reach in a Month's Paffage, with
the Wind aft ; becaufe of the Monfoons which are very-
regular. Immediately beyond Cochin, is the Sea of
Harkand, as the Arabs call it ; and in ranging along
the Shore, they firft touched at Cala, or Calabar, which
is the fame thing. An anonymous Perfian Author,
whpfe Abridgment, or Epitome of Geography, is in
the King's Library, fays, that this Town is in part in-
habited by Mojlems, or Mufulmen, and that there are
Trees here which yield Camphire, as may be. proved
by the Teftimony of Serapion, by reading Cala, inftead C. 144*
of Calca.

Our Author fays, that Cala, or Calabar, is about
a Month's fail from Kaucam, but this does not afford
us much light whereby to difcover its Pofition. Abu.
Zeid, the Author of the fecond Relation, feems to have
better explained the thing, faying, that the Ifle of Cala
is in the mid Paffage between China and the Country
of the Arabs, and that it is eighty Leagues in Cir-
cuit. Thus according to his Notion, it comprehends
an extent of Country under a Capital of the fame
Name, which muft have been fbmewhere about the
Point of Malabar.

From Cala in ten Days they reached a Place cal-
led Betuma : In Syriac, Beit-Touma, is the Houfe, or
Church of St. Thomas, which is upon the fame Rout,
and cannot be very far from Cala, or Calabar. The
Ancients muft have touched there, becaufe they lhaped
their Courfe between the Coaft and the Ifland of Cey-
lon ; whereas at prefent Ships ftretch to the Southward
of the Point de Gale, and fland over for the Ifles of
Nicobar which muft have been thofe of Najabalus, this
Name, it is probable, being equally corrupted by the
Arabs and by the Europeans. They are in eight De- y. Daws
grees of Northern Latitude, & confequently beyond Ca- a p, p urc fc
la and Betuma ; and thus there muft be fbme Tranf- y i r *
pofition in the Defcription of this Courfe, when they ,--

are



K5 REMARKS

are named before Betuma and Katrange, or Kenerag>
according to Benjamin the Jew.

It is hard to fay what Place this laft was, if it be
not the Chitran in our Charts, as well as to find the
true Place of Senef, or Sanf, although the Aromatic
Wood {hipped there, was for many Ages known all
over the Eaft. Serapion, who {peaks of it, though it
can hardly be known in the Tranflation we have,
which reads Seifi inflead of Seneji, gives us fome Dir
rection towards finding this Place, by telling us it is
but three Leagues from Cape Comorin, or Ras Comri,
where the Wood Aloes is to be had, but it is not fo
good.
Clim. i. T ne -Arabian Geography, printed at Rome, can reflet

*. io. no Light upon this Obfcurity ; for the Text mult be

fadly diftorted, fmce it makes two difcinct Continents^
of Malai, which mould be the Point of Malabar, and
Senef, and fince it is very likely we mould read Kau-
kam-Mali, or ' Melai, inflead of 'Malai.

The fame Author fays, that from Senef they go to
Sandarfulat, or, as it is in the Arabic printed at Rome,
Sandifulat. The Word Pulo is frequently compounded
by the Malays, to hgnify, that the Places whofe Names
have that Adjunct,, or Affix, are Iflands : A nd there is
a great Number of thefe in the Sea from the Gulf of
Bengal, quite home to China. Fulat mull then be the
.Pulo of the Malays, and Sanddr Fulat may be Pula
.Condor which is the neareil to China, and may for
that Reafon be the Place the Arabs fleered for, when
they were bound for the Sea of China. And as their
Navigation was rather Coafling than Sailing, and as
their Ships were very handy and light, they might
the more fafely venture through the Straits of Sincapor,
and keep the Shore aboard all the way : And thus
they kept between that String of Iflands and Flats,,
■which llretches away from the Coafl of Cambodia, quite
home to the Mouth of Canton River ; nor muil we
wonder they were five or fix Weeks upon this Paflage.

It is difficult to trace out the particulars of this whole
Voyage by fuch defective helps ; and after all, that
might be done towards it, nothing but a bare Curiofity
could enjoy any Satisfaction in it ; for our Seamen at

prefent.



Oh the Foregoing Accounts. 17

jprefent know more of thofe Seas, and how to fleer iri
them better than the greatefl Navigators of Anti-
quity.

The Sea of Sanji muft be fomewhere about the Gulf
of Cochinchina, which however, as has been obferved
by feveral Authors, is not the true Name of the Coun-
try, but Caocbi ; and even this is a Name impoied
on it by the Chinefe ; fo that this diverfity in the A-
rabic Name may borrow upon fome ancient Name of
the Country, we know not.

To a Place called Eetumai [ M 3

Betuma is a Syriac Compound, whofe true Ortho-
graphy is Bei't-Touma, which both in Arabic and Sy-
riac, is the Houfe or Church of St. Thomas. In like
manner the Syrians call the City of Martyropolis, Bar-
gamea, or Beit-Gar mea, and fo of others. But as much
as our Author leaves us in the dark as to the Courle
he rleered ; if we allow that Kaukam, or Qonkan, as
the Portugutfe write it, is fomewhere about the Gulf
of Cambaya, and if we grant that their Navigation
was no better than Coafling, which cannot well be
called in Queftion ; than need we not admire that the
Arabs mould reckon it a Month's Voyage from thence
to Betuma. Qalabar, Senef, Kadrange, or Chit ran,
are in the Neighbourhood of St. Thomas's. Marco Polo
and aimoit all the old Voyage Writers agree, that by
the Tradition of the Country St. Thomas mould be in-
terred in this very Place; and this is confirmed by
John di Empoli, Barbofa, Corfali, and aimoit. all the P. 146.
other flril Travellers. This Tradition is ftill in force 312. 31$,
among the Nejiorians ; and one of their moil famous
Authors, having iummarily touched upon the Preaching
of St. Thomas, fays, his Tomb was difcovered upon Amr. Hijf,
the Sea Shore, in a Village famous for being the Scene Ar.MSS.
of his Martyrdom. To this Tradition may be added °f the JYV-
that of the Malabar, and moil of the other Syrian fiorians.
Churches, who all believe St. Thomas penetrated in-
to the Indies, and that he there lies intombed: But
this fhall be treated more amply in the DifTertations
on the the Nefiorian Churches.

b Flying



REMARKS

Flying Tip.



[N]

Atlas Sift.



Tt is called Hcangcioqu, according to Father Mar-
tin}, who fays it is a Yellow Filh, or rather a Bird ;
for in Summer time it flies upon the Mountains ; and,
Autumn over, plunges into the Sea again, and becomes
a very excellent Filh. He fpeaks of another fort of
Animal in the Sea of Canton, which has the Head
of a Bird, and the Tail of a Filh.

r o ] Petri/jed Crabs.

The above cited Author defcribes thele to the fol-
lowing Effect : " There are certain Sea-Crabs which
** are taken alive, between Quantung and the Illand of
*• Hainan, which differ little or nothing from the com-
a mon Crab ; but when they are out of the Water,
" and are fenfible of the Air, they harden like the
" hardelt Stone, though they preferve their priftine
" Shape. The Portugtiefe ufe them in Fevers. There
" are of this fame kind in a certain Lake on the
" Illand of Hainan."

£ p ] A Burning Mountain^ or Vulcano.

There is a famous Vulcan* in the greater Java,
near the Town of Panaoura, which belched out a
prodigious Quantity of Flames, Stones, and Cinders,
y ay ; in the Year 1586. There is another in the Ifle of

Geocrapb. Banda, and another in the Illand ot Sumatra : In fome
/. 94. of the Molucca Illands there are the like, particularly

£f j' e q, in Ternate, where there is a Mountain whofe Top
Argent oU. throws up Fire, and from whence ilfues many Springs
Hiji. de of living Water. Nucopora which is either among the
Moluc. of Nicobar, or elfe one of the fmall Illands a-

Barbofa, bout Java, has, according to Barbofa, a Burning Moun-
p. 319. tain alio.

ft*



On the 'Foregoing Accounts. t$

There is a Mohammedan Y^zdi fettled at C<m&\. j-qj

This remarkable Fact is to be found in no Author
older than this, and proves that the Mohammedans
went firft to China by Sea, allured thither [by the. Ad-
vantages of the Trade. This Moflem Judge or Kadi of
the Merchants, was properly a Conful : By degrees he
became Judge over all the Mohammedans ; and even
took on him the Religious Functions, prefiding at their
Religions Aifemblies. But our Author obferves it as
fomething very extraordinary, that the Merchants from
Irak were not againft his performing the Spiritual Of-
fice ; for it properly belonged to a Man of the Law,
and a Merchant could not regularly act therein ; and
he was Hill lels qualified to judge the Subjects of the Ka-
lif, without Authority from him.

The Sermon, or Cotbat, was a Difcourfe with which ^mir
the Imams , or Rectors of the Mofchs commonly ufhered Q on £ £fia
in their Fridays Prayers. Thefe Difcourfes confifled- of j g ^ *
Praifes to God, and to Mohammed, varied to the Cir- ^$0 P if! ,
cumftances of the Times ; and therein the Imams af- c co
fecled to difplay their Rhetoric, but efpecially when
the Mojletns had obtained any Advantage over the Chri-
ftians ; and they concluded with a Prayer for the Kalif,
as had been Cuflomary after the Kalif had laid alide
the Cuftom of Preaching the Cotbat in perfon, fo that
this was a kind of public Homage they paid him.
This is the Ceremony fo often mentioned in the Hi-
ilory of the Saracens, and all the other Oriental Wri-
tings. The Perfon in whofe Name the Cotbat was de-
livered, was thereby acknowledged Supreme : For which
Reafon the Princes of the Family of Buiya, the Seljw
kids, and the others of different Families, who revolted
from the Kalifs, paid them the Honour of the Mofch ;
whereas the Fatemites, who ufurped the Title of Kalif
in Afric and Egypt, had the Cotbat in their own Name,
without any mention made of the Kalifs at Bagdad,
and thereby declared themfelves Heretics. Towards
the Extinction of the Kalifat at Bagdad, the Kalifs
were mere Cyphers ; and the Honour of the Mofch,
the Right of Inveflitures, and that of coining Mo-

b z ney,



a* REMARKS

ney, were all they had left. The Defendants otBulya,
who feized on all that part of A/a which owned obe-
dience to the Kali/s, ordered the Cotbat after this man-
ner ; the Kateb or Preacher, having offered up Praifes
to God and to Mohammed, began firft to fpeak of the
Kaiif, and then of the Saltan ; and the fame it was in
the matter of Coinage, for on one fide was the Ka-
lif** Name, and on the Reverfe the Saltans. The
fame was obferved by the Seljuhids : But as their Em j
■pire extended from Cajhgar quite into Egypt, and al-
moft to the very Gates of Conflantinople, and compre-
hended a great many tributary Principalities ; mention
was firil made of the Kali/ out of Religion, then of the
Sol tan out of Duty as Sovereign, and then of the Prince
himfelf, who by this Form acknowledged the Kali/his
Superior in Spirituals, and the Saltan, in Temporal Con-
cerns; and in paying this Honour, confided the De-
votion of the Mahommedan Princes, who adhered to
the Sonnite or Orthodox Kalifs. So Nuroddin the Sol-
tan of Syria, fet up the Cotbat in the Name of the
Kali/s all over his Dominions, and even in Egypt as
■foon as Saladin, who was general of his Forces, made
hiinfelf Mafter of Kahira or Cairo. And their exam
pie was followed by all the Mohammedan Prices in Me-
sopotamia, Syria, and Egypt, in the Year of the Hejra
dcxlviii. and of Chrift m ccl. after the Death of
Abidfeda Moadzam-Turan-Shah, the laft of the Family of the
EbnChuk- Ayubites, Succeflbrs of Saladin, who was killed by his
na Mah OWR p e0 pl e while St. Louis was in Prifon.
Uift. E- The Tartars who in the Reign of Holaku-Khan con-

&JP** quer'd all the Eaft to the Frontiers of Egypt, and who'

murdered the Kali/ Al-Motafeim, the laft of the Aba/
fid family, by tying him up in a Sack, and marching
their Army over him, put an end to the Kali/at. After
this the Mohammedans were without a Kali/, and the
Cotbat was fufpended for about four Years ; at the
Expiration of which Soltan Bibars-Bondokdari, the
Fourth of the Turkijb Mamluks, railed to that Dignity
an unknown Perfon, who pretended to be of the Fa-
jii m }b r °f ^bbas, in the Year of the Hejra dclix. and
of Chrift m ccl ix. But this new Kali/, who had a
yA/ /ma.11 Army committed to him by Bibars, attempting
io drive the Tartars away from Bagdad, was 11a in five

Months

\






On the Foregoing Accounts. 2 1

Months afterwards with all that belonged to him. Hi-
lars then fat up another called Hakem, whom the Peo-
ple nick-named the Black Kalif; and him Bibars kept
a kind of Prifoner, clofe up in a Palace, and abridged
of all Liberty ; though honoured as Kalif, and par-
ticularly with the Cotbat or Sermon, which was deli-
vered in his Name in the Mofcb. The Turkijb and
CircaJJian Mamluks kept up this Cuftom, and the Prin-
ces, their Tributaries, did the fame, in acknowledg-
ment of the Pontiiicat and Sovereignty of the imagi-
nary Kali/-, and thus the thing flood, till the Defeat
and Death of Tumam-bey, the twenty third and Iaft Cz'r-
cajjian Soltan, who was hanged by the order of Selzm,
the Emperor of the Turks, in the Year of C&r?/? mdxv.
Thus upon this fecond Extinction of the Kalifat, to
which the Dignity of Mufti bears no manner of
Relation, the Ceremony of the Cotbat, although as old
as Mohammedifm itfelf, was intirely laid afide.

Now the Origin of this Ceremony was fiich : Mo- Elmac*
bammed as Prophet and Head of his own Sec\ ad- Emir,
dreffed the People on the Days of their Afiemblies ; and Cond. C5V.
that he might be the better underftood, he was wont to
mount an Eflrade fome fteps higher than where the refl
Hood. He began with Praifesto God, and particularly ex-
patiated upon what Thanks the Mohammedans ought to
return him, when they had gained any Advantage
over their Enemies ; and then opened to them the Bufi-
nefs that was to come under their Deliberation. And
in this was he imitated by the Kalifs his Succeflbrs,
till the rife of the Family of Ommiyah, with the Addi-
tion only of the Praifes of Moha7nmed. At the fame
time they communicated to the People the important
Affairs of the Public ; for in the beginning of Mo-
bammedifm the Government was not Monarchical, but
the Tribes of the Arabs, as thofe of Medina, Mecca,.
Bafra or Baffbra, and fome others, claimed a Share in
the public Adminiftration, which after public Prayers,
as had been faid, was brought upon the Carpet by the
Kalif

The firft Kalifs, and particularly AH, who was very
eloquent of Speech, affected to enrich their Diicourfes
with all the Strains of Rhetoric and Poetry, which
gave birth to the Cuftom of dreffing them up with all

b 3 ttte



R EM ARKS'

the Pomp off Expreffion, and of mixing them with
Verfe and Pro e ; many Examples of which we have
in old Hiilories, and particularly in the Hiftory of E-
■mlr Cord. Moreover the Kalifs upon folemn Occa-
sions, and to IHr up the People by a' Remembrance
of their Prophet, appeared fometimes in White, when
they were to pronounce the Cotbat ; which in the Se-
quel gave rife to the Cuftom of appearing in a parti-
cular habit; and in Imitation of Mohammed, the K alif
mounted a kind of Pulpit or Gallery, called Man-
bar. But the Empire, fhortly after, increafmg to a great;
degree, and the Kalif having altered the firit. Form
of the Government, he aboliihed the old Cuftom,
and then the Cotbat began to be given in his Name,
by the Muftis, the Molla's, and other Officers of the
Mofdh. And now to the Praiies of God, and the
"Elegies of Mohammed, they added thofe of the Kalif:
and when it was pronounced for the firit. time after
the Elevation of a new Kalif, the People lifted up
their Hands, and put them one upon the other, which
was deemed as an Oath of Allegiance ; their left Hand
reprefenting that of the Kalif, and- by the right Hand
laid thereon, they fignified their old Form of taking
an Oath.

The Abbafids having deprived the Defendants of
Ommiyah, affumed the Black Garment, and when they
fpoke to the People, appeared always in Black r
whence thofe who delivered the Cotbat in their Name,
mounted the Gallery or Manbar in Black, which was
the Drefs of the Katebs in all the Parts where the
Abbajfids were acknowledged Supreme, either in Tem-
porals or Spirituals. The Manbar itfelf was hung
with Black ; and in this manner was it that the Ce-
remony was performed. On the other hand the Fa-
temite Kalifs, who called the Abbajfids Heretics, kept
to the white Veil, and hung the Manbar with a White
Carpet, becauie white was the Colour of Ali, whofe
Sectaries Hill wear white Vefts, or Sallies, as we
faw in the Ambafiador of Morocco and his Train,
who were of that Seel. Ever after then that the Ka-
lif gave over his Function, he delegated it to the Doc-
tors, the Men of the Law, or Derviles, nor could it
£>e canonically done without a'Miffion from the Prince.

After



On the foregoing Accounts. 2$

After all this, the Reader will perceive why cm Arabs
were in fome fort alhonilhed that the Merchants of
Irak who traded with China, could bear to hear a
private Man go through the Cotbat or Sermon, in
the Name of the Kalif. For this Man had no Mif-
iion, he was no Doctor or Lawyer, and it mull have
feemed Hill more extraordinary to Mohammedans, that
fuch a Ceremony ihould be allowed in China, which,
to their way of thinking, feemed to erect the Spiri-
tual and Temporal Authority of the Kalif in the Coun-
try where it was ufed.

Four Great Ktngs^ £?<;. [ r ]

The Dialogue in the Second Part clears up what
is here faid, concerning the Account the Chinefe made
of Foreign Princes. We mull not wonder that our
two Authors, being Arabs, mould give the Kalif the
the frit Place ; but in fo doing we mull not tax them
with Prejudice or Prefumption, for, in reality, the Mo-
hammedan Empire was then at its height. Aaron
Rajhid, known in our Hillory by the Name and Title
of Aaron King of Perfia, taking Advantage of the
Victories of his Anceitors, the firlt Kalif s of the Fa-
mily of Abbas, had made himfelf Mailer of all AJia,
from Romania to the Tranfoxane; and the Moors of
Afric, Spain, and the Mediterranean Iilands were Sub-
ject to him. In all this vail Trad:, each way, the
Cotbat was pronounced in his Name, and the Money
was all coined with his Stamp ; and about his Reign
it was that the Arabs made their firffc Appearance in
China. The Mohammedans of thofe Days were not
only conhderable for their Power and their Treafures
heaped together from the Spoils of all the Eail, they
excelled in the Sciences and the fine Arts ; and their
Tranilations of the Greek Books under the Patronage
of and by the Encouragement of Al-Mamun the Son
of Aaron, together with his Kindnefs to Men of Let-
ters in general, made the Empire as great for Arts as
for Arms.

But the Emperor of China, fay they, reckoned him-
felf the Second i this does not feem to fcpare well with
b 4 the



Lj REMARKS

• t Vanity, and we leave every one to pafs
his own Judgment thereon.

This Balbara is dignified Emperor vfthofe nvbn have
■■ Ears bored, which is the common mode a-
mong the Indians. Moil: of the Arabian and Perjian
Geographers fpeak of this Prince juit as our Writers
do. Abulfeda treating of Maabar, which is Part of
what we call Malabar, fays, that The Capital is three
or four Das from Coulam ; and adds, that the Moun-
i of this Country border upon the Land of the King
wf Kings, or Emperor of the Indies, calfd Iibara ; where
it is plain we mull read Balhara. The Situations of
all thefe Places are fo very doubtful, that we can
hardly even guefs at them. The fame Writer fays
elfewhere, that The Country of Chanbalig, in its South-
ward extent, touches upon the Mountains of the Balha-
ra, the King of the Kings of the Indies. This PafTage
may be illuitrated by our Author, who fays, that The
Countr: urJ.er the Balhara reaches by Land from the
Coafl called Kamkam, to the Frontiers of China. The
P. 62. Arabian Geography relates, that the Seat of this Prince
is at Nahakvanah or Nebalwarab, a City which accor-
ding to the Tables of Kafir Eddin and Ulug Beig, is in
the Longitude of 102 Degrees 30 Minutes, and the
Latitude of 22, and therefore can have been neither Ca-
licut, nor Cochim, nor Vi/apor, nor yet any that have
been in Reputation for feveral Ages lait. pall.

What our Author tells us of the Power of this Prince,
can feemingly fquare with no others than the Anceibrs
of the Emperor of Calicut, who by the Relations of the
old Travellers, and as appears even by fome Books of the
Country., which were examined by the famous Hiito-
rian John de Barros, had been inverted with the Au-
thority of Emperor and King of Kings, over all the
Indian Princes.

The Commendations our Authors bellow on the B al-
ii ira fcr being particularly kind to the Arabs, futes very
naturally with thefe Princes ; the laft of whom, Sarama
P v.rivial became a Mohammedan, and took Shipping to
go and end his Days at Mecca.

The Portuguefe Hiftories relate, that this Prince or
Emperor of the Indies, tranflated himfelf to Calicut, for
the convenience of the Pepper Trade : It is therefore

probable



On the Foregoing Accounts. $$

probable that before he fettled at Calicut, he redded fome- *
where in Guzarat, or in the neighbouring and more
Northern Country ; and fo the Mountains of the King-
dom of the Balhara, or the Cordillere which runs all
along Malabar, would have reached the Country of
Cha?ibalig, that is, the Frontiers of Turkeftan, then in
the hands of the Tartars, as well as of a part of China ;
and hence Abulfeda calls them the County oiChanbalig.

By the firll Relation or Account, we learn that the
Country of the Balbara begins upon the Coaft of the
Province of Kamkam, which may give Strength to the QeciA.cjl
foregoing Conjectures. For as Barros affirms ; All the c , j ,
Coajis which we reckon from the Mountain de Gate, and
which is but a long narrow Slip, is called Concan ; and
the People are properly called Conquenis, althd > we call
them, lays he, Canaris ; and the other Land which lies
within de Gate, fir etching E aft ward, is the Kingdom of
Decan, and the Inhabitants are Decanis. So Conkan,
or Kamkam, which is the fame thing, mult have been,
the Province where formerly the Balhara or Emperor
of the Indies kept his Court, before he removed to Ca-
licut ; and this is confirmed by a Perfian Geographer,
who fpeaking of Kamkam, fays it is the Pepper Country.

Notwithnanding it is no eafy Matter to point out the
City of his Refidence, yet by the Tables of Najfir Eddin
and Ulug-Beig, which place it in 22 Degrees of Lati-
tude, we may conceive that this City was at the Entrance ^ q 0#-»
of the Gulf of Cambaya, and that it was to all Ap- &ya£&
pearance the ancient Barygaza; for Arria?i, fays, $fi<cw j|
Near this City the Continent Jiretched down Southerly QuVcupriz
wherefore it was called Dakinabades ; for Dakan, in n7rei$&> cm,
the Language of the Country, fignifies South. Thus as <r« /3of in
according to the Moderns, Decan begins from the Coaft sk nr v'otov
called Concan or Kamkam ; fo according to the Ancients, e mA^A^- m
the fame Decan began from the moll famous Scale, which P5, <^to ^
was Barygaza. The Conformity of Dakin and Decan £&yjv ti-
ls felf-evident, and the word Abud, with which Arrian €a>Mt ko,~<
terminates his Greek Name, fignifies, moreover, a Coun- te%j »
try or inhabited Place, and is annexed to the Names of X®€£ ^ A ~
a great many Towns, as ttoKi? in Greek, Burg in Ger- X^^ $
man, and Ton in Englifli. Conkan according to Teixeira, KetKujo
begins from Chaul, and he fays that Vifapour is the Ca- v'qt&> tji
pital of that Province. eivffi

Ai- y K 4?W:



±6 REMARKS.

All this Teems to evince that this Title of Balhara
can be given to no other than the ancient S amor in or
Emperor of the Indies, who refided at Calicut fix hun-
dred Years and more before the Portuguefe arrived in
thofe Parts. And it is very likely that thofe Princes, who
from die very firft were fo kind to the Arabs, were the
very fame who brought them into Credit in the King-
dom, and iufFered them to fettle there. In Hiftory we
do not read of any Settlement of the Mohammedans in
thcfe Parts before that of Calicut, from whence they
fpread to all the trading Cities in India : therefore till
we meet with fome Hiilory of the Country to afford
us better Inftruction upon this head, we may ilick to this
Conjecture.

The Kingdoms or Provinces of Gtraz or Haraz, of
Tafck, of the Mouga, of the Mabed or Mayed. as the
Arabian Geographer writes them, mull be fomewhere on
the Continent between Cape Comorin and China. It is
well known that the Names of thefe Countries, as they
Hand with us, have been for the moll part corrupted ; and
that they are hard to be exprerTed in Arabian Characters :
It were then almoft to no purpofe to enter upon a number
of Conjectures, which, at the beft, muft be very doubt-
ful, from the little we know of the Hiftory of thefe
*A® « ui- P arts > an d the g reat Revolutions which may have hap-
yej. vvv iv P ene< i aitcr the Mohammedans got good footing there.
ficLPvyd- F° r Dem g valorous, induftrious, covetous, and great
Coiva-tL- Meddlers, they have always fomented Diforders here, du-
haAtti <&&- rm 2 which they have carved out for themfelves by the
y&Ptifi utter rum °f tne Princes, or by perfuading them to em-
ofia.yu.Ai brace Mchammcdifm for Reafons of State.
y^dy.^eL- Before we clofe up thefe Remarks, we will add that
civ ihhvvi- f he Thatarian Drachms, mentioned by our Author, are
Kols k[x,i- not q uite unknown ; but we muft take heed, left, de-
yctroi.y ceived by the Affinity of the Names, we imagine they
llivcu \rr\- me Drachms, or Pieces of Money of Tartary. For Tatar y
ctifAct <rff which is the genuin Name of Tartar, is fpelt with a T,
/xf Aa£5- anc * the other by two Th. Thefe Pieces then may have
ctvJ'fifv 85- been the ancient Coin of the Country, upon which the
CdL7ih<ii- Arabs gained by the courfe of Exchange: or perhaps
a'ovov'A- they were fome of thofe old Pieces mentioned by Arrian
'TToKKc^otx to have been current at Barygaza: At Barygaza, fays
ty Mivctv- he, they have old Drachms with Greek Letters and. the
J"^a. Names



On the Foregoing Accounts. 27

Names of Apollodotus and Menander, nvho reigned there
dfter Alexander.

If he will fuhnit to a Proof by Fire. [ S ]

The fame was for many Ages a Cuftom all over the
greater!: part of Europe, excepting iWr> where the Au-
thority of the Popes, v/ho never countenanced this Prac-
tice, prevented it from getting Ground. Upon this head
you may confult the PafTages and ancient Formularies,
cited by Juret in hisNotes upon Y<ves de Chartres, and fe-
veral others in Monfieur Du Cange, ®n the words Fer-
rum Candens and Judicium Dei; together with fome
others in ufe with our Anceftors to denote this Practice.
Andfo far was it from being thought a Superftition, that it
was incorporated into the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church, and had peculiar MarTes and Prayers to itfelf,
whether the Tryal was to be by red-hot Iron, or Wa-
ter, fcalding or cold.

It has been obferved that this way of Tryal was In Anti-
known to the Ancients, fmce Sophocles mentions it; but gon.v.zjA*
it is more extraordinary that it fhould obtain among fuch
barbarous Nations, as molt of the Indians are, as alio as
the Cafres of the Coaft of Mofamhique, who according
to Joam dos Santos (■*) oblige thofe they fufpecl of fome
capital Crime to fwallow Poifon, to lick a red-hot Iron,



. (*) Ao Segundojuramento chamao os Cafres juramento
de Xoqua, que o ferro T de hua enxo metido nofogo, Cif
defpois de eftar muy Vermelho, & abrafado, o tirao dofogo
com hua tenaz, Cff o chengao a hoca do que ha de jurar,
difendolhe que lamba com a lingoa o ferro Vermelho, tor-
que fe nano tern a culpa que Ihe attribuem, ficara fao &
fafoo do fogo, Jem Ihe quemar a lingoa, nem os beips :
Mas que fe tern culpa, logo Ihe pegara o fogo na lingoa,
beips & roflo, tsf Iho queimara, IJie juramento he mats
crdinario & ufao muytas <vez.es delle nao fomente os Ca-
fres, mas tambem os Mouros que nefias partes habit ao, £ff
que peor he, que tambem algums Chrtftaos derao ja efle
juraynento a feus efcra<vos, fobra furtos que fofpeitavao
teremlhefeytos. 1. I. q, ii. p. 17.

« or



28 REMARKS

or to drink boiling Water in which have been previ-
©ufly fteeped bitterHerbs,aud which they cannot get dowa
if they are guilty, but which they eafily tofs off if they

Lefe de E- are innocent. This is fo extraordinary a Fail, that the

thUpia O- Words of the Author himfelf, as to the fecond Method of

riental. c. Proof, may fairly claim a place here.

II. p. 17. " The fecond Oath, which the Cafres called Xoqua r
" is performed after this Manner : They take the Iron
" of a Hoe, which they put into a Fire and make it
tc red-hot, and being all on fire and red-hot, they take
" it out with a Pair of Pinchers, and hold it to the Mouth
" of the Perfon who is to fwear. They command him
" to lick the red-hot Iron, for that if he is innocent of
" what is laid to his charge the Fire will not hurt him ;
** that it will neither burn his Tongue nor Lips ; but
*' that if he is guilty, it will fet fire to his Tongue, his
" Lips, and his Face. This is the moll ufual form of
" fwearing, and not only the Cafres ufe it, but the
" Moors alfo of the Country : And what is worfe, the
*' Chriftians have already adminiflred the fame to fome
" of their Slaves fufpecled of Theft.

The Negroes of Loango and many others on the Coaft

of Afric have another Proof, by Water tinclured with a

certain Root which makes it as bitter as Soot, as we are

Apnd t°ld by Andrew Battle, in his Account of Angola ; where

Tttrchas, a ^° tne u ^ e °f red-hot Iron is common, as alfo that of

2. p. 083. the Pot charmed and filled with Salt, among fome
other Negroes of Guinea. The Siamefe have Proofs of

p. 2 G> the fame kind, if we believe Schouten ; as walking upon
burning Coals, fwallowing inchanted Rice, befides that
of keeping a long time under Water.

P. 307. Odoardo Barbofa relates that the Indians of Calicut

have a Proof with Oil, or boiling Butter, into which
they dip the Fingers of the Party accufed : This done
they bind them up for Examination on the third Day,
and if they are fcalded they kill him, but if there is

P. 344. no Sign of heat they put to death the Accufer. Nicola
di Conti writes to the fame purpofe, as well concerning
this and the Cuftom of licking or elfe handling of red-
hot Iron, as concerning what is commonly praclifed
among all the Indians in general.



h



0$ the Foregoing ActoMts. 2$



hi Sarandib, when the King dies, £T]

The Author of the Arabian Geography, who has al- Chin. 2,
moft thefe very Words, fays this was a Cuftom all over p. S.p.63*
the Indies. Moft of the Eaiiern Geographers, Kazwixi, Edit, LaU
£bn Wardi, and others, lay the lame.



'The Manners cf the ? Chinefe* £V]

The -Chinefe are fond of Gaming.'] The Arabic Word
ngnifies not only Gaming, but every other fort of Di-
verfion ; it may even be extended to Comedies and Shews
which the Chinefe are fo pleafed with, as well as the
Tonquinefe, the Cochinckinefe, and fome other neighbour-
ing Nations.

They love not Wine becaufe they have none, and
-becaufe their Extraction of Rice, their Tea or Chaw,
and fome other Liquors ferve them inilead of Wine. The
Mohammedans, who abilained therefrom, out of a Prin-
ciple of Devotion, could not fail to make this Remark
as well as fome others, which referred to their own Cus-
toms. Hence is it our Authors take notice, that
the Chinefe did not circumcife ; that they wafhed not af-
ter the manner of the Arabs ; that they killed not their
Meat by cutting the Throat, that the Blood mighf
drain off; all which the Mohammedans moft ftri&ly ob-
ferve.

Debauchery is at this Day very prevalent in China,
not only as to Women, Polygamy and the Numbers of
common Proflitutes, but alfo as to the abominable Vice,
fo much prattifed among the Bonzes. In the Dutch Em-
bafly you have a Reprefentation of their public Wo-
men as they are led about the Town veiled and upon
an Afs ; they are many in Number. Father Martini f at jy Q ru ^
relates, that the Women fold themfelves openly at Tang- y er ?' s j c _
cheu. Debauchery runs to a great height in Vancheu? coun * _
where they without Shame gratify the Rage of their q j t j M

-k^- 1 29.^.3 1»



3 o REMARKS

Lufl, Navarette (*) informs us that Sodomy was
punifhed formerly, and that thofe guilty of it were fent
to ferve in the Garrifbn of the great Wall.



* *####*#**#*##*-*##*#####*#########*####*#**#* *



R E M A R K S

O N T H E

SECOND ACCOUNT.

[X] <Tfc e Ocean has a Communication with the Me~
diterranean.

ABu Zeid obferves it as a new and very extraordi-
nary thing, that a Ship mould be driven from
the Indian Sea to the Coaft of Syria. To find
out this PafTage into the Mediterranean, he fuppofes
there may be a great Extent of Sea above China, which
has Communication with the Sea of Cbozars ox of Mofcovy.
The Sea beyond Cape Currents, on the Eaft Coaft of
Afric, was perfectly unknown to the Arabs, who did not
dare to venture upon fo unfavorable a Navigation ; and
befides the Continent that way was inhabited by men
Savage Nations, that it would been a Task of great La-
bour to have reclaimed them from their Brutality, or to



(*) Como aca condenan a Or an, y Galeras, condenave
el Chino al muro, El pecado de Sodomia tenia ejie pena :
^ambicn pero fi todos los que tienen ejle <vicio la hu<vicran
depagav, juzgo quedaria defpoplada la China, y el muro
con demajiada guarnicion. He mentions it again in the
Seventh Chapter of the Second Treatife, where he fays
that, En tiempo que reynava el Chino, a-via tambiem en
la corte de Pcquin cafa publica de muchachos ; quitola el
Tartaro, oy la ay en la civdad de Jangcben,

have



On the Foregoing Accou'nts. 3 1

Imve civilized them by the Intercourfe of Commerce.
The Portuguefe found no Moorifh Settlement on all the
.Coaft, from the Cape of Good Hope to Sofala, as they did
afterwards in all the other Maritime Towns quite to
China. This City was the laft their Geographers were
acquainted with to the Southward, and they did not know
that this Sea had Communication with that of Barbary
.round the Southermoft Part of Afric ; and accordingly
they defcribed no farther than the Coaft of Zinge or
that of the Cafrery. Therefore we cannot doubt but the
firft Difcovery of the Pafiage into the Indian Ocean, by
the way of the Cape of Good Hope, was made by the Eu-
ropeans under the Conduct of Vafquez, de Gama, or at
leaft fome Years before he doubled the Cape, if true it
be, as is faid, That Sea Charts have had the Cape
by the Name of Fronteira de Africa, before that ce-
lebrated Voyage was undertaken. Antonio Galium,
relates from Francifco de Soufa Ta<varez, That in the
Year m d xxvjii. the Infant Dom Fernand {hewed
him, the faid Tavarez, fuch a Chart, which was in the
Monaftery of Alcobaca, and had been drawn 1 20 Years ;
perhaps from that faid to be at Venice in the Treafury
of St, Mark, which is thought to have been copied from
that of Marco Polo, which has the Point or Promontory
of Afric, if Ramufio be right.

The Arabs knew no more of Japan, which they
called Sila, than they learned from the Chinefe, fmce by
the Teftimony of the oldeft of our two Authors, no Arab
had yet fet foot there in the Year of the Hejra cc xxz.



the Metempfychqfes.



This is very generally held among the Chinefe. Their Martin.
Hiilories fay that one Xekia or Shekia an Indian Phi- Hiji. Si-
lofopher, who was about a thoufand Years before Chrift, nar.p.iog.
was the firft that taught this Doclrine of Tranfmigra-
tion; and our Authors add that the Chinefe had it from
the Indians. It over-ran China in the Year of Chrift,
lxv. and the Chiefs of this Sect have to this Day their
Abode on or near the Mountain Tientai, in the Province
of Chekiang. This Xekia, according to the Chinefe Tra-
dition,




3» REMARKS

Atl.p. 93. dition in Navarratte, has been born eight thoiifami
times over, the laft time, in the Form of a white Ele-
phant. It is he that was called Fohee, after his Apd-
theofis. The Seel: of Xekia, fays the fame Father Mar-
tini, hold the Metempfychofis ; but this Seel is divided
into two Branches ; the one believing the exterior Me-
tempfychofis, or that the Souls of Men pafs after Death
into other Bodies, and thefe worfhip Idols, and ab-
flain from every thing that has Life ; while the other Seel:
has faith in an interior MetempfychofiSj which is the
principal Foundation of their Morality, which cort-
iilb in fuppreffing the Paffions, which are as fo ma-
ny different Animals proceeding from Man : But nei<-
ther the one nor the other expecl Rewards, or dread
Trig. I. I. Punifhments in a Life to come. Father Trigaut acquaints
p. 94. us, that the Chinefe have upon this Head fome Notions

not veiy unlike thofe of the Pytbagoricians. Father
Grueber avers that all the Chinefe are Idolaters at Hearr>
and that in private they all worfhip Idols : That true
it is they feem to be divided into three Seels ; but
that even their Sect of Literati, who profefs to a-
dore a fuperior Subftance which they call Xan-ti, have
thefe words written in Gold in all their Temples, and
adulate them with Offerings of Paper, Wax Tapers, and
Incenfe, purely by this form to diftinguifh themfelves
from other Seels, and particularly the Bonzes. Thefe,
lays he, came from the Indies into China, and it is im*
poflible to conceive what Veneration and Efteem was
paid them on account of their Doctrine of the tranfmi-
gration of Souls, altho' it differed fomewhat from what
was taught by the Pytbagoricians. In a word, all the
Authors who have written concerning China, agree with
thefe. The Indians believed and to this day believe
the Metempfychofis differently from the Pythagorcians ;
In Ahul- and the Arabs, before Mohammedifm, taught it after a
farg. p. particular manner, as Dr. Pocock will fatisfy you. The
13;. Chinefe will have it, that the Doelrine of Fe or the

At/. 198. Metempfychofis, came from Kieo in Junnan : but whence
Trig. I 1 . foever it came, it is thereto owing, that they often mur-
qa der their Children, when they think they cannot

M. Polo. I. maintain them, and that they butcher them with fo little
f, 26. Regret.

Men



On the foregoing Accounts* JJ

Men who devote themfelves* [ Z ]

The Portugnefe Hiftories fufficiently abound with Ex-
amples of Men who have devoted themfelves to certain
Death upon great Occafions ; and this the Portuguefe, in
their Hiibries, term Fazer fe Amoucos. It is a Cuftom
of very ancient Date; witnefs the Ambacli and Soludurii
among the Gauls, who engaged to die with their King,
as C&Jar and Athenaus will inform you.

The Inhabitants of Ceylon would do the fame, and a
Number of Perfons of Quality, filled Faithful to the King
in this World and the next, were wont, as Marco Polo
fays, to burn themfelves when he died. Odoarda Bar* L.^.dio.
bofa obferved the lame in the Indies, particularly among /. 302.
the N aires, who having engaged themfelves in the Pay Ram. T. 2.
of the King, or fome great Lord, would, if he died, or p. 307. de
fell in Battle, feek Death by revenging his Fall, or lay Id. T. 1 .
violent Hands upon themfelves to bear him Company. p. 330.

When the King of Tonquin dies, many of the Lords of
his Court confent to be buried alive with him ,* but for
an ample Account of what the Tonquinefe obferve upon
thefe Occafions, confult M. Ta-vernier,

Indians who burn themfelves* [AA]

This is an ancient and univerfal Cuftom in the Indies,
where it has taken fuch deep root, that it fubiifts to this
Day. All Accounts, both ancient and modern, confirm
this, and agree with what the Greeks and the Latins have
written upo^ the fame Subject. However it is but feldom
s now, that Men burn themfelves deliberately ; and it is
a long while fmce any Bramin has followed the Exam-
ple of Calanus, and fome other old Philofophers, who,
being fick of Life, committed themfelves to the Flames :
But it is ftill common for the Women to burn themfelves
with their deceafed Husbands. And altho' the Mohamme*
dans, at prefent Matters of a great part of the Indies, where
this Cuftom chiefly obtains, endeavour all they can to
fupprefs it, they have hitherto wrought in vain to eradi-
cate this cruel Superftition fo much preached up by Bra-
mins. c Ths



54 REMARKS

Pietro AI- ThtProcefiionsour Author defcribes, are Hill the fame
t&zre'x.iK. when Women barn themfelves ; but as formerly thofe
Rdne~ p. who burned themfelves behaved with great Courage, Re-
120- Bar- folution, and apparent Contempt of Death in all Re-
themai.$. ipefts, the Cuftom is now to alleviate the Pain, and
e. i o.Bar- dilpatch the Women by an extraordinary Fire. Our
bofa p. moil famous Travellers have often beheld this terrible

302. Sight in the Indies, and fome of them have defcrib'd it,

asBemier, Tavemier, and others. Teixeira, when he was
P. g* in the Indies, law four hundred Wives and Concu-

bines of the Naigue of Madura, burn themfelves along
with his dead Body. Marco Polo mentions a Cuftom of
L.^.c. 13. fome of the 7/z^ifl*z.r,who,being fentenced to die,kill them-
felves in honour of their Idols, and are afterwards burnt*



[BB]



the Indians have their Dofiors.



Geogr.
361.



N.



Dec. 4. /.
9 <-9-



The Name Braminis formed from that of Brachman;
which was ufed by the Greeks and Latins to fignify the
Indian Philofbphers, who are much mentioned in the
Arabian Writings. Our Author reports, that there was
a great Number of them at Kanuge, a City, which, ac-
cording to Abulfeda, is in 131, that is 141 Degrees 50
Minutes of Longitude, and in 29 or 27 Degrees of Lati-
tude. It ftands between two Branches of the Ganges,
Eaftward of Multan, in the furthermofl Parts of the In-
dies, and is diflantfrom this faid Town of Mutt an about
c c lxxx 1 1 Leagues, if Alazi%z be right. The King here
has two thGufend five hundred Elephants ; and the City is
handfomj, large, and a great Mart, like Kahira or Cairo
in Egypt. The King himfelf is called Kanuge, and has
many Mines of Gold in his Country, as is confirmed by
the Perfian Geographer. The Indian Hiftories make
mention of the City of Canofe ; and Barros relates that it
is near the Place where the Ganges meets the Gemna.
But the ordinary Refidence of the Bramins, and the Uni-
verfity, as we may iay, of all the Indian Doftors, is
Benares, or, as others pronounce it, Banarus, or as it is
called in the Tables of Ulug Beig and Nqffir Eddin, Ba-
narji. Bernier Tavernier, and the belt Travellers dwell
much on this Place. Kanuge, or Kennaug\ is, in the
abovementioned Tables marked for the Seat of the King

#



On the Foregoing Accounts* 3 5:

fcf the King of the Indies, but is there placed ill the 1 1 6th
Degree of Longitude, and the 27th of Latitude, which
it is impofiible to reconcile with the Pofitions of Abulfeda.
All Hiftories and Accounts are full of what regards the
penitent Life and Auflerities of the Fakirs.

Caravanfera's built by Devotion* £ CC ]

There are many Foundations of this fort in the Indies,
As well as in Turky, Perfia and Mogulifian, nor to mention
the many Hofpitals in the Indies for fick Animals. 'The- T. 3-/« 69.
*v enot observes, that the Charity of the Indians of Cabul
confifts in digging of Pits, or finking of Wells, and in
crefting a Number of fmall Receptacles on the High-
ways for the Accommodation of Travellers.

The Ctiftom of Cock-Fighting* [ £>D ]

This is remarked by Nicolo di Conti> ill his Recital of
the Manners of the Javans.

" Their moft common Diveriion is Cock-fighting.
" They have many forts of Cocks, which they carry
*' about with them in hopes of a Prize. They bet upon
i( their Cock and he whofe Cock has the better, carries
*' off the Wager*

The Cavalier Pigafetta fays the fame of the Inhabi- 4.361;
tants ofPulova, and others of the Molucca's. John Davis
and James Lancafter obferved the fame at Acbem, as ap-
pears by their Accounts in Purchas, Vol. 1. p. 132 and
156.

Public Women in the Pagods. [ EE 3

This infamous Practice is of old ftanding in the Eaft.
Herodotus has a Story of this kind of the Women who £, 1 , c,
proftituted themfelves in Honour of Mylitta, who by the 131.
Analogy of the C ha/dee, mult have been Venus ; and the



( * ) H giuoco piu ufato da loro, e di far combat tre i
galli, e cofi <ve ne portano de piu forti, ciafcuno fperando
the itfuo rejli <vincitore. Fanno infra di loro delle fcom-
fnejfe fopra quefi combatienti, & il gallo cbe rejlafuperiore
fa vincor li dinari,

c % proftituted



5<S REMARKS

Tents or Tabernacles of thefe Women were much like
L. 2. c. 38. thofe defcrib'd by oiy Author. In Marco Polo, we read
that the People of the Province of Cainda did the fame
thing; expofmg their Women in honour of their Idols.
T. 2. /. Tavernier fpeaks of a Pagod near Cambaya, whither mofl

2, 5. of the Courtezans of the Indies repair to make their Of-

ferings : And adds, that old Women, who have fcra-
ped together a Sum of Money, buy young female Slaves,
whom they train up to wanton Songs and Dances, and all
the Allurements of their infamous Calling : And that
when thefe Girls have attained their eleventh or twelfth
Year, their Miftreiles conducl them to this Pagod, under a
Notion that it is a Happinefs for them to be offered, and
delivered up to the Idol.

Again, we are told by Marco Polo, that there was a
like Cuftom in the Province of Camul, where it was pro-
hibited by Mangu Khan, whofe Command was obeyed for
three Years ; but obferving that their Lands did not pro-
duce as ufual, they, at the Expiration of the aforefaid
Term, fent Deputies to Mangu Khan to reprefent to him,
X. 3.^.23. Che da poi che manca<vano di far quejii piaceri cjf eke-
mofyne <verfo forajiieri, le lor a cafe anda<vano di mal in
pe'ggio. The fame Author, in another Place, fpeaks of
certain Indians, who offer their Children to Idols, and
S> xq2. S° * nto t ^ en " Temples Hark naked. Barbofa tells of Num-
bers of Proftitutes, who took up their abode in Pagods ,
and adds, That, in Tibet the Cuftom is never to marry a
Female who has not been expofed to fome one, but efpe-
dally to foreign Merchants. L.z. c. 37.

1 FF 3 fbe Idol of mitm.

This Idol mull be very old, and, perhaps, gave name
, . to the City and Country fo called, which is a part of the

■*_ «/• *• Province of Sind. The Capital is, according to Ahul-
feda, in 92 Degrees of Longitude, and 29 Degrees 40
Minutes of Latitude. According to Ebn Haukal it is
twelve Days diilant from Almanfur, which is a greater
Diitance than is allow'd by our Author. Abulfeda fpeaks
of this Idol, and fays it is dreffed in red Leather, and
has two great Pearls for Eyes. The Emir who was Lord
gi this City, in the Days Of 4hulfeda 3 received the Of-'

ferin§&



On the Foregoing Accounts. 37

erings of the Indians, who reforted hither in Pilgrimage
*rom the remoteft Parts. This Idol is defcribed juft after
the fame manner in Thevenofs laft Voyage. P* 1 63.

The IJland of Socotra. [ GG ]

This Story is told, in almoft the fame Words, in the
Arabian Geography printed at Rome, as alfo in almoft all
the Oriental Geographers. They all imagine that the
Difcovery of the Iile of Aloes, is one of the greateft Inci-
dents of Alexander's Progrefs ; and this tljey imagine from
the great Account they make of this Drug, which is one
of the firft Ingredients in their Materia Medica.You may
fee what is faid of it by Ebn Sina, or Avicen, as we call
him, and by the other Arabian Phyficians, and, among
the Moderns, by Gar das de Orta, and fome others it
were needlefs to cite.

Marco Polo relates of this Ifland, that its Inhabitants £. a.r.343
were Chriftians, and that they had an Archbifliop under
a Zatolic, who refided at Bagdad;, that is, a Catholico or
Patriarch of the Nejiorians. For the Arabs writing Ca-
tholic with an afpirated Letter, which is of the fame
Power with our J confonant or G, were it not for a Point
underneath, many have fpelt it Jatolic ; whence Marco
Polo, who was a Venetian, forms his Zatolic, pronouncing
the G or J after the manner of his Country.

The Port uguefe Authors, on the contrary, will have B arras
them to be Jacobites, or fubjec"l to the fchifmatical Patri- Dec. z. I. r .
archs of Antioch ov Alexandria. When the Portuguefe ci.Purcb*
firft came to this Ifland, the Inhabitants appeared to them /,. 778,
with Croffes in their Hands, to fhew they were Chri-
ftians : But Odoardo Barbofa fays, that, in his time, they J* 202,,
had hardly any Notion of Baptifm, and that they had no-
thing left to diftinguiih them as Chriftians but the bare
Name.

They have the Sonna in Arabic, [ HH ]

We do not fee how this Paflage can be other-
wife underftood, tho' the Translators of the Arabian
Geographer, who has copied it, underftand it in a dif-
ferent Senfe, becaufe the Text is mangled a little:



38 REMARKS

Dcgit enlm in ipfis natlo qu&dam Arabum, qui cft<verjft
Cif antiquis utuntur Unguis, Arabibus hac nofra tempejiate
ignotis. Thus is it the Maronites tranflate this Paffage,
wherein they are confeffedly miltaken. For this Paffage
does not relate to two fmall Iflands, but to that Arabia by
the Ancients called Libanophoros, by the Arabs themselves
Sbihr,a.nd by Ptolomey £ v .-,>■, where dwelt the oXdArabian
Tribes, Ad, Hamyar, Jorham, and Thabateba, who em-
braced Mohammedifm. Thefe Arabs had, Deiides the
Koran, many Stories and Traditions touching the Mo-
hammedan Religion, which they received from the Com-
panions of their Prophet, and his Difciples. From thefe
Traditions and Stories, they form the Body of their Sonna,
which therefore is very different in different Places ; fo
that not only the Sonna of the Perjians differs from that
of the Arabians, but that of the Africans varies from that
of Mecca and the Arabians of the Defart. From this
Variety a Number of Sects have arifen in the Moham-
medan Profeffion ; and thefe Seels have divided Moham-
medifm, and introduced feveral Variations in the Expo-
fition of their Koran, and in their Jurifprudence. The
Tradition of the old Arabs was the moll authentic, and
could not be mixed with fo much Novelty and foreign
matter as the Tradition of other Countries, where it
was multiplied World without end.

This was the fundamental Principle of the Science the
Fakis or Arabian Doctors profeffed. Ebn Kalican re-
lates, in the Life of one of the moft famous of them, Abu,
Tacub Ifaac,ihe Difciple of Kafei, and the Head of one of
their Sect ; That he boafted of knowing by heart feventy
thoufand Hadith, or Stories, concerning Mohammed and
Lis firft Companions, and a hundred thoufand others of
lefs importance on the fame Subject. They cite them in
their Books with the Names of their Authors, and the
Names of thofe thefe had them from, quite up to the
£rft, as the Jews do in the Talmud.

We muft not wonder therefore, if the Tradition was
different 'from the Vulgar contained in the Sonna among
fhe Arabians of the conquered Countries. . In thofe
Countries there are ftill old Copies of the Sonna } which
are fo different from the modern, that they have fcarce
gpy thing in common with them,

ON



OH the Foregoing Accounts. $9

ON T HE
HISTORY and CUSTOMS of

CHINA-



FEW Eaftern Writers liave written worthily of
China, although moft of them are fond of dwel-
ling thereon. But what they write is fo confined, ib
inaccurate, and fo Huffed with Fable that it is eafy
to fee they knew next to nothing of the Situation
and Remarkables of that Empire. The Greek and
Latin Geographers, whom the Arabs perufed in faul-
ty Tranflations, could lend them no helping Hand
in this Part of Afia, which was but litde known to
the Ancients ; and our two Authors are, perhaps, the
firft that have written tolerably on this Head. By the
Paflagesthe Nubian Geographer copies from them, with-
out naming them, it appears that in his Time there were
no Memoirs of more Value for what concerned China ;
and if the other Geographers have made but little
life of them, it is, feemingly, becaufe they thought them
Fabulous, as Abulfeda declares he did, in feveral Places,
The Accounts of the late Travellers, and particularly
thofe of Father Trigaut, and Father Semedo, and the fe-
veral Tracts of Father Martini have more amply in-
ftructed us in the Geography, Natural Hiftory, Manners,
and Cuftoms of China, than all that had been written
before. But as for the Illuftration of Hiilory, it may
be proper to compare the Ancient Accounts with the •
Modern, juft as Father Martini has in many Places ex- J t f as £ l n
plained Marco Polo, whom the Ignorance of part times
rejected as a Fabulift j it may be as proper to fhew
that our two Authors fo often agree with our late Wri-
ters, that they for that Reafon are to be had in par-
ticular Veneration, and efpecially as they went four
Jiundred Year or mom before Marco Polo, and our other

Q 4 «ajiie&



4 o



The Name
gf China.



Navar.



f.i.



Lucen. /.
*o. €. 3.

Appendix
fidAtlant.



REMARKS

carlieft Travellers : And it will be perceived by the
following Remarks, that, fome Points excepted, which
ftill want illuftration, they abound with very judicious
Obfervations, and fuch as are perfectly confonant with
our latell Informations.

It were to no purpofe to undertake a Juftification of
the letter Circumltances to be found in our Authors, by
a great Number of Citations. They may have been
miftaken in fome things, which new Difcoveries may
clear up hereafter ; but if they fometimes happen to
vary from the Modern Accounts, we mull not at once
conclude they are wrong ; for China, as well as every
other State, has been fubjecT: to great Revolutions,
which muft have wrought great Changes in the Go-
vernment and the Cuftoms ; and perhaps the more we
mail come to the Knowledge of the Chinefe Hiftory,
the more we mail be convinced of the Accuracy of
the old Travellers.

Let us firit examine into what our two Authors fay
of the Country in general. It feems they knew it by
the Name of Sin, which the Arabs borrowed from
Ptolemey. Thus it is that Ebn Said, Tacuti, Abulfeda,
and moft of the Eaftem Geographers call this Empire.
The Psrfians, however, pronounce it Tchin, much like
the Italians and Portuguefe ; a Name which may have
been impofed by Strangers, either becaufe the Chinefe
in their Salute fay, Chin Chin, or Ching Ching, or
from the Emperors of the Family of China as Father
Martini thinks.

Father Aleni the Jefuit fays, that in a Chinefe Book
. cited by Na-varette, China fignifies the Country of Silk ;
while others will have it that China fignifies to ohfer<ve the
South ; and the Merchants coming in from that Quar-
ter, may alfo have given Birth to this Name ; at leaft
we may afliire our felves it is of old Date among the
Arabs. The Name of Cathay, which is alfo much
ufed, did properly belong to the moft Weftern Parts of
China, and probably derives it Origen from thofe Scy-
thians beyond Mount Imaus, whom the Greeks called
Xet'iJ). Father Trrgaut, Father Martini, and, in a
Word, Golius, have evidently demonftrated, that the
Cata'i of Marco Polo, and our ancient Travellers muft
not be fought for out of China ; But they have not

fuffh



On the Foregoing Accounts. 41

famciently explained this Diftin&ion ; and what G alius
offers as a Proof (<vix.) that Mis. 7 ; Cata'i, and Teh a
Cata'i, fignify Musk and Tea of China, makes good
this Remark, fmce Musk comes from Tibet and the
adjoining Provinces, and Tea alio. But we do not
find that the Arabians and Perfians gave the Name
of Cathay to the Southern Provinces ; yet, certain
it is that all they report of the Magnificence of the
Khan of Cathay, muft be underftood of the Emperor
of China, and that the Cambalu or Chanbalig of the
Orientals, can be no other than Pekin : And here let
it be obferved, that thefe Forms of Speech came from
Perfia, and the Provinces of the Upper Afia, conter-
minous with China', and that this Name was pecu-
liar to the Weftern and Northern Provinces only,
which alone were conquered by Jenghiz, Khan, the
Emperor of the Moguls.

At the fame time it may be pertinent to take no-
tice that VoJJtus is quite miftaken, when, with his ufual
Confidence, he is fure the Portuguefe were the firil that
called the Country China, which he will have to be
the ancient Serica, and that the Chinefe mould be
called Seres, as he always calls them. For the Por-
tuguefexveft "unacquainted with China, till the fixteenth
Century, and our Arabian Travellers wrote in the
Ninth; and yet we mult not fuppofe they were the
Authors of this Name, which was in ufe long before
them. The Appellation of Seres is equally unknown
to the Chinefe, the Arabs, and the Perfians, nor is it
an eafy matter to prove that it bears any Relation to
the Inhabitants' of China properly fo called, fmce Pto-
lomey diilinguifhes the Seres from the Chinefe, whom
he calls Xi>cu.

It feems our Authors were but flenderly informed
of the Limits of China, fince they confine themfelves
to the Sea-port where the Merchants traded, the Capi-
tal of the Empire, and the Provinces next to the King-
dom of Samarkand. They fay that the Sogd of Sa-
markand 'is but about a two Months Journey from it,
which fquares with the Tables olAbu/feda,and the Au-
thor he cites, oiUlugBeig, and fome others. They
obferve that the Kingdom ofTibat, Tobit, or Tobat, for
ib the Arabs pronounce it* is not far diftant from the

iai4



4 i REMARKS

faid Provinces ; and the County of Tagazgaz, or &
hazaz, if this Name is not corrupted, is conterminous
therewith, on the Eaft. By this Word we might be
induced to think that we are to underftand the Peo-
ple of Laos. Thofe called Mabed, Mujet, and fome
others mentioned in the one and the other Account, muft
be placed between Tibet and Bengal; but it is a hard
matter to know them again in a flrange Tongue, and
after fuch great Revolutions, whofe Hiftory we know
not.

What our Author relates of the Number of Cities irt
China is confonant with the Reports of the late Tra-
vellers ; for our Arabs fay, that in China there are
above two hundred Cities, which have many others
fubordinate to them. Now, Father Trigaut reckons two
hundred forty feven ; Father Martini fays, one hundred
and fifty ; and Navarette reduces the Number to one
hundred forty eight of the firfl Order; but it is no
difficult matter to believe that the Number of thefe
Capitals may have increafed and decreafed according
to the different Alterations which have happened in this
Empire.
Canfu. Canfu was the City bell known to the Arabs, be

caufe it was the Scale of all the Commerce with the
Indies, Perfia and Arabia. The Rocks called the
Gates of China, in our firfl Account, muft be iht Hies
which lie between the Coaft of Cochinchina, and the
Mouth of Canton River. The Arabs required eight
Days to fleer through them, becaufe of the Dangers
they ran of mifcarrying among them; a trouble they
might have avoided by fhaping their Courfe directly
for the Ifland of Hainan, or Ainam, which is, proba-
bly, what they call Alnian. Canfu muft be Changcheu,
or Quantung, now commonly fpelt Canton'. Fu and
Cheu are two Terminations, the firft of which being
added to the Name of a Place, denotes it to be a Ca-
pital City, and the fecond is to denote a City only.
Canfu was but a little way from the Sea, and flood
upon a great River, which Ships entered with the Tide,
and this Situation agrees perfectly with that of Canton.
#.369. This City is mentioned in the Nubian Geographer, but
both in the Original arid in the Tranflation the Name
is very much corrupted, being written Caitaku^ and the

fame



On the Foregoing Accounts. 43

feme Inaccuracy may be obferved in Abulfeda, who
iays, this City was known in his time by the Name of
Can/a. He places it in 164 Degrees 40 Minutes
of Longitude, and 28 Degrees, 30 Minutes of Latitude;
and adds, that " By the Accounts of* fome Travellers,
" it is the greater* trading City in all China. That
" he had been informed by a Man who had been there,
" that it Hands to the South-Eafl of Zeitun, half a
" Day from the Sea, and upon the Branch of a River
"" which forms a Canal, navigable by the largeft Ve£
*' fels. That it is extremely large, and that its inclo-
<e fure furrounds four miall Eminences ; that they there
" drink Well-water ; that it had very pleafant Gardens,
* c and that it flood about two Days diftant from the
■* Mountains." By this flender Defcription it fufficiently
appears, that this Geographer was but poorly acquainted
with the Situation of the capital Cities of China, and
moll of the others fpeak with the fame Obfcurity. BuC
our two Authors leave no room to doubt of the true
Orthography of this Name, and Abulfeda\ Conjecture
cannot be borne, fmce, to all appearance, his City of
Can/a, muft be Changcheu, or fome maritime City of
Eminence for Trade in his time. a

But it is a far more intricate Task to afcertain what q j
place our Authors may mean when they ipeak of Cum- Um aa *
dan, where they fay the Emperor of China then re- -
iided. This City they fo often mention, that there is
no ground to imagine the Text to be corrupted ; and
the Chinefe and Syriac Infcription, found in the Pro-
vince of Xenji or Chenfi, in the Year mdcxXv, con- r ,.
firms what they advance \ for in the Syriac words . !. na
Cumdan is called the Royal City, and the Capital of l "ft r ? ta
Qhina. Now the two Cities where the Emperors have l '
for many Ages pail reiided, are Pekin and Nankin;
but the firft which is thought to be the Cambalu of
Marco Polo, and the Chanbalig of the Orientals, has
not enjoyed this Dignity above ccccl Years, or there-
abouts ; fo that in the Days of our two Authors, Nan-
kin, otherwife called Kiangnang, was the Capital of the
Empire, and the place v/herc the Emperors of China
kept their Court.

Cumdan muft then be Nankin, nor can we well Cumdan
$mty % face the Arabian Geographer, fpeaking of muft b e

the Nankin



44 REMARKS

the greateft River in China, which certainly is tie
Kiang, calls it the River of Cumdan, becaufe it flows
through Nankin, the only City that crowns that River,
which had for feveral Ages been the Seat of the Em-
pire. Therefore is this Town called Nankin, or the
Southern Court, whereas Pekin fignifies the Northern
Court. The Syrians, who wrote the Chine fe Infcription,
we juft now mentioned, have another Title for it, and call
it the Eafiern Court ; and thus this City may have been
lliled by the Chinefe, and, perhaps, the different Names
Martin. of Kingling, Moling, Kianle, Kiangnmg, Kiangnang, and
Atlas t \ 29. Ingtien, which it has borne under different Royal Fami-
lies, may import what the Syrians have in their Infcrip-
tion : But without entring into this Labyrinth, it is ealy
to perceive that it was natural enough for the Syrians to
call it the Eafiern Court ; for of all the Royal Cities in
China, it was the moll Eailward from them who came
from Syria by the way of Tibet. The magnificent De-
fer jptions our Authors give of this City can agree with
no other than Nankin ; for Pekin was not yet the Seat of
the Emperor, and even when it was thither transferred,
Nankin did not fade much away till the laft Wars, that it
was entirely facked by the Tartars.
Vie Tefii- Ahulfeda inthrones the Emperor of China at the City

meny of of Biju, or Banju, or Bijhu ; for this Name is fo often
Abulfeda. varied in the Copies we have of this Author, who lays
it down in 1 1 4, that is, 1 24 Degrees of Longitude, and
1 7 Degrees of Latitude ; and adds, that it is the Refidence
of the Pag fur, who, fays he, is the Emperor of China,
otherwife called Tumgage Khan, that is, Lord of the Coun-
try of Tumgage, or Tumgaz ; that it is an inland City,
embellifhed with many Gardens, and that the Inhabi-
tants have their Water from Wells ; that it is fome Days
diftant from the Sea, and five Leagues North- Weft of
Canfa, and that it is incompaffed with Walls, for the
moil part in Ruins. All this he fays from the Informa-
InAyrag. t[ on f a Traveller. Golius cannot fettle upon what
t' 75' City this mould be, and believes the Eafterns may have

meant Pekin, Nankin, Quanfi, Tamcheu, or even Pegu.
But the great Diftance and Difference between thefe Cities
evince, th.2iX.Ebn Said, Abulfeda, and the other Authors
cited by that learned Man, can have pointed at no other
City than Nankin \ not that the Portions Abulfeda) Naf



On the Foregoing Accounts. 45

firtddin, and Ulug Beig give their City of Biju, can be
applied to Nankin, and even they differ among themfelves,
fome placing it in 124 Degrees, and others in 130; but
we deduce thus much from the Situation of the City,
which they fay is fome Days diftant from the Sea, and
not very far from Can/a, which, tho' it cannot be faid
either of Nankin or Pekin, yet it may be more truly re-
ferred to the former than to the latter of thefe Cities.
And this is the more to be regarded, inafmuch as fome
very accurate Writers have evidently demonftrated, that Got. dp-
the Cambalu of Marco Polo, and the Chanbalig of the pend. ad
Orientals, can be no other than Pekin, the Pofition of Allantem
the one and the other coinciding nicely enough. Sin.

Among all the different Names of Nankin, we do not
find it was ever called Cumdan, and it is very probable
that this Name is not fpelt exactly by the Chinefe Ortho-
graphy : But it is enough for us that this Town was
known by this Name among the Orientals ; and the Con-
formity of the Chinefe and Syriac Stone, with our two
Authors, as to the Name of this City, is well worthy our
Obfervation, and may inconteftably confirm what they
Write.

All that our Authors report of the Magnificence of this
City is agreeable to the Defcription of Nankin, in the
Relations of the Fathers Trigaut and Martini.

Our Authors fpeak of the Government of China in Tfo Go~
Terms which prove them to have been been no Strangers <vemment
thereto ; for notwithftandng the extraordinary Revolutions of China,
which have there happened within eight hundred Years
paft, what they fay is, in its pricipal Circumftances,
confirmed by the Teftimony of the later Voyagers.

They take notice that China was governed by an Em-
peror, who was fupreme and abfolute over all the Gover-
nors of Provinces, whom they flile Kings. The Arabic I
Word, Make, which they ufe, does not actually import
a King, according to the Senfe and Meaning of thole who
wrote contemporarily with our Authors, or in the follow- '
ing times. As the firfi: Mohammedan Sovereigns affamed
the Title of Kalifs, or Vicars of God upon Earth, and Sue-
cejfors of Mohammed; this ftile was peculiar to his Defen-
dants, or, thofe who pretended fo to be, in the Sequel.
The Kalif enjoyed all Authority, both in Spirituals and
Temporals, and no Mohammedan that ere&ed himfelf

'mm



4 6



£.2.^.68-
Dutch Em-
baffy to
China.



The Bag-
bun.

t.z.c.68.



Htft. Per/.
7«MSS.



Trig. I. 6.
c. 16. iV#-

«i><ar. /. I.
c. 9. M*r/.



kEMARKS

into a Prince, and particularly after the AbbaJJtds, aflunik
ed that Title free from Schifm ; for the Fatemitei
of Egypt, and fome other Princes of lefs Note, who pre-
sumed to take it on them, were guilty not of De-
fection only, but of Schifm alfo, and were rejected as
Heretics by the other Mahommedans. But thofe who ad-
hered to the Bulk of Mohammed's Followers, and remained
in Subjection to the Kalif at Bagdad, and who to this
Day call themfelves Sonnis, pretended to no more than
the Quality of S oh an or Prince. Make was a Surname:
peculiar to the Branches of the Royal Family, and was
granted, as an Honour, to tributary Princes, who ac-
knowledged either the Kalif s or the Soltans. We muft
not therefore wonder, that thefe Governors of Cities and
Provinces, who ruled almoil with a fovereign Sway, tho*
at the fame time Subordinate to the Emperor, mould be
dignified Make, or Kings,, by the Arabs ; and efpecially
fmce our later Travellers ufe the fame Term. Thus
Marco Polo, Father Trigaut, Father Martini, Navarette^
and the Dutch not only ftile the Princes of the Royal Fa-
mily by the Title of Kings, but the Governors alfo ; and
both the one and the other obferve with our Authors, that
thefe petty Kings are in Subordination to the Emperor,
befides that Navarette reports the feveral Provinces of
China to have been formerly fo many Kingdoms.

The Arabs commonly write, that the Emperor of C hind
is commonly called Bagbun, tho', according to the moil
ancient of our Authors, they in his Days pronounced it
Magbun. But others, as Abulfeda, and an old Perjian
Author, call him Fag fur, and pretend this and Tumgage t
or Tumga% Khan to be fynonymous ; and Marco Polo
calls thofe Kings by the Name or Title of Fan/ur, who
preceded the Tartars, under whom he went into China.
They all agree that this Title figniffes the Son ofHeavent
and our lait Accounts agree as to the Senfe of this Word*
but inftead of it they give us another, Tiencu, to fignify
the fame thing, and hence, perhaps, the Arabs formed
their Tumgage, which is otherwife fpelt Timjage, and after
other ways.

We muft not wonder that our two Authors tell us no-
thing of the Royal Family of the Emperors who reigned
in their times ; for we can reap no manner of Information
from any other of the Arabian Writers, or the Per/tan,

Who



On the Foregoing Accounts. 47

who did not begin to know China till towards the twelfth
Century, when the Tartars became Mafters of it. But
the total Revolution, mentioned in the fecond Account,
is the more remarkable, as it fquares very exactly with
what we read in the Beginning of Father Martini's
Chincfe Atlas. He fays, that from the Year ccxi before 2. I
Chriit, when the Family of Hana mounted the Throne,
upon the Deprivation of the Family of Cyna ; the Princes
of the aforefaid Family of Hana reigned till the Year
. gclxiv after Chriit ; and that then the Family of Cyna
fucceeded, and held the Throne till the Year ccccix of
the fame. Then five Kings rofe up againft each other,
and commenced the War of the Utai, as it is called,
which was carried on till four of thefe Utai being de-
feated, the fifth, of the Family of Tunga, feized on the
-Empire in the Year dcxviii. That in a fhort time af-
terwards the Empire was rent into many Factions, the
Chiefs of which were called Heutai: And that at laft the
Family ofSunga rofe to the Empire, and kept it in Pof-
feffion till the Year mcclxviii, when the Tartars
quite fubverted it, and then it was that Marco Polo en-
tered China. It follows then, that in the Year ccxxxvi
of the Hejra, which is in the Year d c c c l i of Chriit ;
and that in the Year cclxiv of the former, which is the
Year d c c c l x x v i i of the latter, and which are the two
chief Dates of our Authors ; the Empire of China was
embroiled by thefe feveral Wars of the Heutai, and from
thefe Factions muft arife the Comparifon Abu Zeid makes
between the Divifion of the Chinefe Monarchy and that
of Alexander, which, however, happens to be as inac-
curate as every thing elfe the Arabs and Perjians write
concerning that great Macedonian. This may be uiffi-
cient to evince that our Authors had been well informed
of thefe great Events, and that they confequently may
claim our Belief, in fome other points, which cannot be.
& happily made out.

What our Authors write of the Government of China,
as being a metropolitan City, or the Capital of a Province^
is diftinguifhed from others, by five Trumpets of extraor-
dinary Size, is not altogether confirmed by our modem
Accounts ; but it is, however, a thing to be found in
ibme Authors, and may, it is likely, have been obferve^
when this Mark of Dignity was in being,

Th*



4 8

X>rums.
L.i.c.6.



Pinto.
Purch. Vol
IIL/.276,

Atip.i^.



P.unuchs.

P. 1 29.
l 3 .



Purch.

353-



R E M A

The Drums they relate to h ch City, are

to this Day Eniigns of Diftin -rette writes,

that at Nankin, then the Roys was a Drum

for each Tribunal ; that it is be 1 Magiflrates

to Council ; and that the Drum belonging to the iupreme
Council is covered with the whole Hide of an Elephant,
and that they beat it with a great Piece of Wood which
hangs by Ropes. Martini relates, that before each Go-
vernor's Palace, there are two fmall Towers with mufical
Inftruments and Drums, which are beaten when the Go-
vernor goes out, or comes in, or takes his Seat. Father
Magalhaes fpeaks of that at Pekin, as of unufual Bulk,
being no lefs than thirty fix Foot in Circumference.

All the Cities are fquare, as is obferved by the Fathers
Trigaut, Martini, Navarette, and many others.

Our Author tells us the Governors of the great Ci-
ties are called Difu ; that thofe of the fmaller Towns,
which Father Martini calls Cities, are Tufang ; that the
Eunuchs are titled Tukan, and the fupreme Judge of each
City, La^Jhi-ma-mak-tvan ; and confefs that they know
not how to delineate thefe Titles in Arabian Characters.
How, we find Traces of thefe fame Names in our late
Relations ; for Trigaut calls one of the principal Magi-
flrates Toutam, the fame the Dutch call Tontang, in their
Embafly. Father Martini obferves alfo, that in jfunnan,
there are certain Lords called Tuquon, who are inverted
with an ablblute Power ; and, according to Magalhaes, ■
the Princes of the Province oijunnan, Queichu, £>ua?nji,
and Sutchuen, are called Tuquon or Tufu. The fupreme
Magiflrate of Cities and Provinces is flill called Lip *,
whence, to all appearance, the Arabs formed their Difu>
or Cifu, which is ftill a considerable Dignity.

In the fame modern Writings, we read alfo of Eunuchs
inverted with the mort important. Ports, and particularly
employed to receive the Cuitoms in Cities. Father Mar-
tun mentions him of Nankin, as a great Gmcer; and
Father Trigaut mentions him ofLinJing, who was fent to
receive the King's Revenues, and of another who fu-
perintended the Shipping. Father Diego de Pantoja de-
fcribes the Pomp of the Eunuch Mathan, in a Letter of
his ; and Father Trigaut informs us there is a great Num-
ber of Eunuchs, who are fo made by their own Fathevs ;
Quos cafirant auam $hrimi s at inter regios Fa?nulos an-

numerari



On the Foregoing Accounts. 4P

timer art que ant, nam prater hos, alii Regi non famu-
iantur, nee a conjiliis Junt, nee cum eo colloquuntur, quin
imo tota fere regni adminiftratio. in femi-virorum tnani-
hus <uerfalur. In fine, Father Martini in his Hiitory p. 6*.
of the Tartar Wars, fays, that the Emperor Tianki .
raifed his Eunuch Guei to fo mighty a pitch of Power, \
that he ruled the Empire with an arbitrary Authori-
ty, putting to death, and depriving of their Offices all
fuch as were not agreeable to him.

What our Author adds of the little Bell hung in EittkBell.
each Palace, for tkofe who defired to be righted by the
Emperor, or the Sovereign Magiitrate, when they could
not obtain Juftice at the Inferior Tribunals, is grounded
upon a very ancient Cufcom, which is to be feen in I
Father Martini's Life of the Emperor Vvu, who reigned \
mmccvii Years before Cbrift ; "He lent a ready Ear \5Q a J^' d
*' to all thofe who offered to advife him concerning
" his Duty ; and ordered a Bell, a Drum, a Table
" of Stone, a Plate of Iron, and of Lead to be fixed at the
" Gate of his Palace, caufing Proclamation at the fame
*' time to be made, That all Perfons of underftand-
** ing and approved Character might ftrike upon any
u of thefe Instruments, each of which was appropriated
" to particular Cafes. They rang the Bell for what re-
" garded Juftice ; they beat the Drum for what con-
* c cerned the Laws, or Religion ; they ftruck upon the
" Leaden Plate when they wanted to fpeak on Mat-
*< ters of State ; upon the Stone Table, for Wrongs
" committed by the Magiilrates ; and on the Plate of
u of Iron, for Prifoners." * Hift.Sin,



* Eos qui officii fui admonitum reprehendebant mn mi-
nor i facilitate audi-vit, quam, ut Sinica phraji utar^aqua.
denfumfiuit. Hint ante fores Palatii campanam, tympa-
num, tabellam lapideam, ferream, & plumb earn appendi
juffit, addito EdiSio, quo do Sis & pro bis <viris, qui de
re aliqua monendum Imperatorem ducerent, pot eft as febat >
ex his injlrume?itis illud pulfandi, quod cuique caufarwri
ge?ieri effet dejlinatum. §)ui jujlitia confultum ibant, cere
campana : qui legibus ac religioni, tympano edebant jo-
num : ft regni negotia forent, tabellam plumbeam fi in
juries a Magijlratibus illata> lapideam, ft de carcere Cif
fvinculis querela, ferream pulfabant.

4 Ut



?.$2.



. 1$ REMARKS

He adds, that this Emperor one day rofe twice fiQrri
Table, and that another time he went thrice out of
the Bath to give Audience to thofe who requefted it
by thefe Signals. This fame Cuftom itill furvives in
China, according to Father Couplet , who, in his Chro-

P. 4. nological Abridgment fays of this fame King, " He

: " erected a Drum and a Bell at his Palace Gate, at

" the Sound of which he went out to give Audience

4 < to his Subjects, and this fame Cuftom iubiifts to this

" Day."

Buildings, The Cbinefe Hill build much after the fame manner
defcribed by our Author j for the Infide of their Houfes
is Wood, and they particularly make ufe of the Bam-
loo, or fplit Cane for their Partitions, which they do
over with their Varnifh or Glue Cie, the Compoikion
of which they have hitherto kept to themfelves ; fo
that We cannot be fure our Author is not out, when
he fays they make it of Hemp-feed. Their Houfes,
fays Father Martini, are not magnificent, but they are
more convenient and neat than ours. They are not
fond of feveral Stories, becaufe of the Trouble of get-
ting up Stairs ; and the Emperor of China fell a laugh-
ing, when he was firit fhewn the Plans of the Euro-
pean Palaces, and could not conceive how our Princes

Trig. I 4. did to live in upper Stories. Every Body is in the

/. 403 . lower Part of their Houfes, which is divided into Rooms
and Chambers. The Outiide of their Houfes is but
fparingly adorned, if you except the grand Entrance
and others fmaller in the Front, which are magnificent
in the Houfes of the Wealthy : But the Infide is more
embellifhed; every thing is done over with their precious
Cie, and mines to a wonder, all their Walls being var-
nifh ed therewith. The Houfes are commonly Wood,
and even the Royal Palace is the fame, but the main
Walls are Brick, and ferve to divide the other Rooms
from the Chambers ; for the Roof and Covering is fup-

L ported by wooden Pillars, jufl as Father Trigaut had

' \ ."! laid before in almoft the very fame Words.

/. 14. '



Tympanum iff campanam ad Palatii <valvas erigit,
CMJus piilfu fuQi auditurus project, qui ufus hodieque «z/i-
get.

The



On the Foregoing Accounts. 5 1

The ancient Cuflom of keeping a Watch every Watchmen
Night upon a very lofty Tower, to beat a Drum as to look out
a Signal when they faw Fire break out in any Houle, for Fire.
is a Proof of the dread they have always had of Fires Atlas Sin,
in their great Cities. It is even Death for the Perfon P. 17.
to whole Negligence a Fire is owing, becauie of the
Danger of its ipreading among fo much Wood. Mar- £. 2 .p.
co Polo takes Notice of this lame Cuilom in his De- 476.
fcription of Quinfai, and fays, they there watch every
Night for fear of Fire, becaufe moil of the buildings
are of Wood ; and that the Watch ftrike upon Bafons
[Gonfrs] or great Boards* to give Notice thereof to the
City.

Some Alterations may have happened in their Mar- Marriages.
riages, and we are not exactly informed of their No- Account
tions of Relation or Parentage. Father 'trigaut reports,
they are not very fcrupulous in obferving the Degrees *' **
of Confanguinity on the Mother's fide ; but they are
very cautious of marrying any Perfon that happens to
have their own Surname, tho' in no degree related to
them ; this is obferved by the other Writers, and Fa- p m *$>
ther Couplet has not forgot it in his Abridgment.

In our Authors days there were public Couriers in leve- Couriers _
ral Parts of the Mohammedan Empire. Some of thefe went andHorjes.
on Foot, as the Cuftom ftill is in the Othman [Ottoman] x Account
Empire, where all the Soltan's orders are conveyed by h l T •
Olacs or Footmen, who being fixed at certain Stations,
make incredible dnpatch. The lame there were in
China ; and if we may believe Father Martini, there
are ftill the fame, difpofed at each Stone, a Stone con-
taining ten Chinefe Furlong ., or one of our Leagues, who
forward the Difpatches of the King and Governors.

Moreover, it appears by the Teiiimony of Abu Zeid,
that they had Polt-Hories, or at leaft Mules; for the
word Berid has this fignification, and has for a long
while been very much in ule, to fignify Horfe Poits.
The Arabs made ufe of thefe upon many important
Occafions, juil in the fame manner as in other Places,
but with this difference, that as Pofts were originally
let up for Public Affairs only, they were applied to
no other ufes among the Mohammedans,, and the fame
it was among the Chinefe. Father Martini obferves of
China, that at every eighth Stone, which ends a Day's j^ . ,
d Z Journey, J *"' **■



j2 REMARKS

Journey ; there are Royal Public-Houfes called Cung*
quon and Tell, for the Accommodation of Governors and
Magiftrates, who are there entertained at the King's Ex-
pence, if they fend but a Letter before them y and that
there they are furniftied with Carriages, and every other
Conveniency ; which comes pretty near to the E-veclio
of the Romans.
1. 2. c. 20. Marco Polo fays, that in his time, there were Polls in
China, and that they were fettled from three Miles to
three Miles, which is much the fame Diftance allowed
by Father Martini : that thefe Places were vifited once
every Month, and that the Notaries or Clerks wrote
down the Name of each Meffenger, the Days of their
Departure, and fuch like Cirr urn -lances.
Admini- What is related concerning their Adminiftration of

firation of Juftice, the Severity of their Tribunals, and many other
Juftice. parts of the Chine fe Polity, needs no particular Illuftra-
tion. Thofe who have perufed the Modern Accounts
of China, will perceive that our Arabs are not much
out of the way in what they write of the fame. Ail Bu-
finefs is there tranfadled by Petition, and in Writing ;
and Juftice was feverely adminiftred in former Days, a
notable Inftance of which we have in the Story of the
Khorajfanian Merchant, who demanded and obtained
Juftice againft the Eunuch, though the Emperor's Fa-
vorite.

But it feems that this ancient Severity is ill obferved in

thefe latter times ; for whereas, our Authors affirm,

Robbers were punimed with Death without any hopes

1. 1 . c S. °f Reprieve, Father Trigaut acquaints us, that, in

his time, they were only condemned to the Gallies,

even after many Repetitions of their Crime ; and that

for the firft Commiftion they only branded them with a

hot Iron and Ink.

the Bam- The Punifhment of the Bamhoo was alfo in his time,

hoc. inflicted for the ftighteft Offences, and almoft without

• any Form, quite the Reverfe of the ancient Ufages ;

I. i.e. 9. fc^ our Authors agree with the Moderns, in what regards

the Severity and Manner thereof; and that the Criminal

was beaten upon the Buttocks with great Canes, to fo

Mart.Hift. violent a degree, that it often deprived him of Life. It

&#-P'33jf* was the Emperor Venius, who firft appointed this kind

of PuniUmient, inted of another injinitely more cruel,



On the foregoing Accounts. 52

of cutting the Criminal into Pieces. And hence, pofli-
bly it is, that our Authors fay, the Chinefe are fuch
as were executed, which we do not read in our modern
Accounts, and feems to be quite inconfiftent with the
Chinefe Politenefs. We are told indeed, by Father Mar-
tini, that the Emprefs Vihia, Wife to Kieu, the Nero of
Chi?ia, who began his Reign 1 8 1 8 Years before Chrift,
ate human Flefh ; but it is unnatural to fuppofe fo deteila-
ble an Example could prevail into a Cuftom, in a Country
fo abundantly productive of every thing good for Food.
Marco Polo, however, relates that in tne Province of 1. 1 . c. 48.
Xandiiy they had this horrid Practice, and that when a
Perfon is fentenced to death, they drefs him and eat his
Elefn ; and fays alfo, that in the Kingdom of Concha, J t l% c ^
they eat the Flefh of thole who die a violent death, and
particularly of their Enemies flain in Battel.

The manner how the Emperor and the Kings or Go-
vernors, who reprefent him, appear in public, is pretty
much like what we are told of the fame by our lateit
Accounts, wherein are many Defcriptions of the Procef-
fion of a Mandarin : His Train is very numerous, and
he is attended by a great number of Officers under Arms.
Firrt he is preceded by fome with large Bamboos, where-,
with they make much fuch a Noife as the Chriltians of
the Levant make with the Boards they ufe inilead of
Bells : Every body muft ftop to do him Honour, and
thofe on Horfeback mult difmount ; nay, according to
Trigaut, every one withdraws into his Houfe. * " Many J. x . c . o.
*' other Enfigns of Dignity there are, fays he, to diitin-
" guifh the Magiftrates; Streamers, Chains, Cenfers,
'• and a numerous Guard, who, by the Noife they make,
" dilperfe the Croud. So great a Veneration do they re-
'' quire, that thefe Noifes are no fooner heard, even in
11 the moil crouded Streets, but every Soul di&ppears,
te every body withdraws. " As for the Emperor and
Viceroys, they agree with all our Travellers, that it is



* Sunt alia per mult a dignitatis ornamenta, Magijira-
iuumque injignia, wexilla, catena, thurihula. Satellir
tiumfrequens, cujus clamoribus arcetur in <vicis turba, Cif
tanta eji eorum <veneratio, ut in <vicis etiam frequentijjimls
nemo compareat, fedfecedant ad has ejulatus omnes.

d 3 feldoia



54 R EM ARKS

fetdom they appear in public, and that, not till they have
put their Guards under Arms, and polled them in the
Avenues of the main Streets ; and that formerly they ne-
ver ftirred out but in clofe Litters, of which they carried
many at a time, that it might not be known in which
the Prince rode. This is an ancient Cuftom fince, the
Emperor Hoai fet the firft Example of it, mmxl Years
before Chriit. Na-narette relates of the Emperor, that,

P. 20. * " When he moves they fhut all the Doors in the Streets

" through which he is to pafs, that every body keeps
" within Doors, fo that not a Soul is to be ieen, and
(f that the Perfon who mould mew his Head, would be
" moll feverely chaftifed. "

Jmpofts Our Authors tell us that the Emperor's Revenues pro-

<znd Taxes. vene fr° m * Poll Tax, which is levied only upon Men,
from eighteen Years to eighty, and that, in proportion
to their Wealth : That Salt and Tea pay Duty alfo to
the King, and that Land is unburdened by any Tax.

Atlas Sin. But if you confult Father Martini's Eitimates of what
each Province pays to the Emperor of China, you
will perceive that Matters are very much altered ;
for they each pay very confiderab>le Tributes in Silk,
Cotton, Stuffs, Provifions for his Table, and his Stables.

Mart.Hift. Salt is Hill taxed in part, but Tea is clear ; and this Ga-

Si». belle or Duty mull be of very old Handing, fince King

Venius, who reigned 179 Years before Chrift, took it

L i.e. 3 . ^ '■> but it was foon put on again. Father Trigaut ob-
ferves, that in his time it brought great Sums into the
Imperial Coffers ; but at prefent, according to Navarette %
Commodities pay no Duties, and the main branches of
the Revenue are the Land-Tax, Poll Tax, and the Du-
- ties upon Salt, Silk, Stuffs, and a Tax upon Houfes.

\. I.e. If. He fays the Imperial Revenue exceeds fixty Millions,
clear of all charges ; and Father Martini who defcends
to particulars, runs it up to a higher amount. Thefe Ex-
aggerations were the caufe why Marco Polo was nick-
named Mejfer Marco Milliani, and even fome old Co-

J 9 . 26, P* es °f" ^is Book, are intitled, II Millione. Navarette

talks of above a hundred Millions.

* Las puertas tie las cafas par cuyas calles ha de pajfar
fe cierran de tod as, y la gent e fe recoge; de fuerte que niun
elma fe <ve, yjt/e 'viera, recibiera gravijfimQ cafiigo.

All



On the Foregoing Accounts. 5 5

All the Money current in China, is ftill Copper, and Monej*
nearly of the Size of our Liards or Farthings, and fhaped
as our Authors defcribe. The Arabs call them Fa/us,
which fignifies their Copper Money, and is derived from
Follis, which had much the fame Signification in the.
lower Empire. It has a Hole in the middle that it may
be fining, in which manner they make up their Sums,
It is rather a made Metal than Copper, and for Colour
is not unlike our Sols with Cbinefe Characters on one
fide only, that having one fide quite flat, they may be
the more conveniently fining. Thefe Pieces are to be
feen in many Cabinets, and you have a reprefentation of
them, in Tavern iers Travels; but he has made the
Hole round, whereas it ihould be fquare, which is bet-
ter adapted to keep them fteady. In our Second Account
we are told, that a thoufand of thefe Pieces are worth
a Dinar of Gold, which is exactly equal, in Weight, to
the half Piflole of Spain. It appears therefore that the
Arabs, who have always been iubtle Traders, and who
had of this Money at Siraf, kept it down at a very low
Value, and at much lefs than it ought to have been in pro-
portion to the Standard of the Cbinefe Gold and Silver,
as it is now allowed by our Merchants ; the Gold at
forty two Litres per Ounce, and the Silver at fifty nine
Sols, eight Denier;.

Both ancient and modern Authors are agreed upon the
Prohibition, which prevents Gold or Silver from being
coined in China ; and Father Martini, in the Life of Ve- Wfi' ^ lii »
nius, who reigned 179 Years before Chrift, exprefles him- P> 3 2 ^»
felf thus. * " Their Kings have never allowed Gold or
V Silver to be coined into Money, thereby to obviate
d 4 " the



* Nunquam eorum Regibusplacuit vel argenteam cudivel
emrearn monetam, fraudis quibus ifia gens ajfueta, lucri-
que fagacifjima, prtecaventibus. Solo ponder e argenti *vel
auri valorem expendunt, Cif quatenus quidque mijium pu-
rumve Jit, accuratijjime dignofcznt. Quanquam av.ro nun-
quam utuntur ad emendum, quippe quod non pecuniam fed
mercem effe dicunt- Hinc autem fit ut argentuM tontinuo
■qucf iormento fubjaceat, & in minutijjlma. frujla, ferrea
jonipe ad hoc apta difringziur ■«— Cuprcarr, >T;



5C REMARKS,

ff the univerfal Frauds of the Nation, fo greedy of Lu-?
f ere. They take Gold and Silver by Weight, ami
" know perfectly well whether it be fine or not. Ne-
f 6 verthelefs they fometimes purchafe with Gold, but
" then it is reckoned as a Commodity, not as Money;
f* wlience it is that Silver is perpetually chopped to
f pieces, with a kind of Sheers contrived on purpofe.
" But they have a long time had Copper-Money, which
f this Emperor brought to a better and more commodi-
" ous Form > and allowed it to be coined all over the
: <( Empire, provided it was good. For till this time it
" was ftruck no where but in the Palace, to the great
f ' Gain of the Emperor, but to the great Inconvenience
: "of the People, becaufe of the difficulty and length of
" the ways. He ordered it into a round Form, with a
" fquare Hole in the middle, that it might be fining
" the more conveniently. It is commonly marked with
f* four Characters, which' tell the Name of the Empe-
*' ror, and the Value of the Piece. " Father Trigaut
writes to the fame Purpofe, and adds, that the fame
thing is obferved to this Day ', and the fame is repeat-
ed by Martini in the beginning of his Chinefe Atlas.
Torcelans. The fine Earth mentioned by our Author, muft be
that wherewith the Porcelane is made, particularly in
the Territory of Taocheu, the fecond City of the Pro-
vince of Kiangfi ; and is brought from the City of Hoie-
cheu, in the Province of Nankin, where they cannot
Work it up, as much as they have of it, which is thought
to be owing to a difference in the Waters. Almofl all
this Ware in China, is made in the Town ofFeuloaxg,
by clumfy Country Fellows. They make fome of it
yellow, which is fet apart for the Emperor. Great

a mult o jam tempore habuere, ' quam hie Imperator ad me-
liorern commodioremque formam re-vocavit, ac concejfit infu-
per ut ubique, modo fine fraude, in tcio imperio euderetur,.
Nam ante htec tempora fiebat hoc in fola regia, magn&
quidem Imperatorum quaflu fed majori populorum income
modo, propter difficultates itinerum o diftantiam locorum*
Moneta? formam rotundam effe <voluit, £sf in medio quadra-
turn foramen, quo facilius filum infereretur. Infignitut
quatuor pkrumque Uteris, nomen Imperatoris, & impofir
turn valorem fignijicantibuss

Quantitieaj



57

Macrizi

MSS.

Arab.



Funerals.,
Hifi. Sin.

P-43?



On the foregoing Accounts.

.Quantities of it are alfo made in. the Province of Kiamji,
according to Trigaut and Martini. Among the Articles
of a noble Prefent fent to Nuroddin by Saladin, foon
after he became Mailer of JEgypt, mention is made
of a Service of China Ware, confifting of forty Pie-
ces.

What is in the fame place faid of their way of treat- Merchants
ing the Merchants they admitted into their Dominions,
is not altogether conformable to the prefent ] Practice ;
but by our laft Accounts, and particularly by the Dutch
Embajjy, we may perceive they have been very cauti-
ous how they fufrered Strangers to enter among them.
Trigaut iniinuates that in his time it was cuftomary to
fend the Emperor whatever was moft curious in the
Country. And their manner of viliting and flopping
the Goods, and even the Preients the Dutch carried with
them intp China, is very agreeable to what we are told
by our two Authors.

As for their Funerals, they are almofl fiill the fame
as formerly. Martini relates that they ftill mourn three
Years for the Death of their Fathers, during which they
abflain from all public Bulinefs, and the Magiflrates
from their Employs. That they exprefs their Grief,
not by the coarfenefs of their Drefs only, but that they al-
fo change their Table Service, their Bed, their Place, their
Food, their manner of writing, their ways of Ipeaking, their
Paper, their Ink, and their Name ; and then they put on
white. They mourn three Years by way of Acknowledg-
ment to their Parents, who adminiitred to all their Wants
and Imbecilities, during the three firil Years of their Infan-
cy, and Father Trigaut has the very fameCuiloms deicribed
hy our Author. * " Children oftentimes keep the dead
" Bodies of their Parents three or four Years, Shutting
f f them up in Coffins, which they do over with their
f e Varnifh in fuch a manner that no offenfive Smell can
f 6 come forth ; and during all this time they fet Meat
V before them juft as if they were alive. "

* Non raro jilii parentum cadavera feretro inclufa.
#d ires quatuorwe annos domi offers ant, fuo enim Mo pel-
lucido hitumene ita rimas ilinunt, ut minime faetorem
tranfmittant. £>uq tempore in fmgulos dies, cibum Mis
fotum^ue offerunt, non Jecus ac ft fuperejfent*



c. 7,



5$ R E M A R K S

This Cufbm of fetting Meat and Drink before their
Bead, which Abu Zeid harps upon : is to this Day the
Practice ; and, by Taucrmer, is a Cuilom ilill in force
With th&Qbimfi at Batavia.
p. 78. The Expences the Cbinefi are flill at in burying
their Parents, are very extraordinary ; for they put them
into Coffins of a precious Wood, which fornetimes coft
two thoufand Crowns. They invite all their Relations
and Friends to pay their laft Duties to the departed
Perfon, during the time the Body is in the Coffin, and
expend great Quantities of precious Perfumes, Flowers,
and other different Things, which thofe who come, offer
as a Sacrifice to the Soul of their deceafed Friend or
Relation. They light up Tapers, and they fornetimes
burn rich Stuffs, under a Notion of fending them to the
dead Alan : Ail this muft naturally caufe a vail: Expence,
without reckoning the Funeral Proceifion, when they
have always a great Number of Bonzes, Minftrels 3 and
Mourners.
Writing All the Chinefe can write and read ; this is confirmed

iommm. by the common Concurrence of all Authors, ancient and
modern ; and what is faid afterwards, that all Bufmefs
is transacted in Writing, is, to all Appearance, the chief
Reafon thereof. Martini attributes this to the Emperor
1. 9, p. Sivenius, who began his Reign 73 Years before Chriit,,
,390, and the Reafon he alledges for it, was to the end that

Judges might the more maturely weigh the Cafes
brought before them, and might not be confounded by
the Noife and empty Babble of the Parties concerned.
All Accounts agree in what is faid of the great number
of their public Schools, which is fo much the greater,
as one Mailer cannot inflract above three or four Scho-
lars.
Alms, What our Authors obferve of the Subfiflance the poor

receive from the Emperor's Granaries in times of a ge-
neral Dearth, is very remarkable, and Marco Polo ex-
prefles himfelf in almofl the fame Terms. He fays that
at fuch times, the Emperor claims no dues, but, on the
contrary, adminiilers to the Wants of his Subjects, and
fupplies them with Corn for their Subfiilance, and to
fow their Ground. That to this purpofe the great Khan
in times of Plenty, buys up great Quantities of Corn,
which he keeps in Store-Houfes for three or four Years

together



On the Foregoing Accounts. ^$

together, and that in times of Dearth, he fells it out at
fo low a rate, that he gives four Meafures at a Price,
which would purchafe but one of the fame at Market.

In the fame Author you may read alfo of the very
extraordinary Alms, the great Khan, who was then Em-
peror of China, gave to the Poor, which as Navarette
avers, drew on a Debt, many Millions of which, dp
ilill ly heavy upon die Emperor's Houfehold.

What is faid by our Authors, of their Behaviour to Manner of
foreign Merchants, may have been formerly the cafe, receiving
and their Cuftom of fearching all their Goods, and of Merchants
taking them as a Pledge, is obferved by feveral Writers.
Jofefh Barbara, who met a Tartar from China at the P. \ qy f
Court of Perfia, fays, that the Merchants, immediately
upon their Arrival, carry their Effects to Ware-Houfes,
and thofe, whofe Bufinefs it is, coming to fearch them,
and finding any thing that may be acceptable to the
Prince, take it and pay fpr it in other Goods.



ILLUS<



6a . REMARKS



ILLUSTRATIONS

O N T HE

NATURAL HISTORY

Contained in the Fcregcmg Accounts.



o



UR two Authors agree with the moll: fmcere
Travellers, as to the great abun dance of every
thing neceffary for Life, or that can admnifter
to Luxury in the Country of China. It produces Wheat,
Jlice, and many other forts of Grain ; it produces Apples,
Pears, Quinces, Lemons, Citrons, Moufas or Indian Figs
or Banana! s, Sugar-Canes, Figs, Grapes, Cucumbers,
Citrals, Walnuts, Tifiachios, Plumbs, Abricots, Servi-
ces, Coco-Nuts, and even Almonds, according to our
Author ; but therein he varies from Martini, who ob-
ferves that there are no Almonds in China, nor Olives,
which is confirmed by other Authors.
<r . j They have all forts of Cattle, and particularly Beafts

* " of Service. Many Horfes they have, but, formerly they

* ^ were not to compare with the Arabs ; and indeed till the

laft Conquer! by the Tartars, who brought great numbers
of their Horfes into China, the Chinefe Cavalry was of
no worth ; for their Horfes could not bear the fight, nor
even the Neighing of the Tartar Breed,

Oar



On the Foregoing Accounts. Ci

Our Authors fay there are no Elephants in China, Ail. Sin,
Which muftbe underftood of the Provinces they knew, p. 183.
where, in truth, there are none. Father Martini writes,
that they begin to be met with at N aiming, in the Pro-
vince of Quaygli, where the Inhabitants ufe them for
War and for Carriage. Some there are alfo in the Pro-
vince of Junttan ; nor is it a wonder that thefe Crea-
tures, who fo fwarm in the Indies, and in Tungkin or
Tonquin, mould ib aggie hither.

All our Travellers report with our Authors, that there
are no Lions in China ; this, Trigaut, Martini, and ma-
ny others, affirm : But as it would be endlefs to infill
upon every particular of this kind, the following Re-
marks fhall be conftned to what our Authors fay of two
very rare and extraordinary Animals, the Unicorn, and
That which yields Musk. **•— — — .

By the Word or Appellative Unicorn, we underftand a ;The Uui~
Creature, which the Arabs, and other Orientals, call 1 corn.
Karkandan, the fame with the Monoceros of the Ancients.
Our Author fays he is much fmaller than the Ele-
phant ; that from the Neck downwards he is not unlike x^^
a Bufflar '; that his Hoof is not cloven ; and that his fore
Legs are all of a piece and jointlefs, which feems incre-
dible, and to contradict what botii Ancients and Moderns ;
have told of his Swiftnefs. He adds that the lowing of
the Unicorn, is between the lowing of the Ox, and the
Cry of the Camel. Now Father Jeronymo Lobo, and
other Jefuits, who have lived fome Years in Ethiopia,
aver they have feen of thefe Creatures in the Province
of Agacs, in the Kingdom of Damota, and defcribe them
to this Effect : This Creature is about as big as a middle-
fized Horfe, of a dark brown, w ith a black Tail and
Main, the Main fhort and thm. They add that in other
parts of this fame Province, they faw others with a thic-
ker and longer Main, and with a ftrait Horn cf five
Palms in length, and of a whitifh call ; and that they
are eternally in the Woods, being very timorous, and
never venturing themfelves abroad in open places. Fa-
ther Lobo relates that many of the Portuguefe had feen
them alfo in Ethiopia, and that from the tops of Rocks,
they difcovered them pamng along in Herds in the Val •
leys of the Province of Nanina: and this he attefted
$0 Mr. Toinard f who faw him at Lisbon in the Year

mdclxvu



6t REMARKS

Tbhivholt mdclxvii. He told him that fome were white, and o-
Account is thers Bay, with a white Horn in the Forehead a Yard
to be found long; and that he had a Colt of this fame kind
in the 4. that lived but eight or ten Days, for want of its Dam
'vol. of to luck.

Theve- What the Nubian Geographer writes of this Animal,

not\> is almoft wholly taken from our two Authors, with fome

ColleSlion Additions, as the Cuftom is with the Arabs, who feldom
ef Voyages, trarifcribe a Paflage exa&ly, but are for ever adding what
they find elfwhere- Moll of their Authors tell wonders
of this Creature, though perhaps from a very {lender
///Theve- Knowledge of him. The Teftimony alfo of Co/mas x\\q
notV Col- Monk, in his Chrift'ian Topography mult not be omitted.
ie&. <voi 1 . This Writer owns lie never iaw the Unicorn himfelf, but
afTures us he faw four Brafs Figures of him in the King
of Ethiopia^ Palace, called the four Tav.ers ; that they
told him this Creature was terrible and untraceable ; and
that when lie was clofely purlued by the Hunters, and
on the brink of falling a Prey to them, he would throw
himfelf down Precipices, and fall upon his Horn, which
Hood all the Shock of the Fall. To this Creature he ap-
plies many paflages in Scripture.

In Anfelm de Booth Treatife, you have the chief of
the Obiervations made upon the Unicorn by the Anci-
ents. He remarks that the Name Motwceros, which cor-
refponds with the Name Unicorn, is common to five dif-
ferent Animals ; the Indian Beeves, defcribed by Pliny j
the Rhinoceros, an Animal of a particular Genus; the
Monoceros of Pliny, of the fize of a Horfe, with the Head
of a Stag, the Feet of an Elephant, and the Tail of a
wild Boar ,- the Indian Afs of the fame Pliny ; and die,
Onx with a fplit Horn, often mentioned by Arifotle,
JElian, and the other Naturalifts.

All thefe feveral Creatures have but one Horn, and
what the curious prefer ve under the Denomination of the
Unicorn's Horn, may be the Spoil of one or other of
thefe kinds ; but to thefe we may alfo add, the Horns
of the Nothern Fifh, called Morfs, which are of ex-
traordinary length 1 and the Horns alfo of the Sea-Cow,
who .ometimes comes to land, and is defcribed by Marti-
ni. Aloft of our modern Writers will have it that the Horns
in our Cabinets are not of the Unicorn, but the Teeth
of this Piih, in the North particularly j or clfe fome of,

thofe



On the Foregoing Accounts, 6%

thofe foffil Horns defcribed e ie Boot; whence

many have pronounced there are no true Unicorns
Horns, and that we muit fearc; . for thefe long-

horned Creatures, rather than the Land. In ds la Pereyre
Account of Greenland, you have on this Head many
curious Obfervations, which were communicated to him.
by Wormius. By them it is demonstrated that thefe Horns
have all the Marks of the Teeth qf a Fifn the Ice-landers
call a Narbual y the fame, perhars, our Author calls a
Wal ; that they are carious at the Root, almoit like rot-
ten Teeth ; and that the Sea throws up great Quantities
of them upon the Shores, a plain Proof that they come
from an Inhabitant of the Water. In the fame Book yon
have a Reprefentation of the Cranium of this Fifh, a
thofe who have treated of Ice-land concur with the Obier-
vations of Wormius. But all this can only prove, that moft
of the Herns fuppoied to come from the Unicorn are the
Spoils of a Fifh, not that there is no fuch Creature as we
have a Notion of when we mention the Unicorn, in Scrip-
ture called Reem ; where alfo he is frequently let forth as
an Animal rare to be ieen, vigorous, and wonderfully fleet
and Itrong. Thus aimoit is it that the Arabs and Per/tans
exprefs themfelves of their Karkandan* Louis Barthema P> 15*^
fays he faw two at Mecca, fent thither as a Prefent from the
King of Ethiopia -, Since therefore we havefome credible
Authors, who profefs to have feen this Creature, andfmce
our Arabs even lay that they have eaten of his Flem, we ;
feem to want fomething more than bare 1 Conjecture to fa-
tisfy us, with fome of the Moderns, that there never were any
otherUnicorns than the Narhuals ; for this Fifh is as uncom
mon in the Halt, as theUnicorn is in the North and the Weft,
Thofe who would be more amply informed of what
the Ancients have written concerning the Unicorn, may
find their W^ords moll faithfully cited by Bocbatt in
his Hierozoicon, as alfo fome Tallages from Arabian
Writers concerning the fame, and particularly from Da-
Tniri, whom he calls Demir, who being but a late Author,
feeing he died in the Year mccccv, has compiled all that
had been laid by thofe who went before him. You hav«
alfo a great Number of curious Obfervations upon the
fame Subject in Thomas Bartholinush Diffeitation, printed
at Padua in the Year mdcxlv, as well as in that of
peufingius t printed at Groningen in the Year mdclx.

Our



£ 4 REMARKS

Amber, Our 'Authors thought, with fome of the ancief?ts>'

that Ambergreefe grows like a Plant "at the Bot-
tom of the Sea, and that it is thrown on the Shore
by the Swell ; and that pieces of it are to be found in
the Belly of Whales. The oldeft of them having firit ob-
ferved, that among the Maldives they found Lumps
;' of Ambergreefe of extraordinary Size, j adds, that it
; was alfb found in fmaller pieces, almoft in the Form of
Plants torn up ; that in Storms it was forced up from the
Bottom ; that the Wave warned it to the Shore, and that
there it is found in the Form of a Mufhroom or Truffle.
The other fays, that the beft of it is found upon the Coaft
of Barbary, or the Country of Zinge, that is of the Co/res
on the Eaft Coaft of Afrki and even on the Coaft of
Arabia ; That the Negroes train up Camels to go along
fhore with them by Moon-light; That thefe Camels
know the Amber, and when they difcovered any,
bend their Knees, that their Mailer may pick it up ;
Via. Bar- That there is another fort of Ambergreefe, which
bof.p. 313. floats upon the Surface of the Sea ; That a great Filh of
the Whale-kind fwallows it, and immediately dies ; and
that when the Negroes fee him dead upon the Water
they know that he has Amber in him, and that they
go oft to him, and find it in his Belly ; both of them
adding, that the beft Amber is of a whitifn Colour.

Serapion, A<vicen, and others fince them, concur with
the principal Obfervations of our Authors . They fay it
comes from the Sea, but not as a Plant, according to
Avicen, but in Veins, which does not feem at all likely.
He confirms, that Quantities of it are collected on the
Coafts, and that That called Shelaheti is the beft ; this,
in the old Tranflation, being rendered Selachitum, the
learned Garaas de Orta imagined that Ceylon Was thereby
pointed at ; for the Sea is very liberal of this precious
Subitance to that Hand : But it was thus denominated
from the Sea of Shelahet, which, according to our Au-
thors, is beyond Cape Comorin, and divided from the
Sea of Harkand, by thofe great Iflands, which muft be
Java and its Neighbours.
L. 2, <r. The Commentator upon Awicen, cited by P/empius,

1 43 . p. allures us that Amber grows in the Sea like a Plant ; Sera-
233. pitm will have it to grow upon Rocks; Simeon Sethi re-

late?



Oh the Foregoing Accounts, 65

Sites' that it rifes in Springs like Pitch and Bitumen J but
is miitaken when he adds, that it is found it nti ipeT/-
yii t'oKi cihM^JTov ovoy.aJ^Qfjtyq, In an Indian City
called Selachet ; for, as we have obferved it is the Name
of the Coafl warned by the Sea of Sbelahet. Thefe Paf-
fages in A^uicen and Shrfson Sethi, {hew that the Sea
of Shelahet was not unknown in their Days. The
Town of Arabia the Happy, which he calls ^oy^ov,
is Sichar, where alfo, according to our Authors^ it is
ivafhed on Shore by the Wave.

The Opinion of thofe who believe Amber is found in
Whales, or in other great Fifties of the Cetaceous kind, is*
by moil of the Moderns, rejected ; becaufe there is no Q a rc. de
where lefs Amber found than on the principal Coafts Orl.l.iiC*
of the Whale-Fijhery ; and becaufe the Bafques and the x , Scali^
Bretons, who are almoft always out a Fifhing, confirm J? X erit.
not the Teflimony of the Ancients. Again, by the 264. ri. tal
Directions that have been made of feveral Whales, it is
proved that their Throat is not wide in Proportion to
their Body ; tho' poiTibly Amber may have been found
in fome of the great Fifh of a voracious Nature, as
well as many other foreign Subflances, which they gree-
dily fnap at and fwallow. But this amounts not to
a Proof that they have any particular Guft for Am-
bergreefe, which is by no means a food proper for
them; and it is ftill lels to be fuppofed they would
feek after a Thing that mull prove fatal to them, a ve-
ry Poifon, if true it be, as our Authors take it, that
the Fiih dies upon fwallowing this Amber ; for the na-
tural Inilinft of Animals prompts them to fueh Things
as are good for them, and deters them from fuch as
are hurtful. It is therefore more likely that Amber^
greefe is found naturally in the Sea; that it is not
voided as an Excrement by the Whale or any other
of the cetaceous Tribe ; and that if at any time they
are found to have Amber within them, which at
prefent is very feldom, it mull be confidered as a
mere accident againft the common Gourfe of Nature,
and the Inftinct of Animals.

There are two other Opinions, which carry a

greater Air of Probability, with them, and feem to

confirm each other. The Firfi is that Amber is not

3 Plant at the Bottom of the Sea., but is generated thus 3

e Uporf



€6



Not. in Gu-
iiji.p. 542.

/. 2.C. 23.



Englijh E-
di t ion. 1 68.
/ I./. 20.



REMARKS

Upon the Eaft Coaft of Afric, and in fome Pans of
the Indian Ocean, there are craggy Rocks or Preci-
pices, 'which fwarm with wild Bees, who there make
their Honey in Clefts as in natural Hives. Now they
fay that this Honey, either difTolved by Heat, or
blown away by Winds, or warned down by Rains,
drops into the Sea, where it aflumes a new Form,
and changes its Nature; for that the Saltnefs of the
Sea elaborating the whole Mafs, hardens it, purifies it,
and gives it the agreeable Scent of Amber. That
hence it is it fmells fomewhat like Honey when it
happens to be picked up foon after it comes from
Sea, and that the Spoils of Bees are found in or up-
on it ; and to crown all, this is a pretty generally re-
ceived Opinion among the Inhabitants of the Coafts
moft favored with Prefents of this kind. Thus thinks
Gentius ?l learned Dutchman, who herein agrees with
what other Authors write, as that it comes from Rocks,
or Iflands, and that it is perfected in the Sea.

It is not without Ground that Genfius y s Opinion ap-
pears lb probable to fome of the Learned. The White-
nefs of Amber, inclining to the Grey, borders fome-
what upon the Colour of Honey ; and certain it is, that
the Spoils of Bees and the Bills of fmall Birds which
are fometimes found in Bits of Amber, are far from
weakning this Conjecture. All the Difficulty is how
to conceive, that Bees fhould be able to make Combs
of fuch extraordinary Size as to be equal to fome
Lumps of Amber that have been formerly found upori
the Shore, and even in our own Days. For it is not
very natural to fuppofe that thefe Combs, falling intaf
the Sea, fhould combine into Pieces of fifteen, twenty,
and thirty Pound Weight ; or into Heaps of fuch Bulk
that a fmall Veflel might have been laden therewith j
nay, a Number of Ships, if we can add Faith to the
Report of a French Captain mentioned in the Hiftory
of the EngUJh Royal Society.

Teixeira writes that in the Year 1696. a Piece of
Amber was feen, near Br aw a on the Eaft Coaft of
Afric, of fo unufual a Size, that a Man mounted upon
a Camel could not be difcovered behind it*



On the Foregoing Accounts. '6%

A fiiip from Mofambique, once dropped art Anchor
iipon a great Piece of Amber, and the fame Thing
hapned to another near Cape Currents.

The fame Author fpeaks of a Piece of Amber of L. i.e. 28.
twenty Pounds Weight thrown up between the Rivers
Linda and Quilima ; of another warned on Shore upon
the Coaft of Malabar, which the Inhabitants miftak-
ing for Pitch payed their Barks with. Captain Kee- Purch.
ling was told by the Moors at Deli/a, that upon the Vol. I. p.
Coafls cf Monbaca, Magadoxo, Pat a, and Brava, there 193.
were Pieces of Ambergreefe of twenty Quintals.

Tavernier confirms what our Authors advance, fay- Vide. T. 2-
ing, that great Quantities of Ambergreefe are gathered /• 2. c. 23.
on the Coaft of Melinda, and that the Governors of
Mo/ambique negociate it with Goa to the Amount of
great Sums. He relates alfo that it has been found in
Lumps of extraordinary Size, and gives you two In-
ftances thereof, of one that weighed twenty Pounds, and
of another that weighed Forty-two. •

In the Hiftory of Saladin we read that among the
Prefents he fent to Soltan Nuroddin, there were two
Pieces of Ambergreefe, the one of Twenty, the other
of thirty Pound weight. Many Examples we have of
Pieces of Amber of very great Bulk like that found
towards Cape Comorin in the Year mdlv. which weigh-
ed three Thoufand Pound; but what Rabbi David dc DiSl.He*
Pomis advances, that Amber was found in the Jor- brai.
dan, and that it was an Ingredient in the Perfumes of
the old Law, is a meer Fable j for unlefs we grant that
Amber was there found by a Miracle we muft reject
what he fays in this refpecl, efpecially as he has not
the Concurrence of one fingle Author to fupport him.
The Jews fay, that the Word Kifat, in their c Ialmud 9
fignifies an odoriferous Plant, and not Amber, as the
Moderns have thought. It does not appear that the
Ancients had any Knowledge of this Perfume. /

Joam dos Santos has many particulars concerning
Amber, and moft of them confirm what our Authors
fey ; he reports it to grow at the Bottom of the Sea, jj^a g e g_
whence it is torn up by Storms; and that at fuch thj't'n '
times the Cafres never fail to be along Shore in quell enf 1 n ~
of it, to fell it to the Portuguefe and the Moors. More- c 2 e ' * '
Over, that there are thjee Sorts of k, the firft very white;

6 Z th« /



£i k E M A R. K S

the fecond of a greyifh caft, and called Maxueyra, a'nd
the third black like Pitch, foft, and often ill fcented^
becaufe as the Inhabitants report, Wales and other Fifties,
and even Birds fwallow it as often as they fee it floa-
ting on the Surface. The Cafres called Fumos, near
the Land of Natal, feeing fome of the People be-
longing to a Portuguefe Ship called the St. Thomas, who
was loft in her homeward-bound Paffage, cryed out to
them to throw away what they had picked up, faying
it was a Poifon which dryed up thofe who collected it
fo that they dyed.

Of Musk. Abu Zeid the Author of our fecond Account, is par-
ticular enough in his Defcription of the Creature which
affords Musk. He fays he is like the Roe-buck ; that
his Skin and Colour is the fame ; his Legs flender ;
his Horn fplit and a little bending ; that he has two
fmall white Teeth on each fide, of the Length of half
a Finger, or a little lefs ; that they are ftrait and rife
above the Muzzle of the Creature, almoft like the E-
lephant's Teeth; in fhort, that this it i* that diftin-
guifties him from other Roe-Bucks. This Defcription
does not much vary from what we read in the belt
Authors ; for Avicen fpeaking of Musk* according to
the Tranflation of Plempius, fays, Eft Cyftis feu folli-
culus animalis, ipji caprees non ahfimilis caninos duos
denies Candidas exertos gerentis £sf introrfum reflexos, in-
far cornuum. You have two Reprefentations of this Ani-

r mal, the one in the Fragment of Cofmas, printed in

the firil Volume of Tbevenofs Collection, the other in the
Jccond Volume of Tavemier's Travels. Thefe are
exactly alike, but they differ in two Articles from
the Defcription Ahu-Zeid gives us j for they put no
Horns on the Head of this Creature, and make the
two Teeth which diflinguifh him from the Roe-Buck
to turn downwards, inftead of pointing upwards like
the lower Teeth of the Elephant, according to Abu-
Ziid's Comparifon, in which he is fupported by the
Teftimony of Avicen and Serapion, cited by Matthi-
clus. Marco Polo defcribes the Musk-creature to
this effett; " His Skin is very coarfe like that of
«' the Stag; in his Feet and Tail he refembles the
c< Gazelle, and, like her, has no Horns. He has
.? four Tef th, two ajjoye, fee Fingers long, fcne, and



On the foregoing Accounts. *9

* l as white as Ivory ; two that rife up, and two that
** turn down ; and he is beautiful to the Eye. In the
'* full of the Moon he has an Impofthume which takes
"him on the Belly near the Navel; and then the
" Hunters go out and cut this Impofthume * ".

Barbofa writes, that he neareft refembles the Ga-
zelle, but differs from the others in faying his Coat
is white ; for thefe are his Words ; Musk is found in
fmall white Creatures like Gazelles, with Teeth like an
Elephant hut [mailer. Thefe Creatures are fuhjeSi to a
Kind of Impofthume under the Belly and the Breafi, and
when the Contents are ripened, they are taken with fuch
an Itching, that, for Relief they rub themfelves againft
the Trees, a?id what falls in fmall Drops or Grains is
the mofi perfect and the mofl exquifite Musk.

Thevenofs Defcription is full wider from the reft, he p ar .
writes that in thofe Countries there is a Creature with p j .*
the Muzzle of a Fox, and not bigger than a Hare. For
Colour he is like the Stag, and has Teeth like a Dog ; and
produces the mofi excellent Musk. He has an Excrefcence
or Bladder under the Belly, full of corrupted Blood, and
and it is this Blood which makes Musk, or rather that
is the Musk itfelf They take this from him, and imme-
diately clap a Piece of Leather upon the Mouth of the
Bladder that none of the Scent may evaporate ; but the
Creature dyes foon after this Operation. Antony Piga-
fetta, who fays that Musk is the Cuttings of a. Cat, can-
not be allowed to agree with the reft foregoing.

Father Philip di Marines Defcription is alfb different
from what the others write; for he reports this Crea- Chin. II-
ture to have the Head of a Wolf, and Father Kircher lufir. p.
in the Figure he gives, reprefents him with the Snout 191.

* Ha i peli a fimilitudine di cervo molto grofji, li piedi
13 la coda a modo delta Gazella, no ha come como la Ga-
ze Ha: ha quatro denti, cioe due delta parte difopra, lun-
ghi ben tre dita e fortili, bianchi come a<volio, e due afcen-
dono in fu, e due defcendono in giu, & e bello ani?nale da
wedere. Nafce a quefia befiia quando la Luna e piena, nel
umbilico fotto il <ventra un apoftema di fangue, Cif i caccia-
ori net tondo delta Luna, efcono fieri a prender de ditti
mimalii etagliam quefia pojlema*

f>3 ol.



jo REMARKS

of a Hog, which may be the Ingraver's Fault, whq
furnifhes him with Claws alfo, whereas he has a clo-
ven Hoof. Simeon Sethi errs {till farther from Truth,
by reprefenting him to be as big as the Unicorn, and
to be even of that Genus or Tribe ; but hear his Words *.
The bafer Sort Musk is that nvhich is brought from the
Indies, nvhich is blackijh ; and the nvorft of all is that
nvhich comes from China. All this Musk is formed in
the Navel of a wry large Creature nvhich has but one.
Horn, and is like the Roe-Buck. In rutting time a Quan-
tity of thick Blood gathers about his Navel, and caufes a>
Tumor, attended ' nvith fuch anguijh that, during the Time,
he can neither eat nor drink. He ronvls himfelf upon the
Ground, and frees himfelf of this Tumor, full of turbid
Blood, nvhich clotting a considerable Time afterwards, a-
quires a good Scent.

All Authors then agree as to the Manner it is for-
med in the Excrefence or Bladder, or in the Tumor
which gathers about the Navel of the Creature in rut-
ting time j and there are few that do not confirm what
is laid of the Way the Chinefe have of fophifticating
it, by mixing therewith the Blood of the Creature, of
fome other Things which debafe the Subilance of it,
or by putting little Bits of Lead into the Bladders or
Cods, that they may weigh the heavier.

It feems that the Musk which runs from the Wound
of the -Creature when he rubs himfelf againft the Stones,
was prized by the Ancients at the higheft Rate, as is
obferved by our Author, Serapian, and fome others.
That what was found in the Tumor itfelf before it was



* TsTtf Q nTJaV A7T0 4 'i/'^/Ct? lAiTAKO^l^O/Lf^J^*

fW<l 3 iir) to y.z\a,VTi£yv, ^ tvtk Wx/c varoJ^fs-
f&* o a,7ro r StJ'^f dyo/dfJ&, Tlclv}s$ Jj ov o^olKui

rt/TC^vfc>J'3 £»8 TIVQS }J.0V0l£.(>c/LT(& [AiyiSXy 0IJ.0U «Tof-
K.<L<Pt. 0/!T£.?//& h }<> TO TOltSTQV t^aW IfyxTCU. <f

l[J.$cLhlv <vrcL'xyiJ.<h$$ &l[J.<&T&> cy t'mtgo Qyvctya^JiVH

j£ TWlKdLVTtb VQfLn$ ^ <&t>TK ctV^J), *} KV hU$ i'TTl

£»<fc$f, onzf <&¥ryvvfi&fJoy 9 piTci TtVcL Ktufa hctvbtf

broken,



On the Foregoing Accotwts* 71

broken, was reckoned of leaft value, becaufe not per-
fectly ripe ; and the Merchants of our times always
make this Dillinclion.

Father Martini fpeaks thereof to this purpofe ; to the Atl. Sin,
End that you may no longer be qt a Lofs to know what pi 58,
Musk is, J will declare what I have more than once feen
with my own Eyes; it is a Lump at the Navel of a
Creature like a Purf 9 made of a very delicate Pellicle, and
covered with very fine Hair. The Chinefe call this
Creature Xe from whence the Word Xahicang, that is
the Odour or fweet Scent of this Creature Xe which
fignifies Musk. He is a Quadruped, and is not very un-
like a little Stag, except that his Coat inclines more to
be black, and that he has no Horns, Teixeira fays,
he is like a Gazelle, and that his Coat is like the Tiger's.

A great Quantity of Musk is found in the Province * uo ^
of Xenfi, at Hangchung, at Cungchang, at Ogueichu in
the Province of Suchuen, in the Province of Junnan,
and in fome others, particularly in thofe conterminous
with Tibet, where thefe Creatures moll abound.

According to our fame Author, the Musk of Tibet
is the mofl exquifite of all ; becaufe of the aromatic
Paftures this Creature finds in Tibet, and not in China.
ProbatiJ/imus lay Avicen, Ji regionem fpecles, eft Tebe-
tius, five Tumbafcinus, that is, the Country of Turn-
gage which the Arabs take to be a Province of China.
Simeon Sethi for want of underftanding the Geography
of thefe diftant Parts, fays that the bell Musk is tha^
which comes from a City a great Way to the Eaft-
ward of Choraffan and called Toupat. A Greek Au-
thor, cited by Lambecius, calls it reiTrdr j for thus is it
the Orientals commonly pronounce what we write Ti-
bet. From this Text Ruellius, who underilood it not,
has read t£ ttat, and writes that the befl Musk is
called Pat. Serapion obferves alfo that the bell Musk
is from Tibet, for the very fame Reafons already alledged.

All the Ancients then and Moderns agree, that the
mod exquifite Musk is that of Tibet, or as others call it
Tumgage ; and this becaufe of the Aromatic Paftures in
that Land, fuch as are no where elfe to be found. Tha$
the Indian Musk comes next in degree of finenefs, if fp
we may term what was brought to Cabul, and the other
trading Towns of the Indies, by Merchants who trafficked
e 4. Wttfc



Not. Af-
ra%an. p.
S65.



Tamer nier
vol.. 2. %
2. C. 24.



72 REMARKS

With it by Land from China, and d : fper r ed it all overt
the Eaft. That the Chinefe Musk is the worft of all, not
only becaufe the Chinefe adulterate it feveral ways, but
alfo becaufe what is produced naturally in that Kingdom,
is not comparable to what is in Tibet. All this is con-
firmed by the Teftimony of the learned Gokus, and Fa-
ther Martini. Teixeira fays, the Musk that does
not come from China, is always the belt ; and that the
reafon is, becaufe no llega a las manos de los Chinas,
cuiyo animo no fufre dexar alguna cofa en fit fureza.

At prefent the Kingdom of Bout an is the greateft Mart
for Musk: This muft have been a part of the ancient
Tibet, or Country fubjedl to the Khan of Tibet, and
thence it is that the Indian Merchants fetch the beft fort
of this Perfume, whether in the Bladder or Cod, or out
of it.

Tea, Our Author is the oldeft and aim oft the only Arab that

mentions the Chinefe Drink, fo univerfal in our Days
over Europe, and known by the Name of Tea. But this
is not the Name he gives it; for he calls it Cba, which
comes nearer to the true Chinefe Name, Ghah or Chaw,
than the Name we have for it. He fays that it is an
Herb or Shrub, more biflfhy than the Pomegranate-Tree,
of a more taking Scent, but fomewhat bitter to the Tafte.
That the Chinefe boil Water and pour it fcalding hot
upon this Leaf, and that this Infuflon preferves them
from all Diftempers. This, we own, is an imperfect De-
fcription, but is plain enough to evince that nothing can
hereby be meant but the Plant we know by the Name
of Tea, the fame with the TchaCatayi, or Sini of the Ori-
entals. The Tree which bears this Leaf is but fmall,
and muft be claffed with Shrubs, being no bigger
than a fmall Pomegranate Bum; and even the Leaf of
the one and the other are not much unlike. It has a
plea&mt kind of a violet Scent, is bitter to the Tafte, and it
is common for thofe who are fond of it, to imagine it does
them good, and keeps them in Health. It is certain then,

I I , p. I g. that Father Trigaut is miftaken when he imagines it is
but of late date among the Chinefe, becaufe there is not,
as he fays, any Character in their Tongue to fignify this
Drink ; for by the Teftimony of the oldeft of our Au-
thors, who does not fpeak of it as any new thing, but
as an Herb very much in vogue with thenr, nay, to that

degree,



On the Foregoing Accounts. 7$

jdegree, that the Emperor thought fit to lay a Duty upon
it, and to referve all the Profits of it to himfelf ; by this
Teftimony I fay, it appears that the Chinefe have
been addi&ed to it above eight hundred Years ; nor is it
poffible to believe with William Pifo, that it grew a long
time wild and uncultivated, or that the Chinefe and J a-
panefe have been but lately acquainted with its Vertues
and the manner of preparing it, and with all the Advan-
tages it is of, Advantages which are difcovered daily
more and more. This he fays he was told by fome
Dutch Commanders, who had been a long time in the '
Country.

Father Martini, who has written more accurately of
China that any other Perfon whatfoever, has no fuch Ob-
fervations upon the ufe of this Leaf, which mull make
the reft look very fufpicious and doubtful. He fays it
grows particularly in the Province of Kiangnan or Nan-
kin, where the beft of it Is. It is, adds he, a fmall
Leaf perfectly like that of the Rhus Coriarius, or Su-
mac of the Curriers. I believe it is even of the fame
kind therewith ; however, it grows not wild, but is do-
meftic and cultivated : Nor is it a Tree but a Shrub
which fpreads out in little Branches, with a BlofTom very-
much like that of the Sumac, except that the former in-
clines more to be yellow than the latter. It blows firft
in Summer, when it emits no great Scent, then follows a
Berry which is firfl green, and aftewards blackifh. In the
Spring it is that they gather the Leaf to make their Cha,
for then it is the moil fucculent and tender. The Pre-
paration of thefe Leaves coniiils in gathering them, dry-
ing them by a flow Fire, rolling them upon a Cot-
ton Mattrefs, and in packing fhem up in Tin Chefts or
Boxes, for the fake of preferving them, and the con-
venience of tranfporting them. This Defcription does
not exactly fquare with that of Father Alexander de
Rhodes, and Father di Marini, in their Accounts of
Tonquin, and ftill lefs with thofe of James Bont, and
William Pifo, in his Additions to the fifth Book of his
Hiftory ; for he relates from what he was informed by
$he Sieur Caron, who was a coniiderable time in China,
and Japan ; That this Plant grows no where but in Chi-
fia, Japan, and Siam, fprouting up to about the Height of
fhe Rofe-Bu/b of Europe. That the Stem and all the

Branckji



74



REMARKS

Branches are covered with Bloffoms, and little peeked
Leaves indented all round, all in the fame form, but of
different fixe , fd that they are of five different forts. The
greatejl grow on the lower Branches, whence they dimi-
nifh upward to the very top of the Bujh. The fmaller
the Leaves are the more they are worth ; fo that a Pound
of the largeji fhall fell but for five Pence, while that
of the fecond fixe fhall be worth fifty, thofe of the
third fixe five Florins, of the fourth fixe, fifteen, and the
fifth and le aft fixe of them, fhall fell from one hundred
■ to one hundred and fifty Florins the Pound. The fame
Author has it, that the Bloflbm of this Tree is white, and
not unlike to the Eglantine, except that it has a different
Scent. But it were a fruitlefs Task to infert other De-
fcriptions on this head, which vary from thefe. This
Leaf is now fo well known in Europe, that we may
judge for our felves, that it bears no likenefs to the Eu^
ropean Sumac, whofe Leaf and Flower are extremely
different. The feveral fizes of this Leaf according to
which the Price is regulated, are by no means peculiar to
this Shrub : but the difference of the Value is according
to the time when it is gathered, whether when it firlt
fprouts out, or after it has been fome time upon the Stalk.
Of the budding Leaf is the moft exquifite Tea made, ve-
ry little of which comes to us in Europe ; the Flower is
what is moft univerfally efteemed, and is properly the
Chaw. The fmenefs of Tea diminimes as the Leaf
grows bigger arid bigger, and alfo according as it is ga-
thered in Seafon, or out of Seafon. It may be obferved
alfo, that as Tea grows not only in China, but in Ja-
pan, Tonquin, and even in the Kingdom of Siam, it is
natural for Merchants to purchafe at the cheapeft Mar-
kets, whence we have but little of it that is really fine.
Now, as the Chinefe, J ' apanefe, and even feveral Na^
tions of the Levant, not to mention the Europeans, make
a great Confumption of Tea ; they, it is probable, keep
the bell for themfelves, which is very dear even in China
itfelf, and as it eafily jofes its Flavor upon the leaft Acci-
dent, the Merchants muft be unwilling to run the Rifque
of tranfporting it, except they are fure of turning it to a
good Account. Molt of them, therefore, buy it at Ja-
pan, where the Dutch have exported great Quantities;
£ut ill Japan it is not comparable to what grows in the.

Province



On the Foregoing Accounts. • 7 J

Province of Kiangnang. You have the Figure of this
Bum in Pifo, in the China Illufirata, and in the Dutch
EmbaJJy. It is mentioned in Ra?nujw$ Illuftration on
fome Paffages in Marco Polo.

What our Travellers report of the Coco-Nut Tree, is Coco-Nut
confirmed by all Accounts, ancient and modern, and you Tree,
have a very minute Defcription of it in. Pyrard, 'John ~ ,
de B arras, and in many others . They all declare that t * *'
this Tree alone, affords wherewithal to build a Ship, $' ' '*
and to lade her when fhe is finifhed. The Trunk fup-
plies them with Plank, Marts, Anchors, and Oars; the
.Fibres about the Nut itfelf, make a very valuable Cor-
dage, becaufe it never perilhes in the Water. The
Anchors made of the Wood of this Tree, are well enough
for fmall Craft. TheNut itfelf affords a fweet, pleafant and
milky Liquor, which, fermenting, becomes a Wine, a
Vinegar, a Sugar, and even a kind of Brandy : Its Oil
is fovereign in cafes of the Erysipelas or St. Anthonfs Fire,
Tetters, and many other Ailments. In fine, this Tree
alone fupplies with Food, Habitation, Cloathing, and
Commodities to export, if true it be, that the chief Trade
of the Maldives is in the Articles they reap from the
Coco-Nut. The Arabs call both the Nut and the Tree
N argil, whence the modern Greeks have afyi?Ju'W} the
word ufed by Cofmas the Monk, in his Topography.
Befides the Authors we have cited, you may confult others
who have dwelt on this Tree, as Marco Polo, Lodo-vic
Bar the ma, Barbofa, Garcia s de Orta, A Cofta 3 Johq
f)a<vis, and others,



AN



7*.



ORIGINo/^



A N



<fhe Chi-
nsfe had a

Knowledge
of Chrijli-
Titty before



the Clofe of
the ninth
Century.



INQUIRY

Into the Origin of the Chris

TIAN RELiqiONlIl

CHINA.



UR. two Authors fupply us
with a very ancient Teffci-
mony of the Exiitence of
the Gofpel in this vaft Em-
pire, betore the clofe of the
Ninth Century; for they
obierve that on the Revolution of the Year
CCLXIV. of the Hejra, or the Year
DCCCLXXVIL of Cbrijt, when the
City of Canfu was taken and facked, a
great Number of Chriftians were there put
to the Sword, together with the Inhabi-
tants of the Place. It appears alfo by the
Dialogue between the Emperor of China.
and the Arab) in the Second Account, that
they had a knowledge of Jefus Chrijl and
his Apoftles, and the Doftrine of the Gof-
pel; iince among the Images the Emperor
ihewed him, Jefus was reprefented with his
Pifciples, juft as when he went up to Je*

riifakm :




Chriftian Religion in China. 77

tufdlem: And what this Prince obferved
to the Mohammedan 'Traveller of the Ihort-
nefs of our Saviour's Days, here upon Earth,
allures us he had fome glimmering Light
into the Gofpel Hiftory; but it is a Mat-
ter of Intricacy to fettle the Time when,
and the Manner how Chriftianity made
its way into China,

Thofe who firft attempted this obfcure q> he ^
Point, have,upon a very fufpicious Foundati- monof thofe
on, advanced that theApoftle St.Thomas hav- who believe
ing planted the Gofpel in the Indies trans- Sr - In-
ferred it thence into China. Father Tri- "^Jj^£
gaut who wrought on the Memoirs of Fa-
ther Matthew Ricci one of the firft Mif-
fionaries that went to China, ftarted this
Notion from a Paflage in the Beit Gaza,
or Breviary of the Syrian Churches, where
are thefe Words ; By St. Thomas the Er~
ror of Idolatry has been confounded in the
Indies. By St. Thomas the Chinefe and
Ethiopians have been converted to the Know-
ledge of the Truth. By St. Thomas the.
Kingdom of Heaven hath taken its flighty and
afcended quite up to China. To this he adds
another Authority, taken from a Collecti-
on of Canons, among which there is one p^in. -^
that fpeaks of the Metropolitan o£China y J
and this is all. Father Kircher has re-
peated the fame, drawn the fame Infer-
ences therefrom, and has carried the Thing
to that length, as to trace out the Way
he went into China, and the Way he re-
turned again into the Indies, where, accor-*

- ding



7$ ORIGIN^ the

ding to the Tradition of the Malabar Chlir-
ches, he fuftered Martyrdom.
tfhis <fra- Had the fame Church any Tradition td
ditbn very commemorate that St. Thomas preached al-
"ITun"' *° * n C bina > we mi g nt hearken thereto ;
known to but we nave no ^ uc ^- Teftimony, nor do
the Own* we find any Thing to confirm the fame
tals. either in the Greek or Latin Authors; no*

not even in the Synaxaria of the Greek
Church, or of the Christians of the Le-
vant, whofe Authors have made no fcru^
pie to admit every Sort of Fable. That
there have been Christians in China is not
to be doubted, and as the Light of the
Gofpel was conveyed thither by the Sy-
rians who were converted in the earliell
Times of the Church, either by St. Tho-
mas or fome of his Difciples, this was
fufficient to derive on him thofe Praifes in
the Malabar ic Breviary ; feeing he was, in
fome Sort, the Author of their Conversion^
becaufe he preached the Faith to thofe^
who afterwards planted it in China, The
Paflage taken from the Collection of Coun*
cils is of no weight, and can only prove
that there has been a Metropolitan in Chi-
na, not that St. Thomas himfelf preached
the Gofpel there.

rv^, *.„„„ Yet moft who have touched on this
It has been . , -. ,

embraced Matter in our times, do, upon no other

as indubi- Teftimony than Trigaut has offered, lay
table by the \ t down as an indubitable Truth, that St.
M^Tdela ^ mas himfelf preached in China- it is
Chin'?.!. H °t doubted, fays one of the laft ofthem^
p. 19%. ' but St. Thomas preached the Faith in the

Indies,



Chrifiidn Religion in China. 7?<

Indies, and it is certain that in thofe Days
the Indians were perfeSly acquainted with
China, whither almoft all of them fent fume
Kind of tribute, It is then very probable that
this Apojlle, who had this new World in
charge j would not have neglecled the finefi
Part of it, at that lime as renowned in
the Eaft as Italy was in Europe when the
Roman Empire was in its Meridian. There-
fore it may have been that he travelled thither
in Perform or, at leafi, that he fent Jome of his
Difciples thither. Uhis Conjecture, which has
all the Strength of an authentic Proof has
received an additional Force, from what has
been remarked in the Chinefe Hijiory of thofe
Times , for it declares that a certain Man
came into China and taught d heavenly Do-
Urine ; he was not, according to the fame,
an ordinary or common Man*, his Life, his
Miracles, and his Vertues, attratled him the
Admiration of all that knew him.

It is true, indeed, the common Tra- q% e <f r a-
dition of the Malabar Churches has it, dubn con-
that St. Thomas preached in the Indies, cer.mng the
and the fame has been admitted into the MWj™°f
Roman Martyrology, where it is faid he ^^ ^~
fuffered Martyrdom at Calamina^ but there indies *
is no Memorial left of any City fo called moft cer-
in thofe Parts, and the Conjectures which ****
fome of the Learned have advanced, con-
cerning this Name, are quite intolerable.
Father Kircher pretends we muft read Ca~
lurmina, inftead of Calamina, and that the
Word iignifies upon a Stone ^ becaufe in that
Country they ilill Ihew a Stone figured

with



f»



Shnaen'de
yafcon-
ceflos Noti-
ciasdoBra-

fil. I 2.

The Proofs
cffered by
the modern
Writers are

dubious.



ORIGIN of the

witfi fome CrofTes, and other Enfigns bt
Chriftianity, and upon this Stone, the Ma-*
lobars tell you, he was pierced through with
a Lance by a Bramin. Now although this
Tradition is not altogether certain, it
neverthelefs carries fome air of Authority
with it, inafmuch as the Name of San
Thome ; which is impofed on the City of
Meliapor, has, for many Ages part, been
known not only among the Europeans, but
alfo among the Arabs, both Chrifiian and
Mohammedan. For our two Authors fpeak
of Betuma or Batuma, as of a Place known:
upon the Indian Shores, and this Word
fignifies the fame with Beit-Thoma, the
Houfc or Churchy of St. Thomas, juft as the'
Arabs and Sprians write and pronounce
Bazbadi for Beitzabdi, Bagarmi for Beit->
garme, and fo on. But we are no where
told that this Apoftle reached China, and
fuch Points of Antiquity are not to be
afcertained by Probability, when back-
ed by no pofitive Authority ; for by this
Rule of Conjecture a Portuguefe Writer
has taken on him to prove that the fame
Apoftle croiled over to America, and par-
ticularly that he was in Brafil, a Thing
no Body had ever thought of before.

We are to the full as unwilling to
grant what the Author of the Memoirs
fo politively ailerts, namely, that the In~
dians who were taught by St. Thomas, and
who were of Malabar, were perfe&ly ac-
quainted with China, or, confequently, that
they were Tributaries to that Country;

tor



Chriftian Religion in China. $t

for we are quite ignorant of the Hiftory
of thofe Countries. But what is infinitely
more probable, and what the Chinefe them-
felves acknowledge, and what our two
Authors and almoft all the Arabs joint-
ly confirm, is that the Chinefe had their I-
dolatry, and their Doctrine of Tranfmi-
gration from the Indians, with almoft all
the Superftitions which prevail among the
Bonzes and among the People. So that
this Conjecture has not even Probabi-
lity for Foundation; ' wherefore its Au-
thor reduces it to a bare Poffibility • per~
baps he went thither himfetf^ which is not a
whit more likely to have hapned. For
the Life of Man had been unequalto fuch
long Traverfes, almoft without Refpite £
nor would have allowed of the Delays ne-
cefiary to catechife fuch Numbers of Nati-
ons and Tribes, to found Churches fufficient,
and to go through all the other painful
Functions of the Apoftolat, which muft
have required St. Thomas to fojourn a very
confiderable Time among them.

Now tho' we could difcover any Pafc <z% e QhU
fage, in theHiftory of China, to favor this nefe Hi-
Notion, it would be but of little Weight; pry fays
but, quite to the contrary, Father Couplet has n ° th ™ g h ?
often declared that the Chinefe Hiftory fays
not the leaft Thing concerning the Gof-
pel in that Country, no, not even of the
Miffion recorded iri the Chinefe and Syri-
ac Infcription we fhall come to hereaf-
ter. In his Hifiroicdl Abridgement he on-
ly obferves, that the Emperor Mim^ti who
f reigned



mas.



Si ORIGINo/ the

reigned about (ixty-four Years before the
Birth of Chrirl, had a Dream wherein hs
beheld a golden Figure of a Man, of Gi-
gantic Stature } and that this Emperor call-
ing to mind, as they pretend, that faying
of Confucius j the Saint is in the Weft\ fent
Embaiiadors to the Indies to enquire after
the true Law ; inftead of which they brought
back with them the pernicious Sect of the
Idol Foee, and the Doctrine of the Me-
tempfychofis %
tfhm is no Nor can we fuppofe St. Thomas is meant
Proof of by the Preacher the Infcription calls Oh»
Chrfoanity p tm w ho came into China about the Year
tf^the of CW/*DCXXXVL nor had anybody
fJvZth 6 done it before the Author, or Editor rather,
Century, of the laft Memoirs.

We have no Proof then, that the Got-
pel was preached in China, before this
Epoch : For what many have written con-
cerning the ancient Name the Chinefe had
for Chriftians, that it lignifies the Wor-
Jhippers of the Crofs, is of no pofitive Va-
lidity, fince they may have thus called the
Chriftians in the neighbouring Countries,
tho' at the fame time there had been none
in China. Hoei hoei, which they fay was
their other Name, was equally applicable to



* Occajione famnii quo ohlata fuerit fpecies aurata vi
vi giganteiy & memor di&i y ut putatur^ a Ccnfuciopro-
latiy in Occidente extitlt fanBus, qu&ri jubet Imperatov
per fuoi legatos, %-evam legem ex Indiis. At enim Ido-
U Foe peftftra fefta cum MtHmpfychoJi (froh dolor) in*
pi ft a eft,



Chriftidn Religion in China* % £

thtChriftians, Jews and Mohammedans ; and
as for the Name of Terfai, it is not Ghinefi
but Perftan. The firft Appearance then of
Chriitianitv in China, that we know of*
was in the Year of Chrift DCXXXVI ; and
this is what we gather from an Infcription,
which, in the Year of Chrift MDCXXV,
Was found at Signanfu, the Capital of the
Province of Chenft, delineated in Chinefe
Characters, with feveral Lines of Syriac. <fhisis

As this Chinefe and Syriac Infcription is a proved Ij
Monument of very great Importance, and the( ^ hl -
the only certain Thing of the kind hitherto £y'ia£jL
diicovered in this Empire, it may not be jcnptiom
amifs to explain the principal Paiiages of it,
tho* that is what we hope to do more am-
ply elfewhere. You have a reprefentative
Copy of this Infcription and Stone in Fath.
Kirchers China IIkftrata,which he afTures us
is very exaft, as indeed itfeems to be ; and
Homiusy and fome other Proteftants, who
would have had it a Forgery, without any,
the leaft, Ground, have been refuted by fome
of their Brethren, who have cooler Heads, Mu\U*
and more Underftanding. It was in the dcMo-:
Year MDCXXV that it was difcovered in £? m « Sl <
the Province of Chenji, and Fath. Semedo, mc *
Fath. Boim, Fath. Martini, and fome other
Jefuits, took notice of fome Paflages in it;
but it was moft unhappily explained.

In the Year MDCXXXV, when Fath. Prodrom;
Kircher publifhed his firfl: Eflay upon the ^°? t *
Coptic Tongue, he inferted the Syriac Words,
and gave a Tranflation of the Chinefe Mat-
ter ; but he was vaftly out in his Reading

f a and



*4 ORIGIN of the

and Interpretation of the Syriac ; for mi£*
taking a Word which fignified Priefi,
and ftarting another which fignified £-
thiopian, he pretends to difcover a Miffion
oi Coptic and Ethiopian Priefts,. a Notion of
the wildeft fort. For they would have
made ufe of their own Languages in this In-
fcription, or, at leaft, of one of them, feeing
they are fo diftant from each other ; and
not of the Syriac, which was foreign to
both. Again, neither Copts nor Ethiopians,
who are Jacobites, would have preached up
Jsfefioriamfm, which they abominate* and
nothing is more certain than that all the
Chriftians, for manyAges, in the Indies and
the Upper Afia, have been Nefiorians. Fa-
ther Kircher alfo is miffcaken upon the
Word Patriarch in the Syriac Infcription^
and leaves his Reader in the dark, unable
to determin whether it ihpuld be the Pa-
triarch of Alexandria, or the Patriarch of
Antioch, when it happens to be neither the
one nor the other.
<fte Second When the fame Father publifhes his China
Explication Ilkfirata, he makes mention of Ethiopians
Kircher only ; but his Tranflation, tho' different
has given, f ro m the former, is not at all more con-
m h het *' r formable to the Original, which runs to this
p^ EfFe& : In the Tear of. the Greeks MXCIL

Mar Ifdabuzid, Priefi and Chorepifcopus of
Cumdan, the Royal City of the Eafi, cthcrwife
called Milis, or Melecius, Priefi of Balk, a
City of Turkeftan, erecled this Stone Table,
. whereon is defcribed the My fiery of the Life of
■ gut Saviour x and the preaching of cur Fathers

m



Chriftian Religion in China* 85

tv the Kings of China, in the time of the Fa-
ther of Fathers, Hananjafhuah, Catholic
Patriarch. Father Kircher, in his flrft Ver-
iion, renders it, Dominus Ifdbuzad Sacerdos ■
& Archiepifcopas , in his China Illaftrata ; Sa-
cerdos y Vicarhis Epifcopi Cumdan ; and in a
third Verlion Sacerdos & Vicarius Epifcopus*
Other Words he read wrong, as Beleh for
Balky Hahurflan for Tokareftan ; and of the
Word which rlgnifies a Stone, he makes
Papa, incoherently tranflating it, erexit
banc tabulam Papa. He would have it alfo,
that Hananjafhuah is Johannes Jofue, and that
by the Title 'Catholic we are to underftand the
Patriarch of Alexandria^ or him of Antioch,
or him of Babylon , by whom he imagins
this Title was peculiarly affected, and fo
he leaves this Point undecided • tho* if
the Prieffe who erected this Monument,
acknowledged the Patriarch of Alexandria,
who never was ftyled Catholic, they were
either Orthodox if the Patriarch was the
Greek ; or Jacobites, if he was the Coptic ;
or if him of Babyhn, they were Neftorians j-
and this is all the Light he reflects upon
this Obfcurity. Mailer, who examined this
Infer iption, had no Fault to find with the
Yerfion, and adds nothing but Commen-
dations on the Author; tho* it requires no-
thing but a tolerable Skill in Latin to per-
ceive that many PafTages of the Tranfla-
tion are lame and fenfelefs ; and with a
very (lender Stock of Syriac, it were eafy
to fee that the Interpreter underftood it
*K)t j but his Inacuracies againft Hiftory
f 3 and(,-



%6 ORIGIN©/ the-

and Geography are ftill more confpicuous,

*fhe Ex- fr a PP^ ars that this Infcription is of the

•plication of Year of Jeftis Ghrift DCCLXXX, which

of this in- correfponds with the Year MXCII of the

fcrtyion. Greeks or Seleucid^e, and that Father Kir*

chcr, who makes it the Year of the fame

MLXXXII. is ten Years out in his Ao

count. He that fpeaks, was originally a

Prieft of, or, at leart, came from Balk, a

famous City , which many Geographers

place in Tokarefian, or in Turkeftan, two

Names, tho' often confounded together,

belonging to two diftincl: Provinces. He

was at that time Chorepifcopus of Cumdan t

the principal City of the Eaftern Kingdom, or

of the Eaftem Court. The Chorepifcopi are

very well known in the Eaftern Church,

who has feveral Offices for their Confer

cration ; and the Word being diftin&ly

exprerled in the Table, it is hard to con-*

ceive why Fath. Kircher tranflated it either

Archbijhcp or Bifhop's Vicar.

What we , Cumdan is certainly Nankin, at that time

*?rc to un-' the imperial Seat of China, as well as when

de *fi" nd ty our two Arabs were in the Country. This

Cumdan ^f ^ as ^ ac ^ feveral Names, as Father

Martini obferves ; the Arabs called it Gum*

dan, as appears by Yacuti, Ebn Wardi, and

Nut>f aP ^ Nubian Geographer tho* fcarce to be

known in the Latin Tranilation. For the

Maronites, who undertook that Work, fo

unequal to their Strength, imagined Cum

dan to be the Name of a River, whereas

the JCiang is meant, which the Author fu£-

ficiently gives us to understand, faying,

It



Chriflian Religion in China. 87

It is the Urgefi River in China, and calling Ebn War-
it the River of Cumdan, becaufe it paffes dl » Yaci *ti.
through that City, This Name is fo very of-
ten repeated in the one Account and in the
other, that we can have no Doubt concern-
ij, and efpecially as we find it in the old
Arabian Geographers* For, if Abulfed-a r
and fome other Authors mention it not,
but have a different Name for the Capital
of this Empire, and cannot even fettle up»
on that among themfelves ; it is becaufe
they wrote after the Throne was tranflatedl
to Pekin* They fay Nankin fignifies the
Southern Court) and in the Syriac Infcrip-
' tation Cumdan is called the Eaftern Court ;
the reafon is plain, for, to thofe who came
from Mefepotamia, Nankin was not only the
molt diftant, but the moft Eafterly alfo.

The Catholic Patriarch, Hananjajhuah y was Wlowas
certainly the Patriarch of the Neftorians } as faCaihollc
may be proved by Hiftory, which has two T at rmvch
Patriarchs fo called; the firft confecrated f ff* /w ~
about the Year of Chrift DCLXXXVI: fcr * tm '
thefecond about the Year DCCLXXIV.
Now the Infcription was cut in the Year
DCCLXXXII, and, confequently, in the
Life-time of this l.aft, or afhort time after,
if, as the fame Hiftory records, he fat but
a little more than four Years. We fhajl
however take a time profeffedly to demon-*
Urate that the Date of his Confecration
.ought to be put fome Years backward j
but tho' two or three were wanting to
make it quadrate with this Infcription,
it would no; at all lofe of its. authenticity;

f 4 &t



8? ORIGIN©/ the,

for th.6 Patriarch may have been dead at
Bagdad, and they have known nothing of
the Matter in China. A£b and public
Writings are, every Day, drawn up in the
Indies , arid in America, with the Years of
the Popes and Kings, after they are dead ;
becaufe the News thereof cannot reach
them in time, but thefe Writings are genuin
neverthelefs.
Of theTi- The Title of Catholic, added to that of
tie of Ca- Patriarch, was never afiumed but by the
thohc Neftorians, and when Kircher fays the
Patriarch of Alexandria did the fame, and.
Mutter applauds his Conje&ure, adding,
Cathohd " there never was any one of the Oecu-
Patriarch* u men ' ic Jftfhops that did not take this
m?Z& " Title upon him/' they are greatly in the
pfcopZum wrong. For what can Mutter mean by Oe-
Oecumeni- cumenic Bijhops ? If he conceived them to
covumfibi De the Bimops of great Sees, none but the
ab ohm Patriarchs ot Conft ant inople ever ftyled them-
fumpjtf. { e \ VQS Oecumenical Patriarchs fince John the.
Fajler ; and thofe of Alexandria, Antioch, or
Jerufalem, whether Orthodox or not, never
afiumed this ambitious Title at all. But \t
feems Mutter took Catholic and Occumenic.
to have the fame Import, whereas they
are of very different: Meaning; it was in
the Days of Juftinian, that they began to
give the Title of Catholic to thofe Prelates
who were fuperior in Dignity to Me-
tropolitans ; and who had Authority over
feveral of them, and might confecrate
them without R^ecourfe had to the Patriarch
of Anticch, At fir ft they were two 5 hirn

of



Chriftktn Religion in China, %?

.otPerJia, and him of Armenia, who are ftill
retained in the Jacobite Church ; but the Ne-
fiorians of Seleucia and Ctejiphon, witdraw-
ing Obedience from the Orthodox they fuc-
ceeded, and diverting them of their Autho-
rity, under the Countenance of the laitKings
of Perfidy arrogated to themfelves the Style
of Catholic, and have kept it ever finoe,
adding Patriarch thereto, as they were the
Heads of all the Nefiorian Communion.
From this fame Word the Arabs have for-
med their Jatelik, the two Letters being the
fame but for thePolition of the diacriticPoint^
while Marco Polo, conforming to the Vene~
tian Pronunciation, has exprefTed it by Z<#-
tolic. In Ihort, it became fo very peculiar to
the Nefiorian Patriarchs, that the Jacobites,
out of Hatred to them, tho* they themfelves
had real Catholics in their own Church,
have for five hundred Years paft given them
the Title of Mofrian.

Mailer ', and thofe,who, with him,imagined Mulled
that the Catholic, mentioned in the Infcription Mjlake
may have been the Patriarch of Alexandria u P nt ^ is
<lid not fo much as dream of one thing, which ea '
fhould neverthelefs have firfl prefented h>
felf to the Conlideration of thofe who had
but the leafl Acquaintance with the Eaftern
Churches ; and this is Why any Ecclefiaftics
of the Church of Alexandria fliould have
made ufe of the Syriac, which was of no
.Predominance in Egypt, either in common
Difcourfe, or in the Offices of the Church.
They never could haveaffigned aReafon
for thisj and confequently they mould have

had



?o O R I G I N of the

had fome Thoughts of the Patriarch of Ant*
tioch, and him of the Nejlorians \ and ac-
cordingly have fixed upon this laft, fee-*
ing the former never allumed the Title of
Catholic, and that thofe who, in his Church,
were dirtinguifhed thereby, were fubordi-
nate to him.
A Proof The Date of the Grecian Year fhould al-
fromthe f nave fuggefted to thefe learned Men,
Date. That the infcription could not have been
ordered by Eccleiiarticsfent from the Church
of Alexandria, nor from that of Ethiopid>
with whom this Epoch was not 'in ufe, but
that of Dioclcfian, or of the Martyrs*
<fhe Names There is no Obfcurity as to the Names of
plain. the Perfons, except what Kircher has raifed
by his faulty Reading. The Names are
perfectly Syrian, and common enough a-
mong the Nejiorians ♦ a Biihop, Chorepifcopi %
J Papas, who have the fame Authority^
Priefts and Deacons, who, very probably,
did at that time conftitute the Chriftian
Clergy of China. Midler, who has com-
pared thefe Names with thofe in the Prc-
dromus , might have fpared himfelf the
Trouble ; for all the Difference arifes from
fome Names, in the fir ft Work, ill read,
and not in the Original.
Exam'tna- ket us now - examin the Chinefe Part of
tienofibe this Infcription, a< cording to theTranila-v
Chinefe tion of fome able Jefuits, more to be re-
InfiYipticn. iy ec [ on f ar t h an M u i} er ^ who, in fome

Places, prefumes to reftore the Chinefe
Text, and to alter the Veriion. This,,
is afore of. an Article we will not dwell

on;



Chrifiian Religion in China* <?;

fen ; tho', by the way, it is hard to conceive
how a Man that has never been out of Ea->
rope, fhould be able to play the Critic upon
a Chinefe Infer iption, only by the Help of a
few Lexicons ; to have done with this, we
will take notice of what is molt eflential in
each Column,

The firfl lays down the Ground-work of fkefrft
the Chrifiian Faith, the Exigence of a God- ^^
head, in three Perfons, Creator of all ^garAu
Things. It is remarkable that thefe Syrians the Exi-
ufe the word Alohoj which they, moft cer- ftence and
tainly, did becaufe they could find no Name of
word in the Chinefe Tongue to convey the
Idea the Chriftians have of the true God ;
But Midler^ who fancies he knows more
than any body finds you out four others, ■
which he pretends will anfwer the end,
For we mufi not imaging fays he, the Chi-
nefe have no adequate Name to Jignify God y
tho* they have not the ineffable Name of Je<-
hovah. And yet Ricci, Martini and many
others were of a contrary Opinion, while
thofe, of our Days, who fide with Mutter^
have not been able to prove what they fay.
His turn upon the ineffable Name is quite
puerile ; for without knowing the Pronun-



ciation it may have had among the Hebrews ,

we have, through Mercy, an Idea of

the Sovereign Entity. It is aftonifhing,

.That after fo many learned Men, even Pro- Capcll.de

teftants, have unveiled the Abfurdity there Nom. Eh-

is in the Pronunciation of Jehovah^ there him * &c -

ihould ftill be People \o ftickle for \u

Novtf



9 z O R I G I N of the

. Now for the Remark he afterwards makes
upon the Name of God expreffed in Syriac y
and which he modeftly offers as a Conjecture:
It is likely then, fays he, the Author of the
Infer iption was of a Church that [poke Syriac.
Nothing in the World more certain j and
hence it might naturally have been inferred
that the Patriarch, therein mentioned, could
never have been him of 'Alexandria* But the
date, and fo many Syrian Names might
equally have convinced him, not only that
the Church of this Clergy, that is, of the
Chrirtians of the Country, fpoke Syriac, but
that it was alfo the facred Language in
which they celebrated divine Service, and
drew up their Eccleliallical Writings.
Ofthefe- The fecond and third Column continue
condand to explain the Myrlery of the Creation, the

w C °" fal1 of t} ? e firft ^ an b ^ the Sedua:ion of
the Devil, who is called Satan, a Name

quite foreign to the Chinefe Tongue, and
the general Corruption of Mankind by Sin
and Wickednefs.
Of the The fourth explains the Advent of Jefus

fourth con- Chriffc by his Incarnation, to the following
cemmg Je- e ffe£fc : £) onec Perfonarum trium una commit"
nicavit fe ipfam clariffimo venerabiliffimoque
Mixio, openendo abfeondendoque veram majef-.
tat em, ftmul homo prodiit in jkculum. Thefe
words fufHciently exprefs the Neftori*
an way of expounding the My iter y of
the Incarnation ; they rejecting the Union of
the Word and Man, except by Inhabita-*
tion, by a Plenitude of Grace, fuperior to
that of all other Saints. This conformity'

of



Chrifi'wi Religion in China. y§

of Creed is eafily comprehended, by com- Elias Ni-
paring the ParTages in Elias the Catholic^ ^ b - ^ ss -
and other Divines who have been cited A ^ ru £
upon feveral Qccafions. . Mathaei.

In the fame Column are thefe words : other My-
Spiritus de coelis fignifcavit l<£titiam y which ftfffi
means the Annunciation by an Angel. Virgo f/f^^J"
foemina peperit fanclum in Tacin, which mult the Comply
here .fignify Judaa : Glarijfima conftellatio thnofthe
anunciavit f elicit at em y Pot a (Reges ex ilia Prophecies.
terra orientali) viderunt claritatcm y $3 ve-
ttemnt offerre munera fubjetlionis complete, bis
decern quatuor fancl arum. This plainly -points
at the Appearance of the Star to the Wife
Men, and the Adoration ,they came to pay
to Jefus Chrifi : but as what follows is very
dark, ,let us fee how the Interpreters have
commented thereupon: ut lex & prophetic
vigi?iti quatuor Propheiarum adimplerentur * Chin. H-
according to Kircher, ■ £bis alludes to the luft »
four major y and the twelve minor, Prophet s y
to which if you add Abraham, Ifaac, Jacob,
Job, Mofes, Samuel, David, and 'L^ch^
ry, the Father of St. John the Baptift, you
'will have the twenty four Prophets complete., tf^g n ^
Mulkr likes this Expoiition, and only re- four Pro*
marks that fome have thought the -Chinefe fieu.
Word might ilgnify Prophecies as well as
Prophets. This is, trifling enough, except
we lay hold on it to fhew how little we
are to depend upon Veriions from the Chi*
nefe Writings \ tor this Diverfity may
produce very different Meanings, and
no one can be fond of fo odd an In-
terpretation. This number of twenty four

Prophets



j>4 R. I G 1 N of the

Prophets is equally unknown to the Syn&*
gogue and to the Church, as well as that of
the twice twelve Prophecies, nor ever did
any Man name among the Prophets the Per-
rons Kircher has introduced.
tfhetme It is eafy to perceive that by the Com-
Exptkatkn pletion of the Prophecies, or of what the
cftbis Paf- Prophets foretold, thefe Syrians underftood
Mulled the Predidions in the Old. Teftament : -this
Mifiafa. is evident by what follows of the twenty
feven Books the Apoftles left behind them>
which make up the New Teftament ; and
fo the number of twenty four muft relate
to the Books of the Old. The Syrians,
whether Orthodox, Jacobite, or Neftorian,
have their Verfion from the Hebrew Text^
which contains twenty four Books, com-
monly by the Jews called the Twenty
four. This is the mighty Myftery our
Critic could not unfold • at the fame
time that he is mightilydifturbed at the twen-
ty feven Books of the New Teftament, be-
caufe, truly, Kircher reckons fourteen Epiftles
of St. Paul*, for my part, fays Muller, lean
make out but thirteen, and there is fome
doubt concerning that to the Hebrews. We
very well know the Lutherans make
a doubt of it, but the Syrians and all the
other Eaftern Chriftians are fatisned it is
canonical, as appears not dnly by their Co^-
pies of the New Teftament, but alfo by the
Enumeration their Divines and Canonifts
make of the facred Booksi IfMulkrw&s ig-
norant of fo common and certain a Faft, he

was



Chrtfilan Religion on China. $>j

was but ill qualified to talk of the Reli-
gion of the Orientals.

In the iixth Column mention is made of the
of Baptifm, which cleanfing the Body fi 'xth Co~
purifies the Soul . and then according to lumu
the Tranflation word for word; Difperfi in ' .

quatuor partes mundi ; we are not fure whe-
ther thefe words have reference to the A-
poitles or to the whole Body of Chriftians j
but it is moft likely they are meant of thefe
laft, by what follows; Ad congregandos & pa-
cificandos fine labors pulfant ligna y timoris,
pktatisj gratitudinifque voces perfonando. Here
we have an inftance of the Imperfection
of the Cbinefe Tongue; for very able Tran-
slators have been at a lofs to determin, whe-
ther thefe Words , relate to the preceding,
or to the fucceeding. But it is beyond Dii-
pute that they intend the Ceremonies of the
Chriftians, by this time in fubjedion to the
Mohammedans^ as they were in the Days of
Hananjashuabfeeing he was appointed by the
Kalif Mahadi, who dyed in the Year of the.
J%VaCLXIX, andoton/DCCLXXXV.
At this time the Chriftians were not allow-
ed the ufe of Bells, but were obliged, a$
they are at prefent, to ftrike upon wooden
Inftrnments inftead thereof- and this is
moil: likely to be Senfe of the Cbinefi
Words.

But Muller difcovers a more exalted MullerV
Meaning ; he will have it that Mo y which Cwj&***
the Jefuits render Ligna, iignifies the De- ln i QUr£ * 1 *
vil, and that fo it mult be altered, fine la-
fore pulfant Dtabolmn\ and that this Ex*

predion



$6 O R I G I N of the

preffion is to be underflood of Exorcifrri*
We have already declared, That thofe who
fancy they have acquired the Chinefe Lan-
guage by poring in their Clofets, deferve
not to be heard in opposition to fuch cf
the Learned as have patiently and painfully
ftudied it a long time in the very Country*
To fay no more of this, I would ask if
any Chriftian, in any Language whatfoever,
has made ufe of an Expreffion like
that of beating or ftriking upon the De<ail y
with a view to the Exorcifms of Baptifm.
VheCen- The next Columns mention the feveral
monies and Ceremonies pra&ifed by the Chriftians,
Cufioms of That they lacrifice with the face to the
theChrifii- £ a ^ t ] lat; f even times a Day they pray for
"Tin the ■ t he Quick and the Dead, that they offer Sa-
Infcripion. crifice upon the firft Day of the Week^
and that they purify the Heart by the Re-
miffion ofSin* Then as to their exterior,
.That they wear long Beards, that they
fhave the upper part of the Head, that they
have no train of Slaves, and that they
hoard not riches, but that they bellow great
Alms, and that they fall. We may plain-
ly difcern all the Praclifes of the Eaflern
Chriftians amidfl the enigmatical Exprefli-
ons of the Chinefe* the PafTages Mai-
ler heaps together from feveral Authors,
are by no means to the point, and the lefs
as none of them are Orientals, who, as it
happens, are thofe he mould have consulted.
Mutter'* He makes a moft grave Remark upon the
jnimad- -\y 0I( { Sacrifice; faying there is no Chinefe
^TiS-'Word to fignify the Sacrifice -without Blood*

(hariji. $ *



Chriftian Religion in China. $f

I do not find, continues he, that they made
Ufe of the Word Sacrifice, or that they believed
they offered the real Body and Blood of Jefus
Chriit,* into which the Bread of the Eucharift
was converted by Tranfubftantiation. If this
Infcription had been a Theological Tract
in form, we might have required it to be
more explicit and circumftantial, as well
upon this Head as upon all the reft ; the
Matter is, what the Syrian Clergy believed
concerning this Sacrifice. Fath. Kircher
had cited three or four Oriental Paiiages
from Ecchellenfis, to prove thefe Chriftians
believed a real Mutation of the Bread and
Wine into the Body and Blood of Jefus
Chnft : But Midler cannot difcover either
the Sacrifice without Blood, or Tranfubftan-*
tiation in the Chmefe Tongue, adding, That
he cannot perceive this Do&rin to have
been authorifed by Liturgies, or by the
Teftimonies exhibited by Kircher. And
yet there are above fifty Oriental Liturgies,-
not to mention other Books of public
Devotion, where the Term of the Sacrifice
without Blood, is often and often repeated *
but we do not there meet with Tranfubftan-
tiation; by the fame Rule it may be proved,
that the Roman Church difclaims it; for
the exprefs Term is no where in the Ca-
non of the Mafs. To be plain, it is evi-



* Jt quod Sacrifcum appellaverint, quodque futarint
fe Ha verum Corpus Qp Sanguinem chtuliffe^ ut Euchari-
fiicus Pants per tfranfubjlar.tiathncm talis evaferit y eqm*
dem von inveriio, p. 58,

g dent



2$ ORIGIN of the

dent by Mailer's Way of talking of the
Liturgies, that he never law any of them,
much leis the Works of the Theological
Writers. Thofe who have written in Sy*
r'tac and Arabic, could not uie the Word
'tranfubjhintiation ; becauie there are no
Compounds in thofe two Tongues; but
they have declared this Transformation to
be from Sab/lance to Sabftance. Thefe are
the Terms in the Expoiition of Faith by
Ulias III. of the Name, Patriarch of the
JSFeftorians, and one cf the Succeilbrs to the
Perfon mentioned in the Syrtac Infcription.
Now as thefe Syrians who went to China,
did moll certainly believe, as their Patri-
archs did, Mutter ihould have turned over
the Writings of the Neftorian Church, to
have informed himfelf of their Creed, and
not have been fatisfied with the dark Ex-
preffions of the Cbwefe Monument, where
not a Word was faid of it.
Concern- But having thus decided the Cafe, he
big the ftops ftiort ; becaufe he was to difcufs the
Work point in a Work apart* to be penned by
trowifcs in Order ot his Superiors. It is not known
order to ' that he ever committed this intended Work
prove that to the Prefs ; but without fo much as fee-
^Eaftem j n g j t? we ma y pronounce it a Piece of no

did till vatl De P th h a Man who was a Novice to

heve the the moil common Things relating to the

real Pre- Eaftern Chriilianity, who approved the

fe»«, & c . groilell Miftakes of the firft Tranflator, and

who imagined that three or four PafTages,

contained all the Proof the Catholics could

groduce,touching the belief of Orientals upon

tht



Chrijtian 1 in China* <?£

the£'.'. :flen-

derly prepared for th . :e

. ilt than the K.
nee: Lluftrate our Inlcription, con-

cerning which, he has advanced nothing
bur has been demo a it rated i Afe.

In : A this Inlcription, there is Of Olo-

fome Talk of the nril preaching of the y *
Gofpel in G id, that in the

Time of Taizan^-scn, a holy ]
Olcpuen or Lct>:un, cr. ; Tacin, • Ghiaa

&cd - ing ike

the Winds. bo have la-

boured at the Chinefe Chronology, make
Date to correit;r.i with the Year of
rt Gbrif, EKXXXV1

Iwjft :-. Thing more eafv do

i to prove; adding, th:: 7:^ is
agti he himfelf ;.:.:. :r_- tfefi
agree it is a ;Name which belongs as -
to Syria in general as to P.:

Father Couplet^ in his G - r s ?efiu

ivient) fpeakins: oi this Kine, delivers him- m '
felf to this £v— * - Trie Hirtories of Ccu ? kt *
a the Country report, that in the XIII.



* Mcmerard Chronica a uffe ex

-■::: Regil
■rporifoue

\:fo : qui : quod

fuis ptmum Hrr-.

ttrpretar, ditiontm Sinicam adtijfent.
Cerium <aideiur eos t: lemn ir. P-> :'-

Xerji Ar.no 1625. ttati

g 2 It ear



loa ORIGINo//^

" Year of his Reign, there came Ambafla-
" dors from very re.siote Parts, and from
u feveral Nations ; and that they were of a
" very extraordinary turn of Countenance,
" and of a very foreign Appearance, fuch
iC as had never till then been feen in China.
" That the King accounted it a Glory for
" him, that in his Time there fhoula ap-
u pear Men with fandy Hair and green
" Eyes, blue, that is, fays the fame Fa-
a ther, who continues : It feems evident,
" that thefe are the fame mentioned by
a the Chinefe Monument, found in the Year
Uy< " MDCXXV. in the Province of Chenfi,
<c concerning which, you may confult Kir-
u chr, and an Arabian Manufcript in his
" moft Chriftian Majefty's Library, where-
u in it is exprefly faid, That about that
" Time, certain Miflionaries were fent to
" China by the Catholic Patriarch of the
u Indies and China, who refided at MafcL"
Couplet V It is of Importance *o note, that by the
Covfetfon. Teftimony of even Couplet himfelf, there is
no fuch Mention made of this Million in
the Chinefe Hiftory, and that he owned to
me and to others, That what he had infer-
ted in his Chronological Abridgment, was
borrowed from the Infer iption. What he
afterwards fays, of an Arabian Manufcript,



prodidit. - - De hoc confuk Kircheri Swam Ifluftratrm,
&> vetus MSS Arabicum quod, ajfervatur in Regia Gallz-
arum BiUiotheca y ubi diferte fcribituv circa idem tempus >
mijfos effe EnangeUi p<£cones in Swam a Catholico Pa~
triarchy India & Shit qui In mbe Moful degebat, P ^5.

which



Chrl titan Religion in China. ivi

which is no where to be found, and never
was in the King's Library, he had from the
late Mr. Fhevenot, who how he came to
dream of fuch a Thing is more than can
be told. There is a Manufcript indeed,
but it does not fay that the Catholic of Mu-
Jol or rather of Bagdad, fent MilTionaries to
China, tho' you therein find the Name of
Hananjapaah, in the Series of the Nejlorian
Patriarchs, and are told that he lived near-
ly about the Time mentioned upon the
Chinefe Stone. It is a Miftake alfo, to call
him Catholic Patriarch of the Indies and
of China ; for Catholic was the ufual Title
to which Patriarch was annexed j and the
Metropolitans of the Indies and of China ^ ss A _
were lubordinate to him, as may be ga- rakwjw-
thered from the Notitia of the Nejlorian hUoth. Col-

Churches. bertina.

But to return to the Infcription, it alone We have
\r \ acquaints us, that fo early as the Year no Jutho-
f)V ;;! DCXXXVI. the Gofpel had been preach- ft *"-
ed hi China, by Priefts from Syria, whofe /J^_
Chief was Olopaen. This is all we know feripticn
of the Matter -, the Chinefe Hiftory has no itfelf.
Words concerning it, and it is no hard
Matter to perceive, that this Name is
Chinefe, and that it was impofed on this
Preacher of the Word, as the Curtom ftill
is in our Days, for all thofe who go to
China to receive new Names. Mailer, full
of his Conjectures, fancies thefe Preachers
were Chriftians of Perfia, who fled the Per-
secution of the Arabs*, but long before,
■Mohammed there were Chriftians in Perfia,
g I and



102



ORIGIN^ the

and in the Upper Afia, protected by the laft
Kings ; and no fooner was Perjia conquered,
than the Nefrorians, who were almoil the
only Chriitians of that Country, obtained
very ample Privileges at the Hands of the
Kalif Omar, together with the free and
entire Exercife of their Religion, all which
is exprefly recorded in Hiftory.

It muft be confefled then, that we are
furnifned with no Light in Arabian, Syrian,
or Chwefe Authors, to ihew us who this
Okptten may have been ; we can only fay
that he entered China in the Seventh Cen-
tury. He cannot then have been St. Tho~
mas, as fome have thought : And yet Kir<-
cher and many others, account it an indubi-*
table Facl:, That this Apoftle beamed out
the Rays of the Gofpel there, after he had
preached in the Indies. This Father has
even traced out the Track he muft have
followed in his Journey thither from the
Indies ; but his Notions as to this Matter are
quite intolerable, and can never be brought
to quadrate with the Geography of thofe
Parts.

In the firft Place, he brings St. Fhomas
to a Town of Perjia, called Soldania or Sol-
tania, which is known to be in the Province
of Beladaljebcl, or the Country of Mountains,
^ aS f fi! anc ^ ^"° ^ ave ^ een kuik by Mahamed the Son
wed '" °f ^ r S un Kban, in the Year of the Hejra
DCCX ? and of Jefus Chrtft MCCCX.
Thence he conduces him to Cabul, a City
famous for Trade ; and thence to another
Jie calls Cafurfian, or City of Infidels ; be*-

caufe



Hifi. Nefi.
in A1SS.
Arab.

JVe learn
pothing in
the Ara-
bic Wri-
tings con-
cerning
Olopuen,
nvho can-
fidt have
heen St.
Thomas.



tfhe Track
Kircher

will have
St. Tho-
mas to
have
wetf,



Cbriftian Religion in China. xoj

caufe inhabited by Chriftians only, whom
the Mohammedans call Kafars or Infidels.
No Arabian Geographer or Perfian, has
taken Notice of this Town, fo that Kircber
for this depends only on the Authority of
Benet Goez a Brother Jefuit, who came by
Land from China to the Indies ; but by the
Manner of fpelling this Name, as it ftands
in the China Illuftrata, it feems evident that
this Cafmfian is owing to a Miftake in read-
ing the Name of the Province of Curiftan,
or Cuzifian, which is a Part of the ancient
Stifiana, which was ufually croiled by the
Merchants of Mefopotamia and Perfia, who
went by Land to Tibet. The Matter, how-
ever, was not to exhibit a Diary of St. Tho-
mas's Travels this Way, tho' the Road
pricked down, had been as plaufible as this
is not.

All the Proofs hitherto offered to per-
fuade us St. Thomas preached in China, are
founded upon mere Conjecture only, where-
as this Monument, whofe Authority cannot
well be contefted,afiures us, the firit Know-
ledge the Chinefe had of the Evangelic
Faith, was not before the VII Century;
nor is there the leait Footftep of the
contrary in Ecclefiaftical Antiquity. It
remains now, that we enquire who thefe
firft Miffionaries may have been, a Point
as yet not fufficiently cleared up.

The Obfervations already made upon the tfhU firfi
Syrian Words, at once declare, that this -" ji ^ ton $
Milfion confifted of Syrians, that they were syrlSs«-
of the fame Church with thofe who ere£t-
g 4 ed



104



fThe Sy-
rians of
cifferent
Communi-
sm ; and
thofe who
went io
China
were Ne-
ftorians.



ORIGINo/*

ed this Monument to commemorate the
firft Appearance of the Gofpel in China,
feeing they call them their Fathers ', and that
they profeiied. Obedience to the Catholic,
and that his Name was Hananjajhuah.

Again, there is not the leaft Room to
imagin theie nrft Preachers were not Sy-
rians, feeing that the Date which is as the
Seal of what is contained in the Infcrip*
tion, as alfo the Signatures, which have an
abfolute Affinipy with thofe ftill in Ufe with
the Eaftern Churches in all Writings of
Record, are in the Syrian Tongue, the
holy Language, wherein they celebrated
Divine Service, and tranfacled all Church
Matters. If the Priefts and others mentkv
ned in the Body of the Infcription had
been of Egypt, the Date and their Names
had been written in Greek, or in Coptic.
They were then of the fame Church with
the firffc Preachers, and fubordinate to the
fame Patriarchs, a Thing of the plaineft
Vifibility, feeing they looked on their Prer
deceflbrs as their Fathers.

In former times there were Syrians of
different Se&s, as at this day, Melchites,
or Orthodox, Nefiorians, and Jacobites : Now
if we can difcover the Seet of the Perfon
ftyled Patriarch, we fhall be infallibly
guided to the Communion of the Clergy
who acknowledged him their Superior.
The very Title therefore of Catholic, to
which Patriarch is annexed, is a demon-
ftrative Proof, that he was the Catholic
of the Neftcrians* who was Patriach in re?

fpea



Cbrijtian Religion in China. 105

fpe& of them, as being fubordinate to no
other; and the rather, as neither the Pa-
triarch of Antiocby nor him of Alexandria
ever ailumed the Style of Catholic. But the
difpute is inconteftably decided by the Te-
stimony of the Neftorian Church her felf,
who acknowledges an Hananjajhuab among
her Catholics, or Patriarchs, and declares
he lived about the time this Monument
was erected. Several of the Names which
fill up the Margins of the Stone, are com-
pounded of two Words, a Cuftom more
prevalent among the Syrians of Mefopota-
mia y and the Nefioriansj than with any of
the reft ; and this added to the Arguments
before offered, confirms thefe Preachers
to have been of their Communion. And
what ftill proves it more and more, is
the manner of explaining the Myftery of
the Incarnation • for through the Clouds
of the Chinefe Style, we dilcern the Doc-
trin of this Seft, which admits the Union
but by the Inhabitation of the Word, and
the Communication of his Dignity and in^
finite Power.

This is all we learn from the Syriac In- _* c , „
fcription; but the Cbinefe Words contain n J c p a lt
a more minute Detail of the Progrefs of of the in-
this Million. It is there faid that this O/0- ftrfchi
fuen from Tacin y that is, from Syria or Ju- alone con ~
d<za, did in the Year which coincides with ^faidof
ph e> DCXXXVIof Jefus Cbrifi, in the dp J
Reign of <fai ftim-ven, promulgate the Law grefi of
of the true God ; that this Prince appro- Cbripan^
ying of it, commanded it to be proclaimed **'

all.



io6



iVl.ereupon
it is /aid
the Chi-
nefe Hi-

tflory con-
cerns not it
felf with
Foreign
Matters.



OKlGINofthe

all over China, and the Emperor's Edict
to that End is iummarily referred to, bear-
ing Date DCXXIX; that at the fame
time a Church was built in the Royal Ci-
ty of Ininfan. That fome Years afterwards,
in DCLL under the Emperot Cao- f Mi, the
Chriftian Faith was known in every Pro-
vince of China* That in the Years
DCXCIX. and DCCXIIJ. the Bonzes, or
idolatrous Prieft, raifed fome tumult a-
gainft the Chriftians; but that the fame
was quelled by the Authority of the Em-
peror Fven-can-ci-tao. That in the Year
DCCXLVII. there came from Tacin ano-
ther Priert, called Kieho , that the Emperor
So-cum~ven-mi .had built feveral Churches
in the Year DCCLVI1. that his Succeflbrs
were, in like manner, Friends to Chriftia-
nity ; and that at length this Stone was
erected in Commemoration of all thefe
Fa£ts in the fecond Year of the Emperor
Zam } and DCCLXXXII. oiChrift. You
may read it at length in Kircber's China
Illuftrata, but this is a Summary of the
whole.

What Couplet relates in his Hiftorical
Abridgment, is borrowed from this Infcrip-
tion, and he himfelf confeiies there is no
Mention at all made of the Event in
Chinefe Hiftory • and the reafon is, becaufe
it concerns not itfelf with what belongs
to Strangers. But this Reafon is liable
to fome Confutation ; for this fame Kiftu-
ry records the EmbalTy fent into the /?/-
dies in queit of the Saint pretended to have

been,



Chriftian Religion in China, 1 07

been foretold by Confucius^ it records al-
io the evil Reiult of this Inquiry, whence
fprang among them the worfhip of Foee 9
Idolatry, and the Do&rin of Transmi-
gration. The knowledge of Chriftianity,
the Root it took over the whole Empire,
and the Imperial Edifts in Favor there-
of, were not in the leaft more Foreign to
the Chinefe Affairs, than the new Religion
of Foee. It is then on all Hands agreed,
that the Chinefe Hiftory, and that alfo of
the Neftorian Patriarchs, is totally filent
upon this Head : Wherefore we are reduced
to the Neceffity of wholly relying on the
Incifion upon the Chinefe Stone • but par-
ticularly upon the Date the Tranilators have
fixed to the Year of Chrift DCXXX VI.
for the Appearance of the nrft Preacher of
the Gofpel in thefe Parts, who is Okpuen.

We have heretofore remarked that we it u rath-
have no Affiftance,whereby to get acquaint- nal t»
ed with this Okpuen ; and that to all Appear- think that
ance it is a Chinefe Name, impofed on him 2 l0pU s n
in the Country, as the Cuftom rtiU is in rian^flhe
Cafes of the like Nature ; for this Name fame
is by no means Syriac, nor has it any A£- 'Omnh
finity therewith. All therefore we can ^f th / e
deduce from certain confequences, is, that 7d°th7fa
this fame Preacher, and the other men- fcr'ptwn.
tioned after him in the Infcription, were of
the very fame Church with thofe who e-
re&ed this Monument, feeing they call
them their Fathers. They then paid Obe-
dience to the Catholics, or Patriarchs of
the Nefioriansy the PredecelTors of Hananj^

afhuahj



io8 ORIGIN^fc.

afbuahy and were confequently of Commu-
' nion with him- and as certain it is that he
was a Nefiorian, the others muft have been
fo like wife, the Title of Catholic prefixed
to that of Patriarch, being quite peculiar
to the Neftorians.
A 'Series of From the Year DCXXXVI. the firft
/ZtfNeilo- Epoch noted in the Cbwcfe Infcription,
arebs of*~ down to Hananjafbuah the fecond of the
thofe Name, under whom this Infcription was

^times. dated in the Year DCLXXX. or two
Years afterwards, according to the Com-
putation of thofe who translated the Chi-
nefe, the Hiitory of the Neftorians has the
following Patriarchs, Jajhuaiab, Mar-Am-
ba, Jajbuaiab, Gregory^ John, Hananja/bnah %
another John intruded, Selibazaha, Phiton,
Mar-Aba, Surin or Surenas, James, and
Hananjafbuah the fecond of that Name. At
firft they reiided at Seleucia and Ctejiphon,
which were conlidered as one and the
fame City, by the Arabs called Modain.
He who Hands foremoft in this Lilt, was
confecrated in the Reign of Siroes the
Parricide, who died towards the Year
DCXXXIV. Ardefbir, who fucceeded him,
reigned but one Year* and Bur an the
Daughter of Co/roes, who according to the
Perjian Hiftorians, was the only Survivor
of the Royal Houfe, afcended the Throne.
The Neftorians have it, that flie fent Ja-
Jhuaiab in quality of her AmbafTador to "the
Greek Emperor, and charged with conside-
rable Prefents; that he met with a very
gracious Reception; that he made hisCon-*

feffion



ChnfiiAn Religion in China. io#

%Iion of Faith, and that he celebrated the
Liturgy in prefence of the Emperor, who
received the Sacrament at his Hands : A
Circumffcance v/orthy of juft as much be-
lief, as is due to many of the fame Stamp
in their Hhiory. By the Teftimony of the
Greek Authors, and particularly of Tbeo-
phanes, it is certain that this Queen main-
tained Peace with the Greek Emperors, and
that me ruled with great Wifdom. They
call her Bur an as doth the Nefiorian Hi-
ftory. The Perfians call her Turan, and Emir.
Taran-docht) and exhibit a Series of Kings Cond.
and one Queen called Arzcmi-docht^ before d 5j b - ^f a "
Ifdejerdj under whom Perjia fell a Conquer! £•£ T ^2
to the fortunate Mohammedans, whereas the xeira. p,
Neftorian Accounts,- make her the immedi- 208.
ate Succeflbr to Bur an, or Ifuran-docht, in
confederation that the intervening Princes
fat but a ihort time, and in the midft of

freat Commotions. The Perfian Hiftory
efore the Conquer!, is extremely intricate,
whether we confult the Pcrftans them-
felves, or the Arabs, and the feveral Co-
pies are not of one Mind, as to the Name
of this Queen tfuran-docht, by others called
Buran, as in the Hiftory of the Nejlorians.
iZouan is a Name in mibihus, for which we
ftand indebted to Schikard's miftaken read-
ing 5 all that he fays in his Tarich Regum
Per/?*) fo much famed, vaniihes away to
nothing, or is reducible to very Trifles, if
we except what he borrows from Tcixeira y
and the Jukbajf/in^ but we cannot dwell
longer upon this Head, without wandering



no OKI G IN of the

into a Digreflion, which would lead us
too far aftray.
What is to We will infift therefore on no more than
le found in what the Hiftory of the Neftorian Churches
the Hijiory ^dds concerning the Patriarch Jajhuaiab.
ftorians C " ^ i n f° rms us r ^ at ne lived in the Reign
touching of the laft King Ifdejerd, and that he fur-
thehfi vived under the Kali f Omar y the Son of
Kings of jji Kittabj the third Kalif at whofe Hands
Perfia. ^e b tamec [ an ample Protection, as well as
an Exemption from all manner of Taxes
for himfelf and his. The fame Hiitory has
it, that, while Ifdejerd was yet living, he
fent Prefents and Letters to Mohammedj
or, as others exprefs themfelves, to the Ge-
neral of the Arabian Army, to requeft his
Favour, a Step, which though it had like
to have coil him his Life, procured him
the irrjoyment of his wiih. Omar began
his Reign, as Katif, in the thirteenth Year
of the Hejra y and Modain was taken in the
Years DCXXXIV. and DCXXXXII, of
I ^si^efus Ckrijt. This laft Date therefore qua**
drates with the Date of the Chmefe In-
fcription, and the arrivaL oiOlopuen in Chi"
na y if the Supputation of the Tranflators
be right. And yet the Neftorian Writings
make no mention of Ecclefiaftics fent to
China, or into the Provinces of the Upper
Afta about thefe Times ; and very hard it
is to comprehend, how amidft the Broils
which then diftra&ed Perjia, and the very
extraordinary Revolution upon .. the Con-
quer!: of the whole Kingdom by the M-

hamm$~



Chriftian Religion in China. 1 1 j

harnmedans, the Catholic fhould have been
able to fend a Million into China.

Mutter thought the Chriftians fled from q% e CM-
Perfecution into the neighbouring Provin- pans did
ces, and. that thence they might have pene- mt remove
trated into China- and indeed this Con je- ™ to f ?cr -

<~ . , r > J hate avoid

cture might pais, was it not repugnant to t ^ e p €r f e „
Hiftory, which moil explicitly declares, cuthnof
that the Neftorians enjoyed themfelves in *&* Arab*
Peace, from the Reign of Siroes, that they
were countenanced by Queen turan-docht,
and that the Mohammedans from the very
beginning, were Hill more kind to them.
Mohammed himfelf had recommended them
to his Captains, and had granted them Pro-
tections, which were confirmed by Omar
the third Kalif, and which, as the Hifto-
rian allures us, were preferved, and after-
wards ftill farther confirmed by Othmam
an All. The Chriftians had nothing to
compel them out of the Country, or to
take Refuge eliewhere, and leaft of all the
Neftorians, who were more numerous than
the reft, and by no Means obnoxious, as
being profcribed and expelled the Provin-
ces under the Greek Emperors. Again
they had a folid Claim to the Mohammedan
Friendfhip, they being the firft that made
Advances towards aSubmiffion to the falfe
Prophet, whom the Neftorians alone have
applauded as the Extirpator of Idolatry, nor j mm ^
have their Divines fcrupled to quote the Mattb.
Koran y m fpe.aking of the Myftery of the In- Ek.NiJtL
carnation : Their Hiftory acquaints us, that
feveral Chriftians of this fame Communion,

wers



in ORIGlNo/ffc

were much confidered at the Court of Bag*
dad, and particularly in the Reign of Al~
mamiin^ who imployed them in the Tran-
flations he ordered of the ancient Greek
Books into Arabic ; they were valued alfo
for the Skill fome of them had in Phyiic,
as Honain the Son of Ifaac, and his Son.
John the Son of MaJfowia y known by the
Name of Mefuus y Bocljafhuah, George^ and
Gabriel^ mentioned by Abulfaragius, as well
as thofe who penned the Lives of the Phy-
licians. So Mullers Conjecture mull fall
to the Ground, and the rather, becaufe the
Chrifkians could not withdraw from the
Provinces late in Subjection to the Kings
of Per/za y without expoling themfelves to
very great Dangers, in the Midft of bar-
barous and moftly irreligious Nations, as
thofe were, who inhabited the Tranfoxane
quite to China.
tt r e Iyiow We muft be contented therefore, with
nothing what we are told by the Chinefe Infcrip-
jjflh b t * on > w ^°& Authority cannot well be con-
bytbTin- te ft eQl 5 tho* ^e Hiftory of the Neftorian
fcripthn on Patriarchs does fay nothing of any Syrian
the Chi- Miffionaries fent to China. For this Hifto-
ne&Stom. X y [ s f i m perfe£t that no Wonder it flips
over the Concerns of fo diftant a Country,
feeing it omits many Facts of the fame
Nature, which we know from other Hands.
The other Hiftories, as well Printed as in
Manufcript, are by no Means more com-
plete, and the Averfion the Orthodox or
Melchites, as well as the JacobiteSj have
ever had to the Ncftorians, is the Reafoa

they



Chrifiian Religion in China.

they fcarce name them \ befides, it is pro
bable they knew but little of what palled
in a Communion they had nothing at all
to do with.

Supporting then the Contents of the
Chimfe Infcription to be true, and we have
almoft all the Reafon in the World to ad--
mit it* Chriftianity was firrl: taught in
China in the Courfe of the feventh Cen-
tury, and the firrl: Miflionaries were Nefto-
rians, of the fame Church with thofe who
erected this Monument, one Hundred and
forty-iix Years afterwards, to commemo-
rate this firrl: Million* Nor can we doubt
but that, in Conformity to the common
Difciplin of all Chriilians, the Catholics
or Patriarchs of the Nefiorians^ erected
the ufual Hierarchy, fending one or feveral
Bifhops thither, without which, this infant
Church could not fo long have fubfifted ;
accordingly in the Syriac Signatures, you
have the Names of a Biihopj a Chorepifc
copus, Priefts and Deacons * alfrd it is al-
together probable, that as fart as there
was a lufficient Number of Converts, they
appointed Paftors over the new Chriftians :
But tho* Hiftory nor this Infcription is par-
ticular as to this Point, there is an impor-
tant and collateral Tertimony which
makes it almort. certain.

We have a Notitia of the Metropolitans
of the Neftorian Church, which cannot be
queitioned, the fix firft of them being the
lame as are in the Office of the Confecrct-
tion of the Catholk y publiihed by Father
h Moritiy



HI



tfhefeMf-
jionartes

were Nc*
Adrians.



^thelv No-
titia has A
Metropolis
tan of
China.



ii 4 ORIGIN of the

Dc San«a. Morin, as the Chief in Dignity, and tllff
Ordin. fame as are often mentioned in Hiftory, as
are moft of the reft. The Order theie Me-
tropolitans Hand in, feems at firft to be con-
futed } and it might be thought, they are
not named according to the Rank they
held • in the Church. For the Metro-
politan of Jerufalem is but the twenty-
fecond, tho* there are but twenty-four in
all, which is contrary to the Ufage of o-
ther Churches, and to the Canons of the
Council of Nice, which dignifies him
next after the four Patriarchs. And hence
is it that he, for many Ages, has been con-
iidered as the fifth Patriarch in the Greek
Church, and in the Latin; tho' the fame
was not allowed him by the Coptic Church
of Alexandria. But it may be readily un-
derftood that this Order, the Neftorian Me-
tropolitans ftand in, was not regulated by
the Dignity, but the Antiquity of each.
Now this Antiquity was not deduced from
the Rank thefe Metropolitan Cities may
have enjoyed under the Chriftian Empe-
rors j for in thofe Days they were fcarce
known, and deftitute of Bifhops, nay,
fome of them were not built.
tfhey eveB The Neftorians then erected a new Hier-
a ww archy, whofe general Metropolis, and, as
Hierarchy. j t w ' ere) trie Capital of their Patriarchat
was Seleitcia of the Parisians, and Ctcfi-
phon, which have been deemed as one and
the fame City. Simon, by the Neftorians
called Barjabaiy who fuflered Martyrdom
in Sapors great Perlecution^ and whom

they



Chriftlan Religion in China. i 1 5

they number with their Catholics^ was, ao 'a^/st/-
cording to Sozcmen, Archbifhop of Sdcucia ****&* r
and Ctefokon, Royal Cities of Perfta. The f^^
Neftorians there fettled, and role to great <ri$fl<§T
Authority under Ofrces Nujhirowan^ who r i» un-
protected them in Opposition to the Greek ^ 0*-
Emperors, and compelled the other Chri- ~^ ^/j
ftians to embrace their Communion. In £ Vi
this State of Favor they remained under
the laft Kings of Pcrfia y and the fame was
fecured to them, as has already been faid, Sozom.lz:
by the firft Kalifs. As they well knew, c - 8 -
and as was the Belief of all Chriftians, Ce**».T.
there could be no fuch Thing as being of " P ' 4I * %
the Church without an Apoltolical Suc-
ceffion, that is, if the principal See had
not been founded by fome of the Apoftles
or Difciples of Jejus- Chriftj a Prerogative
they wanted, they fought for one w r hich
they thought fufficient. They began then
with the holy Bifhops of Seleiicia, whom
they would have to be the PredecefTors of
their Catholics^ but fraught with no other
Proof than that of pofTefTing the fame
Churches, wherewith they had been in-
vefted by infidel Princes. Then as, ac-
cording to the Tradition of the Mefcpta-
mian Churches, St. Thadteus preached the
Gofpel at Edeffdy a See they had alfo u-
furped, as well as the ancient School of
the Holy Scripture, w r hence they were
driven by Reraclius, but which they
were reftored to by the Arabs; by the help
of this and many Figments at the begin-
ning of -their Hiftory, they perfuaded their
h a People >



ti6 ORIGIN of the.

People, that St. Thadtus had founded
the Church of Seleucia, and the Dignity of
Catholic. Thus is it that they fixed their
Patriarchal See at Modainj the ancient Se-
kucia y and when that City was partly
ruined) and Almanfar the Kalif had built
Bagdad r , they transferred it thither.
<fhe£re>- The Foundation of this new Hierarchy
their °Lw being laid in Per/ia, their firrl Metropo-
Metropli- litan City was Jundaifabur^ built by Sapor
una, Ardjhir King of Perfidy and which be-
fore had not fo much as a Bifhop. The
fecond was Niftbis y after they had expelled
the Orthodox from that City and School
' there, which they did to honour their Se£fc
by the Commemoration of St. James y and
many other Saints. The third was Baffb-
ra y the fourth Hazza y the ancient Arbela y
by the Arabs, Erbel: The fifth was Bajarmi?
Abulf or as the Syrian s pronounce it Beitgarma y
&«.'2pi. the ancient Martyropolis y the fixtli was
* Hahvati) a City of Irak, five Days from
Bagdad^ but unknown to Antiquity. Thefe
fix firft Metropolitan Cities, accounted
fuch by the Neftorians only, were either
in Mefopotamia y or the Irak Ajami or the
perftan Irak, it being in thefe Provinces
that they firft began to fpread. After this
they erected a Metropolitan of Perfia that
is of the Country comprehended under the
Name of Fars y or Perfia properly fo called,
they being admitted by the laft Kings.
From thence they penetrated into the
Upper-Afia y and the ninth Metropolitan
was that of Mam in Cboraffa#' 7 the tenth

was



Chrifiian Religion in China. 1 17

was Aract, the Aria of the Ancients ; the
eleventh Katarba, but little known. To
conclude, the twelfth was that of China,
the thirteenth that of the Indies.

According to what we have noted above, V%eyweve
this Order or Series of Metropolitans, ac- ranked ac-
quaints us with the Seniority of each ; and c ° rd ™$ t0
thence it follows that China being, in the mm 1 %
Notitia, named before the Indies, muft.
have been the elder of the two. It may
be faid thefe two were but one, and it may
feem that Trigaut fupplies us with a Proof
thereof; for fpeaking of the two laft Bi-
ftiops fent to the Indies by the Nejlorian
Patriarch , at the Time that D. Alexis de
Menefes was labouring to reform the Mala-
bar Churches, he fays, they called themfehes Gov. Hifl.
Metropolitans of the Indies and of China. °f Mene ^
It is true, that in the latter Ages thefe two
Titles were put together, but formerly
they were diftinft; and in the Hiftory of
the Nejlorians, we read of feveral Exam-
ples of two Bifhoprics in like Manner
united, even of two Metropolitan Sees in
one Perfon. So the Catholic Shebarjapuah
who is the LXV, and was confecrated to-
wards the End of the eleventh Century,
united the Bifhoprics of Cajhgar and Wafet,
in the Perfon of the Prieft Hormifdas, a
Native of Siraf Another called Stephen^
was appointed Bifhop of Elfan and Bwia-
zije. The Metropolis of Halwan was uni-
ted with that of Rai, Hazza or Arbela,
and Mufol, two of the fix Principal, were
held by the fame Metropolitan Jabalaha*
h 5 There-



u8 ORIGIN of the

There are many Examples of the fame
kind that occur among the A' r eft or 'ians^ and
the Abufe fprang from thefe Sources ;
for, Firfly notwithstanding the ancient
Canons, they admit in Concurrence with
other Chriftians, no Seel: has more da-*
ringly infringed them, and efpecially
in the Tranflation of Bilhops. Mori: of
their Catholics and Patriarchs were Bilhops
or Metropolitans of other Churches,
which not only was no Obftacle in the
Way of their Election, but they were al-
fo confec rated a new, much in the fame
Form with Bilhops. The Coptic Church of
A'esandria never gave way to this Abufe,
and down to thele latter Times me has
obferved it as a Rule , never to eleel: any
Man her Patriarch, if by Confecration he
was wedded to any particular Church.
The Jacobite Church of Antioch adhered a
long Time to the fame, and two of
her Metropolitans chofe rather to lay
down their Lives, than confent to the
Hmac, Election of Ifaac Bifhop of Harran into the
P: 9 8 - ' Patriarchal See of Antioch. The Greeks
have a long while forgot this holy Infti-
tution, nor can we ourlelves decently re-:
proach them therewith. It may then have
. hapned, that the Neft avian Patriarchs, pre-
fuming upon the full Power they arrogated,
thougnt they had Authority to make thefe
Unions ^ but to deal ingenuouily bythem 3
they may have had this ; Secondly ', To ex-
cufe them, that their Seel: dwindling conii-
.derably away in the fecond and th;rol Cen-
tury



Chrijlian Religion in China, up

tury of Mohammedifm, by means of the
Privileges the Mekbites and Jacobins ob-
tained of the Kalifs and Soltans,- it hapned
that in many Cities where the Neftorians
had been the only Chriftians, they were
not a number fufrlcient to conrtitute an E-
pifcopal Church or a Metropolitan. Hence
iome came to be joined with their Neigh-
bours, others were totally extinguifhed, as
in procefs of Time hapned to that of
China, when Chriftianity was there no
more, as was the Cafe when the Portuguefe
firft arrived there. Then it became a
mere Title like thofe in Partibits Infidelium.

The Greek Patriarchs of Antioch have tfhe Pa-
pretended that their Jurifdi&ion reached trian ^ of
all over the Eaft, whence it is faid in the f™™ h
Notitia of Nilus Doxapatrius, 'That his Au~ Mijjiona-
thority extended over all Alia, the Eaft, and rks to
the Indies, whither he fent a Catholic called China.
of Romogyris. This Title may have been K*Ts7^gy
kept up together with fome others aflum- *J*™ V
ed by the Greek Patriarch of Antioch: But ^Acriav
we find not the leaft veftfge in Hiftory ^^^y
fince the feventh Century at leaft, of Ca- n r 'Ip-
t holies or Metropolitans fent to the Indies, JW, &e
either by the Orthodox or Jacobite Patri-
archs of Antioch, much lefs to China, AUatl.i.
where the Chriftians were always of the c.^p.itftf.
Nejlorian Perfuaiion.

There is Reafon then to believe, that tfbefe frfi
thofe who went thither to fpread the Mijicna-
Light of the Gofpel, obfeured as it was by ™ «?£
the darknefs of Errors, took the- way of ^ i an ^
the Provinces conterminous with Cher a/Ian,
h 4 and



120 ORIGIN the of

and that they travelled thither by Land,
For that enigmatical Exprefiion, contemn
flando veniGrum regulam, & a nubibns c<eru-
kis direcfus, is far from proving, that this
Oloptien failed thither by Sea, and by the
help of the Cpmpafs. We want fomething
more than Chinefe Hiftory to perfuade
us they knew any thing of the Magnetic
Needle, but if we grant the Chinefe to
have ufed it, we are pretty fure the Syrians
did not; the Courfe they ihaped for the In-
dies is a plain Demonftration of their Igno-
rance in this Particular, But, indeed as they
had vaft Defarts to crofs before they could
reach China, they might have hadrecourfe
to the Needle to guide them, juft as they
do in the vaft Wildernefles of America,
when they were out upon any Difcovery.
Others, as thofe mentioned in the Se-
quel of the Chinefe Infcription, may have
gone thither by Sea, fleering the fame
Courfe laid down by our Authors } and
it is likely they went much about the
fame Time, the Metropolis of the Indies,
being immediately named after that of
China,
How long We may conclude, then, from what we
Chr utd' are ^^ ky the Infcription, that Chriftia-
China 1P n ^y wrrich was fir ft preached in China in
the Year DCXXXVI, fubfifted there till
the Date in Syriac, that is, till the Year of
Chrift DCCLXXX and even a confides
able time afterwards, lince Abu Zeid, the
Author of the fecond Account, fpeaking of
the general Revolution which happened in

China



Cbrlftitm Religion in China, m

China, and particularly of the Peftru&iori
ofCanfu in the Year of the Hejra CCLXI V",
or ofjefns Chrift DCCCLXXVII, relates
that a great Number of Chriftians was
there flaughtered. He fays nothing of
thole in other Cities, whence it feems
that in this City, which was the principal
Scale, there were none but Merchants.

But we are told by another Author,
whom we know but by the means of Golius y
in the Margin of one part of his Notes
upon AJfraganus, that the Chatholics fent
fome Ecclefiaftics into China, above an
hundred Years afterwards. This is the
Tranflation. " Abulfergius relates, from the
" Teftimony of a Monk of Najaran, thefe
u very Words, That he teturned from Cbi~
" na in the Year CCCLXXXVII, that is in
« the YearofC%?DCCCCLXXXXVII
iC whither he had been fent, feven Years
" before, or thereabouts, by the Catholics,
a together with five Peribns more • and
" that the Name of the City, he had been
i6 at, was Tajuna.

Hence we infer, that towards the end of w e know
the tenth Century, the Catholics or Nefto- nothing
rian Patriarchs continued to fend Million- f u / th Z! °f
aries to China, after the Example of their t p m £ lf~
Predeceffbrs. But from that time we are this Coun-
on all fides left in the dark concerning try fince
thefe Millions, whence it mould feem that the tmfh
Chriftianity was foon after wholly loft in Gcntm >
that Country by fome Caufe to us un-
known. We do not difcern that there was
#ny Perfecution, like the laft in Ja$an y



122 ORIGINo/^

one of the moft cruel the Church ever
underwent ; nor could the Revolutions,
brought upon China by the tartar Con-
queftsof Jenghiz Khan and his Succeffbrs,
have been fatal to the Chriftians } for we
know that Jenghiz Khan himfelf had a love
for them ; his principal Wife was the
Daughter of Ung Khan whom he defpoiled
of Empire, and who was a Chriftian, as
were many of the Hoards of tartars that
paid him Homage. His SuccerTors were
to the full as well inclined towards the
'Cfcriitians ; and in the Life of Jahahalaha y
which ends the Hiftory of the Neftorians,
we read very remarkable Inftances to
prove it. It is therein related that this
Catholic was originally of Cathay, and that
he was fent by Abajha-Khan, great Em-
peror of the Tartars, to vifit the holy
Places at Jerufakm, there to lay certain
coftly Robes upon the Sepulchre, and af-
terwards dip them in the Jordan : That
aiterwards he was made Metropolitan of
Tang at , by his PredecerTor Danha, who
had invefted hirn with a plenary Authori-
ty over the Hoards of Chriftian Tartars,
and that at lait he was chofen Catholic.
He fat thirty feven Years ; but when the
Tartars were driven from Bagdad, the
Mohammedans deftroyed a part of the Ne~
ftcrian Churches, added to the former Tri-
'butes, and things put on quite another
Face.

From that time Hiflory fays nothing of
the fubje6\ we have been upon., and we

ar§



Chrijlian Religion in China. % 23

are left barely to guefs at what may further
concern it. This laft Revolution fell out
a little before this Catholic dyed, who de-
parted this Life in the MDCXXIX Year
of the Seleacidx, or the Year MCCCXVII
of Jefus Chrift. We find np Name that fuc^
ceeded him, and very probable it is, that
Chiftianity dwindled away by Degrees
in China for want of Paftors, or for fome
other reafons we know not. For when Barros.T.
the Portuguefe failed to China in the Year 3. l r 2. a
MDXVII under the command of Fernand 6 - h$-
Perez d'Andrade y who was the firft that
went to Canton^ there was not the leaft
Footftep of Chriftianity to be traced out ;
and the firft Miffionaries of that Nation as
well as the Caftilians, who crofled over
from the Philippine Ifland, met with none
that were not Idolaters. Some Crolfes
and other Signs, which have been fince
difccvered, being naked of all Date or
Infcription, could afford us no certain
Light, till the Year MDCXXY, when
the Monument we have had under conr
^deration was difcpvered.



A N



C I2 4 3



A N

INQUIRY

Into the Time when the Mohammedans
firft entered into

C H IN A.

OF the many curious Particulars to be
found in the Two Accounts we have
prefented to the Public, the En-
trance of the Mohammedans into China, be-
fore the third Century of the Hejra, is not
the leaft considerable. All their Hith>
rians are very obfeure upon their Travels
or Voyages to this part of the Upper Afta ;
and their moffc famous Geographers dif-
fer fo widely .from each other, that we
may believe they were as ignorant of
thofe Parts, as we were in 'Europe before
the Nautical Attempts of the two laft Ages.
Abulfeda y the moil accurate of their Geo-
graphers, {peaks of China merely by what
fie heard from feme Merchants. The reft
are full of Fables, fuch as Alexanders Tra-
vels to China, his Conference with the Em~
peror there, and the like : Their Copifts.
have but added to the ufelefs Lumber by

freih



firft went into CHINA. H j

ftefii Stories, which have thickened the Mi ft,
and may convince us of their thorough Ig-<
norance : And, indeed, our Authors feem
to be the firft, and almoft the only Wri-
ters that have dwelt on thofe Parts with
fome tolerable exa&nefs. They firft told
us the Mohammedans had a considerable
Settlement in the principal Port of China^
and that they had there a Kadi, who a&ed
both as a Judge, and a Spiritual Director.
In a word, that great Numbers of Mobam~ .
rnedans were in the Imperial City before
the great Revolution, mentioned in the
fecond Account.

Our own Ancient Authors take Notice,
that in the vaft Provinces, known former-
ly by the Name of Cathay y they met with
Mohammedans, who had been there a long
while ; and the Accounts of the firft Je~
f uits that went to China, confirm what they
fay. They, in every City, found M<*
bammedans, in Number fufficient to evince
That they muft have been of very old ftand-
ing in the Country. But fince nor the
Ancients nor the Moderns give us any
Circumftances, or inform us when or how
they came into this Country, it may not
be unacceptable if we make fome Inquiry
into this Matter.

It is the Belief of many that the Mo* Wh&hs?
harmnedans went firft to China by Land, *'>Mo-
and that the Track purfued by fome mo- ^ ammc ~

-, ,_, „ \ , J dans went

dern Travellers, ought to point out to us thither by.
the Road the Ancients may have taken-: Land,
Marco Pok^ fay they, went into China by

the



X*G When the Mohammedans

the way of T'artary ; Mandemlle almoft trod
in his very Footfteps; j^£^3 Khan, the firft
Emperor of the Moguls, conquered a Part
of China, and marched thereto from the
ancient Moguliftan or Turkeftan; we have
a Perjian Account of an Embafly from a
^Tartar Prince to the Emperor of China, and
this Ambafiador went alfo by Land; at
Voyages tne beginning of this Century, Benet Goez i
dcTheve- a Jefuit, travelled alfo from the Indies to
not. T. 4. Pckin ; the Fathers Grueber and Orville
did a few Years ago perform the fame
Journey the Mofcovitc Ambafladors do
when they go to China, and they evert
allure us, this Rout, which is not always
the fame, is pretty well frequented by the*
Caravans of the Merchants of the Upper
Afta> Thefe different Routs are pricked
down in the Map of Cathay, published by
Kircher in his China lllujirata ; and Father
Couplet had another, which pretty much
confounded us, tho' the Names of the Places
were written in Perjian.

All thefe Inftances fufficiently prove that
we may go to China by Land, and there
is no doubt of it; but the Way held by
a fmall Number of Travellers does not
feem to prove, That for certain the fame
was held by the Caravans and Merchants^
which ought to have been the Cafe, for
fuch a Number of Mohammedans to get in-
to China that way. For, according to the
old Method of travelling in Caravans, it
was a very hard matter for the Merchants
of Perfta and Mesopotamia to go. thither by

Landj



firft went /oCHINA, 127

Land, unlefs the Track was well frequent-
ed- and it feems not only certain that it
was far from being fo, but alfo that it was
coniideredonlyas a By-way, a Short Cut.

The better to clear up this Difficulty, <f cUarup
which, well explained, may let us into this matter
many Points of Eaftern Hiifcory and Geo- we mu fi
graphy, we mull firft furyey the Extent of ™%% n w „
the Mohammedan Empire in the third Cen- ih e Limits
tury of the Hcjra, and at the fame time cj the M.o-
confider w r hat Bounds the Eaftern Geogra- fcammed-
phers fet to the Provinces of the Upper ™Jj~^j
Afia, nearer! the Borders of China. Ceritwf?

Mohammed made himfelf Matter of a
part of Arabia } and Abubecr his Succeflbr
conquered the reft of this Province, with
the greateft part of Syria : Egypt alfo was
fubdued in his Reign, and thefe Conquefb
were enlued by others Weft ward, which
are foreign to our Subject. In Afia, the
Mohammedans had two potent Enemies to
cope with, the Romans and the Perfiatis *
the former were Lords of the greateft part
of Syria on this fide the Euphrates ; the latter
were Supreme over the reft, and their Em-
pire extended far away into the Upper Afta.
The Romans were driven out of Syria in
the Reign of Heraclius, by Omar the third
Kalif, who pofTefTed himfelf of Damafius,
and all the Holy Land. The Empire of
the Sajfanian or Cofroid Perftans expired at
almoft the fame time, by the Defeat of Ifde-
jerdy the Son of Shah-Riar, the lait of thefe
Princes,who being forced out of all the Per"
fan Iraky retreated into ChoraJJan^whQtQ he

wa,a



123 When the Mohammedan^

was almoft: inftantly attacked by the King of
Zurkeftan, and at laft flain in the Yeaf
of the Hejra XXXI, of Chrift DCLI, At
this fame time the Arabs made a Conqueft
of the greateft part of Choraffan ; and Ab-
. dallahj the Son of Amar, who commanded
the Troops on that iide, advanced quite up
co the Oxus or River of Balky before the
Death of Ifdejerd.

The civil War which broke out in the
Reign of AU y the fifth Kalif* and which
blazed till the Settlement of the Family
of the Omrniyads, put a flop to this mighty
Progrefs : But in the Year of the Hejra
LXXVI, and of Jefus Chrift DCXCV, they
made an irruption into Tabariftan or 2^-
breftan. In the. firft Century alfo they
made fome Conquefts in Armenia^ and
and in the Country of the Turks ; but
as the Arabs bellowed this Name pro-
mifcuoufly on feveral Provinces of the Up*.
per AJia y which they knew not, it is irn-
poffible to fay how far they advanced:

Elmac. p. ln ^ir firffc Wars with the ancient People

70. of Turkeftan.

Wdlid, the thirteenth Kalif, who be-
gan his Reign in the Year of the Hejra
LXXXVI, and of Chrift DCCV, did very
much enlarge the Extent of the Mohamme-*
dan Empire. Kdtiba y one ojl his Generals,
conquered the Mawaralnahra or Hr.anfoxaney
took Bokardy and Samarcand the Capi-*
tal of the Sogd) or Sogdiana of the Anci-
ents, together with Farganah, and many
©cber Cities farther remote,, beyond which

the '



fiYft went to CHINA. gjrjg

the Mohammedans marched not, till a long
time afterwards. It is true, the Oriental.
Hiftories tell us, that in the Days of
Malec-jhah the third of the Seljukids, their
Empire reached to Cajhgar^ but this King-
dom was not fubdued under the Kaliis,
but by Kings, who not only difowned Elihac.
the Kalif s Yoke, but Mohammedifm alfo • LeB. Ta-
for Hiilorians obferve, that Michael the ^ k *^ m ! r '.
Son of Seljukj was the firft Zurk that turn-* tulfeda "
ed Mohammedan.

We murt conclude then, that in the When out
third Century of Mohammedifm, when our Authors
Authors lived, the Mohammedans might go fJ ot l' th *
to the uttermoft Parts of the Mawaral- mC( ^^
nabffij without exceeding the Bounds of Empire ex*
their Empire ; and that thus they were at tendedtothe
no great Diftance from the Frontiers of F ™*^ rs
China: But it is not likely 'they were 0J lm "
at that Time fettled at Cajhgan Under the
Empire of the Seljukids, indeed, they were
a coniiderable Body there, and according
to Abulfeda, this City produced a great
number of Perfons famed for Learning,

Cajhga-f) according to both ancient and V*he Wrf
modern Geographer Sj was ufually croffed ^ Ca&~
by thofe who went either into Turkeftan y **' r
or China* Some place this City in Furkef-
tan, but others^ upon better Ground, write
it the Capital of a Kingdom of the fame
Name, inhabited by Mohammedans. Ac-
cording to Abulfeda, it is in 96 or 95, that
is, in 105 or 106 Deg. 30 Min. of Longi-
tude, and in 44 Deg. of Latitude, and fo
muft be much more Eafterly than Sdmar*
X cand $



tt*.



*>'



Ahulfed.
a. 523.



Another
IVay by
Samar-
cand.



When the Mohammedans

candy which, according to the fame Au-
thor, is in 89 or 88 Degrees of Longitude,
and in the 40th Degree of Latitude ; that
is, according to the ufual Computation,
5)8 or p9 Degrees of Longitude, by add-
ing the ten Degree neceffary to make
Abulfedds Meridian coincide with the Me-
ridian of the other Geographers. After this
Rate the Way the Arabs muffc have held for
China, was by going firrl into Chorajfan y
from thence into the Mawaralnahra ; to have
gone itrait from Samar candy or fome other
City of the Province, deftroyed by the
Moguhy into Tibet y or to have gone into
the Kingdom of Cajhgar y there to join the
Caravans. They fometimes alfo went by
the way of Gaznaby upon the Skirts of
Chorajfariy which had great Dealings; or
by Cabal a City to the Eaftward of Gaznab,
and which, in Abttlfedds Time, was the laft
City inhabited by Mohammedansy on the
Borders of Tokarefian y or Tarkeftatiy and
the Place where the Indous and Mo/km
Traders ufually met. When thefe Tra-
vellers had got into Tibet , they might have
entered China y by the Province of Chenfi y
after they had crofled the Sandy Defart.

But it was ftill more eafy to reach China
by Land, if the Kingdom oiSamahand be
the fame with that of Samarcandy and ex-
tends to the Sandy Defart, as Father Mar-
tini has it in his Chart. Not but that the
Dirtance is much the fame, for thefe la ft
Maps ftretching Samahand to the Defart ?
only allow it a larger Scope than the Ara-
bian



firft went to C H I N A* £3|

to# Geographers. Samarcand is the Ca-
pital of the iftgv/, and muft be farther from
ftihft than fome Travellers give out, and ^ me f-
among the reft Benjamin the Jew, who en J am °P ,, •
places it but four Days diftant from the
Capital of that Kingdom, whereas the
Eaftern Geographers clap ten Degrees be-
tween them. But there is no concluding
any Thing from what they fay • for they
knew but little of the Provinces beyond
the Mawaralnahra, and the Countries of
Cajhgar and Cotan 5 for under the general
Name of Turan, or Turkejian, Tajuje and
Majuje, that is, Gog and Magog, they com-
prehended all the Provinces Northward
and Eaftward of China. And fome have
enlarged Chorajfan to that Degree,as to make
it take in the greater! Part of the Mawaral-
nahra and Chowarazm, and fo have made it
a nearer Neighbour to China, than is allow-
ed by the proper Limits of this Province.

Our Authors feem to have been of this What out
Opinion, and the laft of them, giving an Authors
Account of a Man who went from Samar- fytothis
cand to China, obferves it to be a two Matter.
Months Journey from the Skirts of China
to the Sogd of Samarcand, which is nearly
the Diitance of the two Ends of the Sogd,
extending it to Sicu, which muft be Sochen,
on the Borders of the Province of
Chenfi. According to the Eaftern Geogra-
phers, thefe two Cities * are 28 Degrees



* Our Author is fomewhat oh/cure in the preceding
Period ; but by thefe two Cities he feems to underfhanct
Samarcand and Sicu or Socheu.

i z diftant



H$i When the Mohammedans.

diftant from each other; and thefe De-^
grees are equal to four Hundred and eigh-
ty French Leagues, at twenty to a Degree,
which divided by fixty, give 8 Leagues
for each Day, which, by the Arabian Geo-
graphers, are equal to a Days Journey for
a Man that walks.
WisJVay But this Way by Land, whether by
was im- Samarcand, by Cabal, by Gaznah, or by
paatcabie. Ca p gaTj was very i mpra aicable in the
Days our Arabs wrote, excluilve of the
natural Inconveniencies of the Roads they
were to travel. All the Trade of the
Eaft was then in the Hands of the Mer-
chants of Perfia, Bajfora, and of the
Coart. quite down to the Red-Sed y which
was the Center of the Egyptian Trade, and
partly of the Mediterranean. They traded
to the Indies by Land, in many Places,
and particularly at Cabuh The Product
of Arabia, Egypt ', Perjta, and the adjacent
Provinces they exchanged with the Mer-
chants of Tarkeftan and the Indies, for
Musk, precious Stones, Chryftals, Spices,
and Drugs : But it was almoft impoflible
for them to go farther, or to drive a
Trade quite home to China, becaufe of the
Defart, a dangerous Track; and flill
more, becaufe of the continual Wars be-
tween the Arabs and the Princes of tturkefi
tan. And the civil Broils which during
the firft Centuries, and afterwards were
fomented between the diftkrentMohammedan
Princes of Chorajfan, and the Tyranny of
the Governors of Provinces in Times of

Peace^



Jitft went to C H I N A, fj£

Peace added flill to the difficulties of
Trading extenfively by Land.

Nor does it appear that any of thefe
Obitacles were removed for a confides
able time ; for the Mohammedans did not
penetrate into thofe Provinces of Turke-
ftan^ conterminous with the Mawaralnahra
and Cboraffan, 'till three hundred Years
after the firft Voyages by Sea we are here
to fpeak of.

The various and numerous Nations, TVTurks
the Arabs comprehended under the gener- came late
al Name of Turks^ came very late into ™ t0 M °~
Mohammedifin^nd. the Moguls ,~ when be- ^ mQ ~
come Lords of the Upper Afia under
Jenghiz Khan, were for the moll part
without any Religion, or had one to them-
felves ; fo that it was under fome of this
Khans Succeifors that feveral of the Moguls
turnded Mohammedans ; but the People of
Kipjaky adhered moftly to the Religion of
their Anceftors, contained in the famous
Laws called Taza Jenghiz Khan^s did moft
of the Hoards of the Defart, according
to Cond Emir j and even the whole Pro-
vince of Sejejfan^ according to Abulfeda.
The Arabs then could not fafely venture
a-crofs thefe Provinces, inhabited as they
were, either by Enemies or by People
of different Perfualions, who had moil of
them been driven out of ChoraJJan and the
Mawaralnahra by the prevailing Arms of the
Kalifs. The Baits of a gainful Com-
merce could fcarce bewitch the Arabs to
run fuch Rifques, and efpecially as the
i 3 Bulk



j 34 When ^Mohammedans

Bulk of Trade was negociated, as it a£?
terwards was, upon the Sea of India ;and
indeed by the Accounts of Goods we read
in Arabian Authors, we furHciantly under-
ftand they had no large Dealings with
thofe remote Provinces ', that the Drugs
they had from thence were brought to
the Mohammedan Cities, by the Turkijb
or Indian Traders ; and that all their
Furs, in which may have confuted the
moil advantageous Branch of their Trafc
fie, they had from Armenia and Belad ah
Jebel, or from the Barbarian Coait, whence
they had the Tygers and Leopards Skins,
they fo much valued for Caparifons and
Saddles.
tfu Mo- Nor does Curioiity feem to have prompt^
hammed- ed the Mohammedans to undertake fuch
ans not \ Qn <g Traverfes, tho' it mull be owned
Xhele 7onl ^Y f° me ti mes went farther to hear fome
traverfes of their famous Mailers. Thefe Peregri-
ty Curio- nations did, with them, anfwer the end
fty of a Cpurfe of Theology, and in fome

fort raifed them to the Degree of Doctor.
They would formerly from Spain and Afric
go firft to Mecca, then to Bagdad, thence
to Balk, to Samarcand and to Nifapor to
hear the celebrated Profeilbrs of thofe Ac-
ademies. Ebn Shalikan, in his Lives of
Illuitrious Men, has many Examples of
fuch Traverfes, which in thofe Days were
performed with eafe enough. For at e-
very Town and every Mofch, the Pil-
grims met with charitable Entertainment,
and with Perfons who accounted it an



frfi went to CHINA. ijj

Honour to entertain them in their Houfes.
The Molhhs and the Learned in particular
paid them great refpect ; many Princes
had bequeathed Foundations for their Sup-
port ; and if with fome Knowledge in
the Koran, and a parcel of traditionary
Stories about Mohammed, they had fome
fmattering of the Law, and a bent for Htpry of
the Arabefque Poetry, they were fure of the p ™~
a kind Reception throughout the extent J^ ft r ^
of the Mohammedan Empire, jurt as our damus.
Trabadours were antiently received at the Hifi. Ma~
Courts of the European Princes. ™f cr -

All this might induce us to conclude, f^ s r c f r ~ e
that the firft Arabs that went to China, knewlny
were Merchants. The way thither by but the
Land was Co little ufed during the three Maritime
firft Centuries of Mohammedifm, and even ®**" °$
for fome Time afterwards, that Hiftory
fcarce Records one Example of any At-
tempt of the kind. Now it cannot be very
eafy to fuppofe, that this Road was bea-
ten by the Caravans, and the Geogra-
phers know nothing of the Matter ; and
yet Ahdfeda and the other beft Geogra-
phers feem to have known none but the
chief Maritime Cities of China. They
fcarce ever fpeak' of thofe towards Cho-
ra/fan, and when they do, they have no-
thing but Fables to tell of them. Thefe
Countries of Gog and Magog are their
Fairy-Land * it is here they fuppofe
all the moft wonderful Things to be %
fuch as the Sping of Life Alexander
fought for, and many other incredible
i 4 Par.-



%^ When the Mohammedans

Particulars, which they have borrowed
from the Pfetido~Callijthenes y and fome fuch
like writers.

When they tell thefe Tales in their
Poems and Romances, we may fay the
Authors thereby mean to pleafe and a-
mufe us only : But when we meet with
them in the graverl Works, and find
they are to pafs for the Geographi-
cal Defcription and Hiitory of a Coun-
try, we may fafely pronounce the Author
profoundly ignorant of what he would
infbrucl us in, and efpecially when the
more Judicious, not daring to relate them,
give you to understand they have not
much Faith in them. The very fame
Judgment may be formed in confequence
Of this, That the beft. Authors treating
of the extraordinary, but true, Things of
thefe fame Parts, which the late Difco-
veries have confirmed and afcertained, do
it with very great Caution, and as if
they were not above half inclined to
_ . believe them.

mmc9~ ^is Ignorance of the true State of
proved by China, particularly on the fide of the
their Geo- Defart, beyond Ca/bgar and the Weftern
p-apheys. boundary of Tibet may be proved up-
on them by us as many Eaftern Geo-
graphers as there are in Libraries. Nor
aid this Miffc continue during the firfl
Centuries of Mohammedifin only, it lafled
down to the fourteenth Century, down
to Alnilfeda • tho' he, not barely Satisfied
ivith what was to be found in the belt



fir ft went to C H I N A. 137

.Authors, had recourfe to Travellers and
Merchants for farther Information. Now
it ihould feem there could be no going
into China by Land, without knowing
Something of the great Wall : If a Tra-
veller or two had gone through they
poflibly might have known but little of
the extent and vaftnefs of that Work ;
but had it been a common Road, Tra-
vellers would have made fome mention
of it ; and yet we have not one Eaftern
Geographer, above three hundred Years
old, that has defcribed it, or that even
feems to have known any thing atall
of it : And thofe who have written the
Hiftory of Jenghiz-Khan y feem to have been
to the full as ignorant in this particular.
XxoliitSy it is true, in his Additions to the
Cbinefe Atlas, cites a PaiTage in Abulfeda,
which feems as if that Prince knew fome-
thing of the Wall, but it is aPaffage not to
be round in old Copies of him • and the
fame may be faid of what Kircher cites
from Najjir Eddin, which is enough to
make us believe they may be the Ad-
ditions of fome modern Hand.

But Eaftern Hiftorians and Geographers tfheEaf*
are not only fo ill acquainted with this t&nGeo-
Part of the Upper Afta, they fpeak fo g ^%
confufedly of the Countries farther North- u t ° t i eo fth$
ward, that it is impoffible to imagin they Upper A-
knew much of them. In Truth, they fia.
comprehend all the Tracts beyond Cbow-
arazm and the Mazmralnahra, under the
general Names of furan^ Tarkeftan y or

Coun-»



138 When the Mohammedans

County of the Turks, Igur, Catai, Shacatai,
Caracatai, and fome others, without align-
ing any determinate Bounds to thefe Pro-
vinces,' or if they attempt it, they vary
fo infinitely from each other, that there
is no reconciling them ; and juft the fame
Stand they are at when they offer to fix
the Pofition of the Provinces of Turan y
or the ancient Moguliftan, the Scene of the
mighty Deeds of Jenghiz Khan. It w r as
anciently the Opinion that all this vart Ex-
tent w r as inhabited by none but Hoards or
Tribes of Nomad Tartars, Wanderers, and
deftitute of Towns; but in the Hiftory
of Jenghiz Khan you have Accounts of
Sieges which lailed many Months, and
fucii Slaughters of the Inhabitants of the
conquered Places as abundantly evince
them to have been very numerouily po-
pulous. Jenghiz Khan was a Defcendant
of Buzanjir Khan, who had been a potent
Barms King among the tartar s. UngKhan, whom
Decad. 3. m any, both antient and modern, have
* 4 ' c * *' taken for the Prefer John, fo famous in
the Hiftory of latter Times, was Lord of
a very great Kingdom ; and yet no Men-
tion at all is made of it by the Arabian
Geographers who wrote before the Tar-
tars made a Conqueffc of all the Upper
Afta: And their Authors, that have written
iince the Tartars were driven out of Syria
and Mejipotamia, feem to have made no
ule of the Communication they had with
them, for a hundred Years, to inform them-

felves,



firfi went to CHINA. j 39

{elves concerning the Countries fo utterly-
unknown to their undent Geographers.

To all this we may add the little Moham-
Knowledge the 'Tartars of MoguUjian, a medifm
Part of Casbgar, and Tibet had of Mo- ^f*
bammedifm before the Days of Jenghiz mm^thl
Khan. The bell Hiftorians, and particu- Tartars
larly Emir Cond, Cond Emir, and many before- ^
that have followed them, obferve that Jl e ?8 hlz
before Jenghiz Khan*, the Tartars had no ^nan.
other Keligion than what was contained
in the Taza or ancient Cuftoms of the
Nation; and fo indifferent were thefe Tar-
tars afterwards upon the Choice of Reli-
gion, that feveral of the Defcendants of
Jenghiz Khan became Chriftians, while
fome of them embraced Mohammedifm, and
others adhered to the old Keligion of the
Country. From this Piece of Hiftory
we may, almost, by a natural Induction
conclude, That the Mohammedans had hi-
therto but a very {lender Commerce with
thefe People of the Upper Afta 5 for they
have ever made a Number of Converts in
the Places were they have fettled, or where
they have had Liberty of Trade. Hence
is it that great Numbers of them have been
found upon all the Coafts of India, for a
few Families of them fettling in fome of
the chief Cities of the Coalt, were fuffir
cient to give Rife to fome fmall Colonies,
which, in Procefs of Time, became very
potent. Thus was it, that under the great
Empire of the Seljukids, when the Moham-
tmdqns had Intercourfe with the Kingdoms

of



■14$ When the Mohammedans

of Cashgar and Cotan, that Mohammedifm
was by little and little introduced ; which
they ealily compaffed, fupported as they
were, by the Power of ChoraJJan y the Ma-
waralnahra, and the neighbouring States,
in Subjection to the Soltans, who, fome of
them, as Make Shah y Mahmudj his Son,
and fome others of the fame Family refid-
ed in thofe very Parts.
Jtfrade It is certain, that after the Divifion of
<was net the Empire of Jenghiz Khan, and in the
tpendwifh Reign of fimir Beg or Tamerlan, there
*iiiafav* S b e S an t0 ^ e f° me Communication between
the Days ChoraJJan and China by Land* and that it
<f Jenghiz was opened with a View to trade princi-
&han, pally, and that fome now travelled to
thofe Parts out of Curiofity. The Mer-
chants of ChoraJJan, who traded upon the
Frontiers, did fometimes venture to crofs
the Defart in Caravans } but fome of thefe
Attempts mifcarrying, the Usbek Princes,
and fome of the Myrza Tartar s, moftly de-
fended of Jenghiz Khan, by Ttili Khan,
his elder! Son, began to fend Ambafladors
to China y by them to protect the Trade,
which turned chiefly to the Advantage of
thefe Princes. Shah Rok y the Son of Ta-
merlany did in like Manner fend an Em-
bafly to China y which was joined by the
Ambafladors of feveral other Princes and
many Merchants. The Account of this
Embaffy is in Perfian, and the Tranilation
Tom. 4. of it has been publifhed by Thevenot. Fa-»
ther Martini acquaints us that thefe Em-
baffies come to China every three Years, or

that



■firft went to CHINA. 't$i

that -Other wife the Cbinefe would not ad-
mit the Merchants into their Empire. The
Caravans ufually attend upon thefe Ambaf-
fadors, who, as Trigaut tells us, come al- L
fo from fome other Neighbouring King-* p.' 54^
doms, with Prefents to the Emperor of
China, by way of Tribute. Thus is it they
iniinuate themfelves into a Trade, and the
Prefents they receive are often more con-
fiderable than what they bring ; for the
Chinefi Minifters of State make a grand
Affair of thefe pretended EmbafTies, as if
they derived a very great Veneration upon
their Emperor, and perfe&ly anfwered
the Flight of his Ambition. But though
we were allured that for four Hundred
Years pall the Mohammedans have made it
a Pra£tice to trade with China by Land,
it would not follow that they did or could
do the fame during the three fir ft Centu-
ries of the Empire, or that they reforted
thither in fuch Companies as may be fup-
pofed to have fettled in any Number in the
principal Cities the Land way.

All that has hitherto been offered, and It 1 mop
much more that might be added, feems HMythat
evidently to prove that the Mohammedans ihe ^™ h *
firrt went to China by Sea: It remains ^chma
therefore that we examin into the Courfe by Sea,
they fteered, the Nature of their Naviga-
tion, the End of their Voyages, and what $ ome are
Advantages they made of them. of opinion

Some there are who fancy the Arabs they had
fteered by the Compafs before we had any *t*2^
Knowledge of that faithful Guide ; that ^ °^ H

for us.



14*



P. Berge-
ron Trait.
des Navi-
gations y p.

T " "

Traite
des Saraf-
fins p.
uo.



When the Mohammedans

for many Ages pail they have known haW
to take an Observation, to divide Sea
Charts, and perform the feveral Parts of
our mod able Navigators. Granting all
this, it muit of Courfe follow that they
made nothing of the great Indian Ocean,
and that they traverfed it, backwards and
forwards, as we do at prefent* Thus is it
that a modern Author concludes, forming
his Judgment from a Supposition that the
Saracens had the Ufe of the Aftrolabe long
before the Portuguefe, " The Saracens j fays
he, " had ufed it a long Time before
" upon the great Indian Ocean, to take the
a Altitude of the Sun and other Stars",

And in another Treatife he fays to the
fame Purpofe :

" It is alfo of them we learned the
a Ufe of the Affcrolabe, for which they
" have fo many Names in their Tongue,
" and for the feveral Parts of this fo
a univerfal and ufeful Inftrument in Aftro-
a nomy ; which they fo well applyed on
u the Mediterranean and the great Indian
a Ocean, to take the Heighth of the Sun
a and other Stars, in the midft of their
" great Conquetts, Navigations, and Dif-
" coveries, as we have elfewhere obferv-
li ed. And indeed how could their Em-
" pire, their Religion, and their Tongue,
" fo long have prevailed, and fo exten-
" lively, among the remoter! Iflands, and
a the fartheft Eaftern Shores, without the
44 Help of Navigation, and fome Ufe of

the Compafs in fuch vail and perilous

« Seas"?



«



frfiwent to CHINA. 14$;

"Seas"? This Writer, tho' a very
judicious Man, and many others, fince
him, at once fuppofe the Thing to have
been as they wouid have it, and demon-
Urate a very uncertain Matter, by another
abundantly more fo. For if the Mohamme-
dans have peopled a Part of the Coafts of
the Eaft Indie* and Afric y it need not fol-
low that they went thither by Sea, and
tho' they did for certain reach fome Parts
by Sea, it is not certain that they failed by
Obfervation, or that they were skilled in
all the Parts of Navigation required for
the Condu£t of a Ship in a long run.

But to the Point ; we do not find the We find
leaft Proof of this ancient Ufe of the riotthehap
Compafs in any of the Arabian Books: JZj/^e

r S > 1 vt i_ c x - IT? • ' wards tbU

for tho the Number or their Writers ^ their
be almoil inflnit , and tho' no Man Books.
can be fure he has feen them all, yet
may we fay it is impoffible that fo ufeful
and fo marvellous a Difcovery fhould be
concealed in fome rare and uncommon
Books, if for fo many Ages it was in the
Hands of their Sea ArtirTs.

Now there is not one original Word
either in Arabic, ( Turkijh y or Per/tan, which
can properly fignify either the Ailrolabe
or the Compafs. The Arabs and the Turks
commonly call the Compafs Hojfola, the
Italian Name, which ihews that the Thing
lignified is foreign to them as well as the
Word. Kotubnema is a Compound ,
and a Word of modern Ufe with the Per-
Jans. Their Naturalifts, who have Co

amply



J44 JVbtn the Mohammedans

amply expatiated upon the Virtues of the'
Load-ftone, and repeated all they found
concerning it in the ancient Greek Au-
thors, have never once hinted at the Pro-
perty of the Magnatic Needle; nor da
we meet with one iingle Obfervation, made,
of ancient Date, by the Arabs, on the
Variation of the Needle, or any Induc-
tion confequent thereto for the Affiitance
of Navigators.

The Arabian, the Furkijb, and the Per~
Jian Pilots, prefer the Compafies made in
Europe to thofe they make themfelves, aud
are not yet perfect in the Method of touch-
ing their Needles. Indeed fince they have
been taught by our Seamen, they know
the Ufe of the Compafs very well, and ven-
ture upon long Runs in the Indian Ocean,,
by the Help thereof and fucceed very
well : But by this we underftand, That
if in lefs than two Centuries they have
learned enough of the Franks to become
intelligent Navigators, they could not
have had the fame Knowledge feveral
Ages before, and at the fame Time be
ignorant of all the Principles of Naviga-
tion, as they were at the Time of the
firft Difcoveries. The moft ancient Ma-
thematical lnrtruments they have for Nau-
tical Ufes, can never be ftrong enough
to combat this Conjecture. Some in-
deed they have which are well enough
wrought, and particularly fmall Aftro-
labes, which their moft skilful Pilots carry
in their Bofom } and it is certain, that

they



firft went ^CHINA. 145

they have a long time made ufe oi this
Initrument, whence Bergeron gathers That
they failed by Obfervation, and even
ufed the Compafs : But no one is fo
ignorant as not to know the wide dif-
ference there is between thefe two In-
ftruments ; or that tho', by the help of
an Aftrolabe, an Obfervation of the Stars
may be taken, it is of no ufe to the
Seaman in fleering his Courfe without
the help of the Compafs.

It is in vain to fuppofe the Arabs had WUfbw
the Gompafs before us, becaufe they have *% ha *
had intercourfe with the Chinefe eight f^ C f^
,red Years paft, and becaufe the Chi- the ch^
m i had it. many Ages before we had. We nefe.
very well know that Fath. Martini re-
lates of the Emperor Ching, w r ho reign-
ed MCXV Years before Chrift, that he
made a Prefent of a Compafs to an Am-
baffador from Cochinchina : Aaditus be*
nigne legatus, adornanfq, jam reditum y dona-*
Ms eft a Cheveungo, Machina fummo artifi-
cio fatla y qu<e fua fponte refpeiens Aujfrum^
irreqaieta lege certum monjirabat iter Jive
terra illudy Jive man facientibus. Ea dua-
bus Jyllabis Chi nan appellabdtur, iifdem cm-
nino quibus nunc Since Magnefiam acum Jig-
nijicant* Argumento hand dubio ejus ufum
ilk jam tempore apud Sinas inventum ad alias
inde N ationes, mea quidem fententia, tran-
ftvijfe. Hanc igitur Machinam ducem fecuti
Cochinchinenfes unius annifpatio domum redie-
re. "We need not inquire into the Au-
thority of the Authors Fath. Martini has
k com-



i^6 When the Mohammedans

compiled his Hiftory from ; we ought
to rely on the fincerity of that learned
Man, to whom Europe is indebted for
her mod perfect Documents concerning
China. But it feems extraordinary that the
Chinefe fhould have made fo poor a Ufe of
their Compafs as to proceed in their
Voyages as if they had none. The length
of the time the Cochinchincfe were upon
their return from China, might tempt one
to think this Machine was not altoge-
ther what we call a Compafs.
^ Sir John Chardin, a famous Traveller,

•Sfc* of being confulted upon this Subject, return-
er John ed Anfwer to the following EfFeft. " I
Chardin « cannot tell whether or no the Chinefe
concerning a f themfelves found out the Art of
a Navigation and the Compafs, as they did
16 the Art of Printing and Artillery } we
a fhould confult their Learned to be af-
" fured of it. But for the other Afiatics
a I boldly aflert they are beholden to
* us for this wonderful Inflrument, which
a they had from Europe by the Hands of
a the Arabs, a long time before the Porta-
" guefi Conquefts. For, ¥irft, Their Com-
u panes are exactly like ours ; and they
u buy them up of the Europeans as much
u as they can, fcarce daring to meddle
16 with their Needles themfelves. .Second-
a tyj It is certain the old Navigators,
" only Coafled it along ; which I impute
a to the want of this Inflrument, to
" guide and inftru& them in the mid
u Ocean. We cannot pretend to fay they

were



ibis



firfi went to CHINA. 147

** were afraid of venturing fir from Home;
u for the Arabs j the firit Navigators in
u the World, in my Opinion, at leaft
u for the Eaftern Seas, have, time out of
" mind, been from the Bottom of the
" Red-Sea all along the Coarl: of Afric
ic down to the Tropic of Capricorn,
u which is a Space of fifty Degrees ; and
<c the Chinefe have always traded with the
u Iflands of Java and Sumatra, which
u is alfo a very confiderable Voyage.
" So many Iflands uninhabited and at the
c< fame time productive, fo many Lands
a unknown to the People I fpeak of,
u are a Proof That the old Navigators
€t had not the Art of Sailing on the
€i main Sea. I have nothing but Argu-
" ment and Conjecture to offer touching
" this Matter, having never met with any
" body in Perjia or the Indies to inform
" me when the Compafs w r as firft known
u among them, tho' I made the Inquiry of
" the moffc learned Men in each Country.
" I have been from the Indies to Perjia,
u in Indian Ships, when no European
" has been on Board but my felf. The
" Pilots were all Indians, and they ufed
" the Fore-Staff and Quadrant for their
<c Obfervations. Thefe Inftruments they
<c have from us, and made by ours, they
" not in the leafl: varying therefrom,
" except that the Characters are Arabic :
f* And, by the way, I obferve that the
u Arabs are the moft skilful Navigators
" of all the Afiatics and Africans : But
k 2 they



1^3 When the Mohammedans

a they nor the Indians make ufe of*
a Charts, and indeed they do not much
« want them; fome they have, but they
<• are copied from ours, for they are
€l quite ignorant of Perfpe6tive.

It feems moft likely then that the A-
rahsj in the firffc Ages of Mohammedifm^
had no knowledge of the Compafs, and
that they never failed by Obfervation
till they imbibed the Precepts of that
Art from the Europeans : And certain
it is, by the Teftimony of our two Au-
thors, and by that of all the Eaftern Ge-
ographers, who often take notice of
Courfes and Diftances, That they were
formerly mere Coafters, or that when
they did venture to leave the Land, it
was for no great Run, and this is what
made their Voyages fo long and dan-
gerous. They failed from the Perjicm
Gulf, and thence ranged along Shore
quite down to the Point of Malabar ', and
having doubled it, whether they flood
over for the Ifles of Andaman^ or made
for fome other Port in the Gulf of Ben-
gal y they did not ftir far from Land,
and particularly as they came in with
the Coaft of China.

They were very follicitous about I-
flandsand Anchoring-grounds, which our
People now avoid as much as pofible,
that their Voyage may not be retarded,
and themfelves expofed to fuch dangers
as they are in no fear of at Sea, The
jBuik of the Siraf Shipping, as described

by



frft went to CHINA. 1451

by our Author, may fatisfy us they were
not calculated for the high Sea; for their
Planks fewn, as we may fay, together
with Coco-nut Yarn, and almoit defti-
tute of Iron, could never have held in the
tumbling Weather our Ships frequently
meet with in thofe Seas.

We mull not wonder then if the Dis-
coveries the Arabs made by Sea, in fix
or feven hundred Years time, are not
comparable to thofe of the Portuguefe^ Ca-
ft'il'ians, Italians^ and, in a Word of all
the European Nations, whom the Ori-
entals commonly furpafs in Induftry • for
the want of the Compafs is ever an Ob-
ftacle in the way of long Runs*

From what has been faid we may fate- Tie Arabs
ly conclude That the Arabs did not ven- '^cucmau
ture far out to Sea 5 that they failed by ^J^ mt
an inaccurate reckoning and the Obfer- at $ ta
vation of the Stars • that the little Know-
ledge they had of the Winds and Mon-
foons, made them often miftake in their.
Run and the Dirtance of Maritim Pla-
ces, as fufficiently appears by their gene-
ral Meafure of a Day's Sail by Sea, which
is fo vague and uncertain that there
is no reducing it to any fixed Stand-
ard : And that thus they only coafted it
along, or at leaft that they feldom left
the Shore out of Sight behind them ;
and that, confequently, they are not to
be fuppofed the Original Difcoverers of
the true Courfe to be fleered for the
Great Indus and China..

k 3 Nqyt



1)0 When the Mohammedans

Now if we examin into the Caufes of
this Imperfe&ion in their Science of Na-
vigation, there are two which principal-
ly occur to us. Firftj The Arabs being
no great Inventors, as appears by the
little Progrefs they made in Learnings
beyond what they had from the Greek
Books tranflated into their Tongue, found
no Inftruftion in thofe fame Books to
make then Navigators. For the Greeks y
tho' they had potent Fleets, knew no-
thing ol launching out into the Sea, and
many of the Learned think they hardly
ever ventured upon the Ocean, but connnea
themfelves to the Mediterranean. The
Carthaginians alfo were no more than
Coafters, and tho* it were certain Han-
no ran down to the Cape of Good-Hope,

Hannoti anc * t ^ lat ' ^ e ^ a ^ e ^M is the 0wv %xW*}
Peripl. or Chariot of the Gods he difcovered;
Ramu£ we cannot conceive this Voyage to have
Praefat. b een otherwife performed than from
NavS! Headland to Headland ; as the Porta*
Tomf'i. & ue f e &*&. did lt * ^ ne general Form and
Conftru&ion of the ancient Ships was not
adapted to the Ocean ; for they all went
with Oars which are not only ufelefs but
dangerous in Voyages of Length. The
Defcription of the great Coaft of the In-
dies, or of the Eryth<ean Sea, as Arrian
has left it us ; and what we read in
Pliny concerning the Courfe fleered by
the Ships, that traded to the Indies from
the Red-Sea, can only confirm us in our
Opinion. For if we except the Voyage

to



jttft went to CHINA. *S%

to Taprobana or Ceylon, with the Wind
called HippalttSy that is, by obferving
the Monfooi), it does not appear they
knew how to keep a Reckoning. The
Arabs therefore could pick nothing out
of the Greek Books to inform them of
this neceftary Art, and their very little
acquaintance with the Latin would not
allow them to under ftand what Pliny and
thofe he quotes had written. For the
Book they have under the Name of Pli-
ny, is fo very unlike the Original, that
we can fcarce believe it was ever in the
Hands of the Perfon who pretended to
give it in Arabic. The Arabs then only
continued to go from the Red-Sea to
Malabar and Ceylon, but in time ventur-
ing farther than the Romans had been,
they, from Ifle to Me, at length difco-
ver'ed the Shores of China,

In the fecond Place, nor the KaJifs
nor the Soltans who fucceeded them,
ever aimed at any great matter of Po-
wer by Sea, fo that the Navigation was
wholly left to the Merchants.

Thefe Princes never endeavoured to have Tj&wKa-
Potent Fleets, as having no call for them, h J* d ™*l*
and as fitting poffefled of fo vail and any gr ° ea$
fo rich an Empire, that they could have Matters b$
no Temptation to make farther Difcove- Sea.
ties or new Conquefts beyond Sea, or
to confult the Intereft of their trading
Subjects by procuring them the Benefits
their Protection might have derived on
them in foreign Parts. Some unie, in-
k $ deed






*They had
every thing
in abund-
ance and
Indian
Commodi-
ties zveve
brought to
them*



When the Mohammedans

deed, after the fir ft Wars beyond Sea^
the Soltans of Egypt and Syria began to
have fome Shipping and even obtained,
fome lignal Advantages over the Chri-
ftians at Sea* but it is plain That a
Sea Strength had been of but infig-
nificant Uie in the other principal Af-
fairs, and Revolutions of this great Em-
pire.

To all this it may be added, That the ge-
neral abundance of Things neceflary for
Life, or to fupply Luxury in the Moham-
medan Provinces was fuch, that they had
no Occafion to expofe themfelves to the
Dangers of a long Voyage to go in
queil of them to the Places whence they
came. For the Indians brought by Land,
to Cabul and fome other Places, and
by Sea to Bajfora and Sir of, all the Com-
modities of the Indies and China. Furs
were brought into Syria by the Provin-
ces of Adarbejatij by Cur di ft an and other
Parts more Northerly. Great quantities
of the fame they alio had from the Bar-
barian Coaft, by the way of the ~ Red-
Sea^ from whence a great Trade was
carried on with them all over Egypt*
From the farrre Places they had ' Gold
Dull: ; Gold alfo they had from the
Mines of Sofala y brought to them by the
Negroes who traded with Egypt by the
way of the Defart, or from Port to Port
quite to the Red-Sea. From Ceylon and
the Indies they, by their Trade with the
Chinefe and Indian Merchants, had Silk,

rich



firft went /oCHINA. 133

rich Stuffs, and many other Manufa-
ctures ; Drugs and Spices. With this Stock
of Goods they drove a very consi-
derable Commerce, by the way of Ka-
hira \_Cairo^\ with the Venetians, the Ge-
noefe, the Catalans, and the Greeks ; and
therefore they were under no neceffity
of going fo far as China. Wherefore it
is very probable That the firft Adventu-
rers that undertook this Voyage were
urged thereto by the Calamities of the
Civil Wars, which, having reduced many
Families to Want,obliged them to feek fome
Livelihood by Trade, deprived as they
were of all other means of Subliftance. AnS
accordingly one of our Authors obferves
of the Arab who had the long Confer-
ence with the Emperor of China, That
he fet out upon his Voyage after the
Deftru&ion of Bajjora. There is fome
reafon alfo to believe that the Syria®
Merchants who went to China, and whom
we fhall mention hereafter, came to the
fame Refolution upon the very fame Ac-
count.

It remains now that we examin whe- q\ e tf a vu
ther or no the Chinefe had a different gatiowfthe
way of Sailing,, and how far .they went. Chinefe.
If we hearken to fome Authors, they
came as far as the Cape of Good-Hope,
and formerly Peopled arid conquered the
great Ifland of St. Laurence. It is pre-
tended alfo That they had the ufe of
the Compafs a long time before us; and
that fo they were able to undertake long

Voy-



154 Wheto the Mohammedans

Voyages, and the rather as the Built of
their Ships fpeaks them to have been
more Skilful in nautical Architecture
than any of the other Orientals. We
have given you the Testimony of Fath.
Martini as to the very ancient Know-
ledge they boaft to have had of the
Magnetic Needle ; and our Authors af-
fure us, That in their time the Chinefe
came to the Pcrfian Gulf. So they had
failed along throughout the Mlands ; and
even had Settlements upon fome of them,
remains of which are at this Day upon
Malacca and in other Parts. We read
alfo in fome Authors, That they conquered
CochinchifM) and the Neighbouring States
quite to Pegu ; and others allure us That
thofe States formerly paid Tribute to
China. Now tho' the bell Authors ac-
quaint us that they marched their Ar-
mies by Land, it is neverthelefs certain
that, long before the Difcoveries of the
laft Ages, they had Fleets which made
them Mailers of all thofe Seas, and it is
thought they once fubdued the Empire
of Japan by means of their Shipping.
But as it is above twelve hundred Years
ago fince this People, not very Warlike
by Nature, have given over all thoughts
of enlarging their Empire, they, as con-
fiderable Navigators as they were, made
no Conquefts among the lilands upon
the Coafts of the Eafterri Ocean, and have
been very unwilling to admit Strangers
among them under the pretence of Trade,

It



firft went to C H I N A. 15J

It is commonly reported that this Pro-
hibition is almoft as old as the Empire ,
and yet by the great number of Moham-
medans, Jews, Indians, and even Syria**
Chriftians that fettled among them, it
appears that this fame Prohibition was
not very ftri&ly minded, as may be clear-
ly gathered by all the Circumftances in
our two Authors.

NavaretU thinks they failed no farther
than the Straits oiSincapor, or Sunda, becaufe
their Ships are not flrong enough to
live in the heavy Seas of the great In-
dian Ocean ; and will have it that there
is not the leaft room to imagin they e-
ver reached Ceylon, and much lefs Su
Lawrence or Madagascar, as feveral of
the Portttguefe Navigators at firft gave out.
He adds, that they had never underta-
ken fuch long Voyages to conquer far
diftant Countries, feeing they never were
inclined to fpread the Fame of their
Arms ; that the Trade of Metals, Silks
and the principal Drugs, could not have
been their Motive for fuch Undertakings,
feeing they were in China itfelf abund-
antly fupplyed with all triefe Things; and
that in ihort it does not appear they
had any Inftruments proper to take Ob-
fervations, or that they ever knew how
to divide, or proje& Sea Charts.

But our firft Author partly deflroys the
Conje&ures of Navareiie by alluring us
That in his Time the Cbinefe Ships came to
jSirafy tho' they dared not go farther, be-
caufe



1 5 6 When the Mohammedans

caufe of the bad Weather, and great Seas
they could not endure, and that thus they
did not offer to go quite up to Baffbra y OT
into the Red-Sea. As for the Poriugueje'
Writers who would have it they failed as
far as the Cape of Good Hope, they built
their Ailertion upon the uncertain Founda-
tion of fome Manners and Cuftoms, among
the Cafres and People of the- Ea& Coaft
of Afric^ which, as they thought, had fome
Refemblance of what they had obferved
among the Chinefe* This is a Matter of
great Obfcurity, and can never be cleared
up till we are more exactly informed of
the Chinefe Hiftory than we are.

It is very extraordinary alfo that the.
Arabs fhould have been eight Hundred
Years acquainted with all the Seas of In~
dia y and yet never leave .a Sea-Chart be-
hind them, to afcertain their Difcoveries,
and guide their Pofterity: And yet it
does not feem that they drew up any
Charts in the firffc Times, and we have
very great Reafon to fuppofe they are in-
debted for this Piece of Art to the Occi-
dentals, it being but feldom that we meet
with their Charts above three Hundred:
Years old.
cftfoSea- Thefe Charts are uncommon enough, and

Charts and ^q ver y ^eft Q f t fe m are fo i m p er fe&,

theoJL- ^^ t ^ le W0I "ft we have in our old Manu-

uls. fcripts, are far more accurate than the niceft

of the Arabs and Perftans\ for they afford

neither Bearings, nor the Courfe of

Rivers, nor Order, nor Method, The.

beft



ftf mnt /oCHlNA, 157

beft of them are thofe which confift of
Squares, produced by the mutual Inter-
fe&ion of Parallels and Meridians, in the
Midft of which is the Name of each prin-
cipal City. They themfelves have been
feniible of their Ignorance in this Particu-
lar, and no fooner did the Europeans print
their Maps than the Orientals put a great
Value upon them: They have even en-
deavoured to make them their own, by
writing the Names of the Places in their
own Characters and Tongue, by the com-
mon Names current with us.

In the Commentaries of Alfmfo a" Albu-
querque) we read of a Moorijh Pilot, at Cali-
cut) who had a very exact Draught of all
the Coafts of the Indies } and it is credi-
ble, that the Arabs) who, by Egypt and
Syria, had a continual Commerce with the
Europeans) had by the Venetians and Geno-
efe y in thofe Days the greateft. Navigators
in Europe y been taught fome Parts of Na-
vigation, which they may have apply ed in
their Voyages to India and China. But
thefe are very extraordinary Inftances ; for
they had fo little improved upon what they
borrowed from our Seamen,That ever flnce
the Difcovery of the Indies y they have
thrown alide their own Charts to make ufe
of ours, which they prefer to thofe they
may have drawn up from their own Obfer-
vations.

Wemuft judge of the maritim Skill ^ Arabs
of a Nation by the length of their Voya- m ^ ™
ges, their Difcoveries, and bold Attempts, f l a er - m u

like^.



j^S When the Mohammedans

like thofe of the Portuguefe, the Englijh
and Dutch) which had ieemed incredible
to the Ancients : The Arabs have under-
taken nothing of the kind iince the Rife of
their Empire. They went into Afric under
the Protection of the Governor of Egypt ,
who fent a Guard with them through the
Defart. Their PafTage over into Spam was
fo mere a Trifle that it is not worth the
naming, and even for that, it feems, they
made ufe of Chriffcian Ships. TheConqueft of
Majorca, Minorca, and 2 r mca, was compaf-
fed a long time after, when the Arabs had
by their Slaves and Renegadoes been
taught what to do with a Ship : But all
thele maritim Enterprifes, conilfted of no
more than embarking a Parcel of Troops
on board of Flat-bottomed Vefiels, they
had fcarce any other, and landing with Dis-
cretion. Their Voyages to Sicily, Sardi-
nia, and Calabria were to the full as eafy.
Their Fleets did not then fweep the Seas,
there were then but few Corfairs, and when
the Chriftian Princes began to fit out any
considerable Strength, the Mohammedans
were unable to ftand againft them ; but
in a very fhort Time were driven from
their Conquefb, a certain Sign of the
weaknels of their Navy.
tfheir mojl The molt formidable Power they ever had
formidable at Sea before the middle of the Sixteenth.
Seajrma- Century, when they began to be dreaded
in the Mediterranean, was that fitted out
by the Grand Signior, in the Year MD
XXXV I ? under the Command of Soliman

Baflia,



meat*



firft went ?oCHINA. i$g

Baiha, to drive the Portuguefe from their
Indian Conquefts. This Fleet failed from
Suez, and reached Diu, which Scliman be-
fieged with the unfortunate Event related
at large in the Portuguefe Writings. But,
befides that this Expedition was fet on
foot above forty Years after the Difcovery
of the Indies, there was fo great a Number
of Chriftian Seamen and Officers on board
of this Fleet, that we may fairly afcribe
to them all the Honour of this Voyage.

The Arabian Colonies difepvered on the tfheirCob-
Coafts of India, fince the Portuguefe failed nie . s in A "
thither, have made fome believe they ^{^s
went to thofe Parts by Sea, and that they
made their Settlements much in the fame
Manner the Portuguefe conquered and Peo-
pled a vart Extent of Country from Cape
Eojador quite to China', but it is certain,
thefe Settlements were owing to a very dif-
ferent Origin. The Arabs were at Sofala
and Mofambique before the Difcovery of the
Cape of Good-Hope } and it was no very
difficult Matter for thofe who were mAfric
and in Egypt, to go down to the Eaft
Coaffc, which for many Ages had been
famed for Trade. Thus it was that they
peopled die Egyptian Side of the Red-Sea \
becaufe the Caravans of that great Pro*
vince came ufually down thither to trade
with the Perfian Merchants, who brought
them all Sorts of Commodities from the
the Indies and China, which they exchang-
ed with them for thofe of Egypt and
Chrijl endow* They were Matters of Ara-

hit*



160 When the Mohammedans

Ma, Perfia^ and all the Provinces which
extend quite to the Indies prA fo it was eafy
for them to have travelled from Kingdom to
Kingdom, till they got to China* Had
they been poileffed of great Fleets to make
them Matters of the Sea, it is very likely
they would have undertaken the Conquer!
of this Country, as they did by all thofe
they could get at with their Arms ^ but we
do not understand by their Hiftories, nor
even by the Portuguefe Accounts, that their
morl coniiderable Cities were owing to any
Thing belides Trade and Religion. It
was Trade that formed the Arabian Colo-
nies of Monbaza, jQiufoa, and Mozambique,
and fome other Places on the Way to the
Great Indies, where the firffc Families in-
creafed to that Degree, That, in Procefs of
Time, they made a good Part of the In-
habitants of the Places. Religion alfo
gave Birth to fome Settlements, when Ido-
latrous Princes were perfuaded to Moham-
wedifm by Fakirs, who, as we fhall ob-
ferve hereafter, often devoted themfelves
to fuch Mimons. Under thefe two Pre-
tences did the Mohammedans get footing in
feveral coniiderable Ports of the Indies :
But, tho' they were in great Favor with
the Princes, were very rich, and partook
largely in the Government, they were
never confidered as the predominant Part,
as they had not obtruded themfelves by
Conquer!:.
Moham- j t is fome what hard to account for the
Settlements feveral Mohammedan, Settlements upon the

Coaft



ftrft went to C H I N A. i6t

Coaft of jifriCj between the Cape of Good* Cfajl of
Hope and the Red-Sea. Thefe are of very Afric *
obfcure Rife, and of a very different Na-
ture from thofe which brought the greater!:
Part of AJia and Jfric under their Yoke*
They were neither erected nor aided by
the Princes or Governors of Provinces,equal
in Authority to Tributary Kings, where-
fore Hiftory has no Mention of them:
And fo little do we know of the interior
Afric, that we cannot well decide the Way
the fir ft Mohammedans may have taken to the
Eafh Coaft • the little we know of the Hi-
ftory of thefe petty Kingdoms, we have
from the Induftry of the iamous Hiftorian
John de Barros y who met with fome of their:
Chronicles.

The Arabians fubdued Egypt in the very
firft Century of their Hejra ; and fome
Years afterwards they made a Conqueft of
jifrk) were Mafters of Arabia, and of all
the Ports of the Red-Sea. There is fome
room then to believe that this {birring,
this indefatigable and avaricious People,
trading at firft upon the Coaft with the
Negroes, underftood they had their Gold
from the Mines of Sofala and Monqmatapa,
that Ivory abounded in the Country, and
that great Wealth might be thence accu-
mulated ^ this was furely the Rife of the
firft Arabian Colonies in thofe Parts, tho*
juft at what Time we cannot fay. It was
eafy for them to fettle upon this Coaft;
becaufe the Negroes who lived in the Up-
land had no Towns, but dwelt in Hutts

1 like



1^2 When the Mohammedans

Abulfed. like Nomads. It is thought indeed,
Gf°t r - that their firft coniiderable Settlement was
Per/. Kai- at 2i4ag a rf 0X0 ^ a City known, tho' very ob-
fcurely, by the Arabian Geographers,
which mull have been firft inhabited, be-
caufe of its advantageous Situation.
<?he Cities The Bedouin or Bedivin Arabs had wan-
they built dered t0 t he uttermoft Parts of Egypt, of
Co7/} he Nubia, and, perhaps, even of Barbary, and
^ ' had fettled towards the Eaft Coaft ; where
they lived, in their ancient Manner, under
Tents, feeding of Flocks, which were
their chief Support, while they cultivated
fome Trade with the Cafres ; but the Bar-
barity of thefe Cafres made them edge by
Degrees to the Coaft, and there build a
City whofe beginnings are to us unknown.
After this, thefe fame Arabs ftrengthned
by others, built Brava, and Monbaza, and
fome other Cities of the Coaft quite to
Gkiiloa.

Thefe Colonies, according to one of
the Hiitories of the Country cited by
BarroSj had been fettled about the Year
CCCXX of the Hejra, or DCCCCXXXII
of Chrift. About the Year of the Hejra
CCCC, of Chrift MIX, a Perfian Prince,
younger Brother to the Soltan of Shiraz,
Decad. i. came t0 fettle at Jghiiha. Barros calls Sol-
1. i. * tan Hofin, the Father of this Prince, King
of Shiraz^ but at the Time he fpeaks of
he could be only Khan or tributary Prince
of Shiraz, fubject to Soltan Addulat, of
the Family of Buiya, who was Lord of all
Perjia, and the. principal Mohammedan

Provinces



firft went to C H I N A* i6%

Provinces of the Upper Afiay from the Year
of the Hejra CCCCIV, or of Cbrift MKIII,
to the Year CCCCXI, of Chrift MXIX,^
and the fame fucceeded him to the Year of
the Hejra CCCCLXXXVIII, of Chrift
MXCIV. It is alfo laid, that thefe Per-
Jians called themfelves Amozaydiy or Fol-
lowers of Zaidy the chief of a Seel: which
claihed with the Arabs and the Africans ;
but it is likely we muft read ImamzadUy as
if they were defcended from Ally by fome
one of the Imams or Pontifs of the Per-*
fian Sect • this Difference was the Caufe
that this new Colony of Per/tans went to
the Place where they afterwards built

Thofe at Magadoxo were the firft that Barttg*
difcovered the Gold Trade at Sofala, one
of their Ships being horfed thither by the j g ca c L
Currents : but they did not make the Dif- ' C ' **
covery proferTedly, or on fet purpofe, tho*
they had fome Knowledge of it • becaule
they dared not go near Cape Currents y
which being Hill a dangerous Navigation,
was abundantly more fo to thofe who
made as little free with the Offing as poffi-
ble. The Kings of Ghiika made Difco-
very of a good Part of the Coaft, and
became Mailers of Monbaza> Melinda, and
the Ifles of Pemba, Zanzibary MonfrUy
ComrOy and fome others; they even fent
fome Colonies over to the Ifland of St*
Lawrencey and their chief Refidence was
at Sofala. Thefe Per/tan Adventurers, or
their Defendants, were in Pofleffion, here,
1 2 long



i&4 When the Mohammedans.

long before the Portuguefe found out the
Way to the Indies : And other Colonies, at
different Times, from Perfia and Arabia,
did alfo feat themfelves on many Parts of
this Coaft, and moll of the Cities were fo
many Republics or little Kingdoms, when
difcovered by Vafco de Gama. Some of
them were Sonnis or of the Arabian Se&,
others were Imamis, or of the Perjian ;
and thefe religious Diileniions, as well as
a Jealoufy of each other in Trade, ftirred
them to great Wars, which it feems the
other Arabs knew nothing of, or any
way concerned themfelves with.
9%py force The Mohammedans being thus in Poffef-
the i ufres f 10n Q f ^ w hole Coaft down to Cape
*Ctiwtry. Currents ; obliged tbe Cafres to retire into
the Country. It was feldom thefe Cafres
came down to the Sea-Side, except to
look for Amber greefe , which the Sea
threw up at certain Times : But they found
it alfo more Southerly, and trucked it
with the Mohammedans y to whom they alfo
brought Ivory, Gold-Dull, and Tygers,
Leopards, and Lions Skins, which they
had from the Defart.
JVhat we It feems as if, in the third Century of
know of the Mohammedifm y the Towns we are fpeaking

the%io- °^ were not Y et bui^ an ^ r ^at the Trade
hamme- was immediately negociated with the Ne-
dan Settle- groes themfelves by the Egyptian Mer-
7heC T n f chants of the Red-Sea, and the Coaft of
India ^ftfafo This Coaft was as yet called no
more than the Country of the Zinges ; and
the Name of Zangaebar> fince impofed on

it,



Jirfi went to CHINA. iS%

it, feems to be given by the firrt Naviga-
tors who came thither from Perjta. Bar
in the Indian Tongue fignifies a Coaft, as
Abulfeda and the other Eaflern Geogra-
phers have obferved: And the Per Hans
who w r ere acquainted with the Malabar
and fome other Coafts fo called by the In-
dians, called this Country of Negroes Zin~
gebar or Zinjebar, if we pronounce it as
the Arabs do, or Zinguebar as the Per/tans.
All the Shores Northward and then Eaft-
ward quite to the River Indus, were in
Subjection to the Mohammedans : And
from the Indus down to Cape Comorin,
they met with Moors in many Places, but
particularly at Calicut. Barros relates,
that Sarama Payrimal being feduced to
Mohammedifm, and being defirous to dye c * I# $*
at Mecca, divided Malabar, his Domini-
ons, between his Children and Relations,
and that he gave Calicut to one of his Ne-
phews who was his chief Heir, together
with the Title of Samorin, or Emperor of
Malabar.

The Moors coming to Coulam to trade, q> heh - r »
this King Payrimal gave them Calicut Settlements
where they kept their grand Warehoufes, there owing
not only of the Pepper and Ginger the t0 ^ de -
Country abundantly produces, but alfo of
all. the Drugs and Spices which were
brought from the Iflands, and the utter-
moft Parts of the Earl. This Settlement
and the Veneration the Samorins, who
f ucceeded Sarama Payrimal, had for the
Moors, gave them a great Sway at Calicut,
I 3 and



l6$ When the Mohammedans

and upon all the Coaft, where they made
Allyances with the Principal Indians, who
thought it an Honour to give them their
Daughters in Marriage. They insinuated
themfelves alio into a great Intereft with
the Princes of the difierent Parts of the
Coaft, as Idalcan, Nizamaluco, Cotalmaluco,
Madramaluco, for being at perpetual War
with each other, they made great account
of the Moors , and endeavoured all they
could to engage them in their Service,
they being, in thofe Times, the beft Soldi-
ers in all the Indies. Molt of the Patans
or Kings of the Indies were Idolaters,
nor had Mckammedifin taken any deep
Root in the Country, nor did it till King
Ekbar, in the beginning of the Seventeenth
Century, made a Conqueft of moil of
fchefe States,

From Cape Cotnorin Eaft ward, the Por-

tuguefe did not meet with fuch Swarms of

Moors ; neverthelefs they were fettled upon

Malacca, upon feveral Parts of Sumatra,

and among the Molucca's ; but there was

fcarce any of them in moft of the other

Kingdoms. They were already at Canton,

and in the other chief Ports, when the

Portugucfe arrived, but according to the

Teltimony of our two Authors, they had

been there ever fince the CCXXX Year

of theHejra.

ffhcyhad From thefe Premifes we deduce That

four Ways tne J ra hs formed their Settlements four

tSs feveral Wa Y s ; b Y Conqueft, by Difcovery,

in the In- by Trade, and by Miffion. By the firft

dies* Means



firft went to CHINA. i$/

Means they poileiTed themfelves of all the
Provinces which made their vaft Empire :
By the fecond they got footing in Afric
down to Cape Currents, among the poor
unarmed Carres who had it not in their
Power to prevent them from feizing on
what Parts they faw good: Their Colo-
nies of Magadoxo, Brava, and Q^uiha were
fomewhat in the Nature of ours in thefe
latter Times ; but not fo difficult to main-
tain, becaufe of the Proximity of the
Red-Sea, whence the Arabs had all Sorts
of Afliftance. By the two other they
feated themfelves in all the other Parts,
but more efpecially by Commerce. Thefe
Voyages were not in thofe Days fo fafe
and fo frequent; wherefore the Merchants
were under a necellity of making a long
Stay at the principal Scales, where they
took to them Wives, their Religion al-
lowing them a number; thefe new Fami-
lies brought on others, and the Princes
being fenlible it was greatly for their Ad-
vantage to draw the Trade of Perjta, Ara-
bia, and at the fame time of Egypt, and
Europe, by the Red^Sea, into their own
Ports, thefe Merchants met every where
with the kindefh Ufage they could wiih.
Thefe Idolatrous Princes,confirmedin their
old Superftitions, were not at all fcrupu-
lous about differences in Religion, but ad-
mitted all indifferently. So they readily
allowed their Subjects to embrace Msham-
medifm, which they preferred to the reft ;
becaufe of the hopes thefe Arabs gave
1 4 them



itd8 When the Mohammedans

them of Protection from the Soltans,
whofe Power was known in the remoteft
Eaft : Even Princes themfelves made pro-
feffion of Mohammedifhi in troublefom
Times, that the Moors might join them ; for
in latter Days they were lo multiply ed,
■ that they alone peopled whole Cities, or
a part of the moft considerable. Thus
this Religion, which has nothing very in-
convenient in it, did by little and little ob-
tain in many Parts; and at length received
an accefs of Power, when fome of its Pro-
feffors being raifed to the firft Pofts in the.
Courts of Cambaya and Guzarat, invited
a greater number of thofe Aiiatic Turks
called Rumis, and even feized on fome
Pofts, as did Malic Az, who raifed a con-*
iiderable Settlement at Dm, from whence
he a long time infefted the Portuguefe.
<7 'heir Set- By Trade and Religion the Arabs got
thmenis footing in fome Parts of Malabar, as has
that were a i reac jy been noted, and by the fame
<frade and Means they came to be very confiderable
fp Religion, upon Malacca. They firft w r ent thither as
Merchants, and fome of them there fixing
their Abode, gained many of the Idola-
ters over to Mohammedifm* From Malacca
they failed round to the Molucca's, and
having prevailed on the Kings of Tidore
and Tern ate, together with feveral others to
join with them in Religion, they reaped
great Benefits from thefe Princes, whom
the concerns of Trade, and the Protection
thefe Moors gave them room to hope, con-<
fomed in Mohammedifm. According to

the



fi-Jl went to C H I N A. x6$

the Portuguefe Writers they had not been
long upon the Moluccas before our Difco^
very of the Indies,

They had been in China above five <Tbeir Set-
Hundred Years before, and, according to tiement in
our two Authors, they were there very China *a*
numerous • but the Severity of the Chinefe ^"# '^/
Laws prevented them from propagating *
their faith with the fame Freedom they
had been allowed in the Indies : So that
they did not convert the Chinefe, they could
obtain nothing farther there than the free
Exercife of their Religion* The great
number of them, before the Year CCC of
the Hejra, fumced to People a Part of the
chief Cities of China, where the Portuguefe
found them.

Our Subject naturally leads us on to fay ^ wJ?at
fomething' of the manner how the Moham- they n e f,_
medans extended their Seel to the Extre- tendedtheir
mities of Afia and Afric Now the Man- Religion.
ner of this was widely different from the
Way taken to proclaim the Gofpel to the
Univerfe, particularly by the Apoftl.es in
the firft Ages of the Church : The Difci-
ples of Chrifi were harmlefs, humble,
poor, patient, and foes to Riches } and
fo averfe were they to every fort of Vio-
lence, That many of the primitive Chri-
ftians, moved by the Spirit of Meeknefs
and Forbearance, forfook the Profeffion of
Arms, deeming it unlawful to fight even
with the Enemies of the State. The A-
poftles and their Difciples confined riiem-
felves to the pure Doctrine they had re-
ceived



1 70 When the Mohammedans

ceived from Jefus Chrift^ they expofed
themfeives to numberlef's Torments in De-
fence of it; they prayed for their Enemies,
nor ever returned Evil for Evil; they
hoarded not Wealth, and whatever the
Believers depofited in their Hands, was
faithfully diltributed to the Poor: Thus
was it the Goipel was firft recommend-
ed to the World.
tfhcRife The firil Arabians were of different
cf Mo- Manners,and had a contrary way of think-
fof™^ hng; but without entering into a Detail of
the perfonal (^alkies of Mohammed their
Prophet, a turbulent ambitious Man ; iet it
fuifice that we draw you the exac\ Picture
of their reputed Saints, and principal
Friends to the Koran. Their whole Re-
ligion confifted in a ferupulous Obfer-
vance of Times of Prayer, Ablutions; in
bellowing of fome Alms, and in fighting
for the Eftabliihment of their Empire.
Their Sermons were very fhort, and when
they came into a Country they declared
themfeives Companions of the Prophet,that
they were come to exhort them to em-
brace the Religion he had taught, and to
root them out if they refufed. Thus was
it the Conqueror of Afric } addreffed him-
felf to the Africans ; and all the Propaga-
tors of this pernicious Se& have always
talked after the very felf fame Rate. And'
thus was the Koran erected not only upon
the Ruins of Pagamfin in Arabia] but alfo up-
on the Ruins of all States and ProfefEons>
and that, by Blood, by Plunder, and by all-
the Cruelties to be imagined. Hiftory



firfi went to CHINA, 171

Hiftory does not inform us that the tfhey did
Mohammedans ufed any other Means to votfpread
fpread their Doftrin. It is true, indeed, 'X fyfe-
that in fome of their Books we read oiwStionand
Difputes they had with the Chriftians of Infimfthn.
the Seventh Century, in which they boaft
of confounding them. Emir Cond, in his
Hiftory of Alt, tells us, this Kalifdifpu-
ted with a Chriftian Monk, and fo clearly,
from the Gofpel , convinced him That
Mohammed was the Paraclete or Comforter
promifed by Jefus Chrift, that the Monk
embraced Mohammedifm : But fuch Exam-
ples, as liable as they are to doubt, are fo
very uncommon, that nothing can thence
be inferred to fatisfy us they made as
many Profelytes by the Strength of Argu-
ment and Conviction, as by Might and
Victory. In the Writings of the Eafiern
Chriftians we have Examples, and even the
A&s of many Difputes upon Religion,
but ever to the Advantage of the Chrifti-
ans, Accordingly the Mohammedans but
feldom recurred to this Way of drawing
Men into their Belief; it could not anfwer
their Purpofe, and varyed from the Begin-
nings of their Religion,

When they were unable to propagate <fhey were
their Faith by Arms, as they had done in ver y H uiet
a Part of Alia and Afric, it does not ap- f™-^
pear They had recourfe to any Thing but Jhefelhey
Cunning, Treachery, and their own Inte- were
reft ] they did not venture to condemn the «>**&/?.
Religion by Law eftabliihed in a Coun-
try where they were Strangers, on the

contrary,



ij z When the Mohammedans

contrary, they were very cautious how
they offended thofe they dreaded. But
they had nothing to fear in the Sea Ports
of the Indies ; for the native Idolaters
are not apt to take Umbrage at religious
Differences, and have never made it their
Endeavour to draw Strangers into their fe-
veral Se£t.s. The Fakirs or Mohammedan
Devotees were by no means prone to the
ram Doings they fometimes ventured on
for the Sake of Religion; and if we make
a Scrutiny into the Number of their Mar-
tyrs, we mail find them but few in Number,
if we except thofe who dyed Sword in
hand,who are all honoured with that Dig-
nity. It hapned alfo, but feldom in the
Primitive Times, That Dervifes or Fakirs
undertook long Journeys in the Caufe of
Mohammedifm : But when any Prince was
difpofed to embrace it, then they fent for
fome who made an End of inrtrucling
him; and, upon fidore, the Portuguefe
found one of this Sort, who was come to
wafh away the Lees of the old Idolatry in
that Kingdom. The Moors expe£ted to
get by it if they undertook to propa-
gate their Religion; and made them-
felves Matters of the Trade, by promising
to defend the Princes againft their Ene-
mies ; and fending for further Supplies of
their own People, they added to their
Strength, and often reigned Chiefs of the
Ports that had received them as Foreign
Dealers. Sometimes, under the Mask of
Devotion, they perfuaded the Princes, and

the



firft went to CHINA. 175

the moll confiderable Perfonages to go
Pilgrims to Mecca, or to fend rich Pre-
fents thither } by which means they had
fo advanced their Affairs in the princi-
pal Empories, that, when the Portuguefe
arrived, they tranfa&ed all the Trade of
the Earl. In this flouriirring State, they
without difficulty drew over to them
a great many Perfons, and particularly
Slaves and Merlices, who thereby became
exempt from all Tribute, as they claimed
the advantages at firft granted to the
Mohammedans to allure them into the
Ports.

By thefe Means and Methods did the
Mohammedans propoxate the Koran, which
has ftill more extensively prevailed iince
the time the Mogul Emperors became
Mailers of the Kingdoms of Cambaya,
Guzarat and many others, where this Sect
had not yet admiffion, and where it was
miftrufted, feeble, and in no condition to
make any Attempt.

Now the difference betw r een thefe Mil-
lions and thofe of the primitive Chri-
ilians is obvious, as much as fome mo-
dern Authors have dared to make the
Comparifon ; they are not even to com-
pare to thofe of latter Times.

Fath. Naverette writes that in his time
there were about five hundred thoufand
Moors in China } and believes they had
not been in the Country above five hun-
dred Years, and that they had conlider-
ably multiply ed by Marriages : He adds

that



174 When the Mohammedans

that many of them took Degrees in the Se£t
of Literati, but that the reft confidered them
as Apoftates, whence it is plain they
thought this Seel: incompatible with their
Religion.

By what has been hitherto offered,
we may pretty clearly difcern how the
Mohammedans may have at flrft got in-
to China ; and it feems that they did
not force an Admittance as elfewhere,
but inlinuated themfelves under the pre-
tences of Trade chiefly } and that
the Trade driven by the Upper Tartary
was the moft ufual and expeditious : But
we cannot tell exactly what this Rout
may have been, becaufe not only our
Authors of the middle Ages and the
modern Greeks, but alfo the Arabs and
the Perfians have under the denomina-
tion of Turks and Tartars comprehended
many Nations of difcordant Manners,
Tongues, and Religion, befides that the
moft: able Geographers have never prick-
ed down the Limits of the Extent they
place them in.
ManyNa- They moft of them fay that the Coun-
thvs com- try of Shaft) is the boundary of the Provin-
pehended ces fubjeel: to the Mojlems, and confines
under the U p 0n ^urkeftan. Then when they fpeak
Tartars °^ ^ UT ^ e ft an or T'okareftan, which is the
fame * they agree in nothing about it,



* Our Author here feemingly contradicts what be
ajferts in a Pajfage before, but he here under jtands that tho*
thefe two were difiinclProvipces confidered as fucb, yet as they

but



firftwent to CHINA. ij$

but in faying It is a very vail Province Abulfeda
beyond the Oxus and Country of Balk • Yacuti
and that it reaches to Badakjhan, which jf a } n ^ w ~
is thirteen Days diitant therefrom. In ether Arz-
Tokarejlan they place a great number of bian Geo-
Nations, which they comprehend under grafters.
the general Name of Turks ; and the
chief of them are thefe. The People of
Bujaky free, very barbarous, and their
Country twelve Days in Extent : The
Najabisy or Nogais, who inhabit a very
great Country, a Month in Dimenflon :
Thofe of Ferak, in a Country of the
fame Extent • they have a King and
are Mohammedans of the Se£l of Ali, whofe
Defcendants they pretend to be, and
whom they take to be the God of the
Arabs.

Then they come to the Tartars, proper-
ly fo called, whom they write Tatars ;
cruel, inhuman, lawlefs and without Re-
ligion, except that moft of them worfhip
the Sun ; in Language they differ from
the reft : They lpeak alio of thofe they
cay Tagazgaz, a Name Varioufly written,
from the aptnefs of taking one Letter for
another, in a Character wherein a Point
or two differently placed quite alters the
Pronunciation : Others they have, called
Hakak\ thefe are free, and worfhip the



were included in each ether, they are to be considered
but as one when either of the blames is fifurped in a
general Senfe,

Stars



t-j6 When the Mohammedans

Stats as did the ancient Arabs, and fomd
of them were Chriftians: Others, called
Hcttis, who inhabit a Tra£t of twenty
Days Extent, more polite and ingenious
than the preceding: Thofe of Harkir the
fame, they had a King greatly refpe£ted
by them, in whofe prefence no Man ap-
peared till he had attained his fortieth
Year : The Larkanjes, the Catlajcs, and
fome others are as unkown : The Caz,
who were Chriftians, and a very potent
People, formerly fubje& to the Seljukian
Soltans ; but who waged War with Saltan
Sinjar the Son of Malec-Shab, defeated
him and took him Captive, tho after a
Years Confinement he made his Efcape :
The Geographers fpeak alfo of the Sa-
hara or Tahara who poffefled a Country
of forty Days Journey, among whom there
were Chriftians, Jews, Mohammedans, J-
dolaters, and Magi an s or worjbippers of
Fire : Many more are named in Hifto-
ry, the Moguls, the Hiathelites, the Kip~
jaks, the Alain s, the Karis and ' Markis ;
in fine many numerous Hoards who
were fubdued by Jenghiz-Kban, but who
before obeyed Ung Khan, whom he over-
threw in Battle.

This detail may evince it impoffible to
know what People our Authors and even
the Orientals mean, when they they ufe
the general Denomination of Turks and
Tartars. And if in Europe we are at
fo great a lofs to trace out the ancient
Cities, and the many Nations whofe

Names



r



firft went foCHINA. 177

Names ftand recorded in Hiftor^, we
rnuft be infinitely more to leek when
we attempt to recover Cities and Conn-
tries ib very . imperfectly known to the
Ancients, who have lo often changed both
Name and Mailer, and who have been
fo harrailed and ravaged by continual
Wars.

Now, as it may be obferved^ among
the People and Nations, io compre-
hended under the general Denomina-
tion of Tartars, there was a great Num-
ber of Chriftians, not only when Jenghiz
Khan erected his Empire but long before
this Epoch : For in the Hiftory of the
Neftorians we read that Timothy, their Ca-
tholic, who fucceeded Handnjajbua, the
fame mentioned in the Chmefe and Syri*
ac Infcription, wrote to the Khan or Em-
peror of the Tarrars and to fome other
Princes of Tnrkefian, exhorting them to
embrace the Chriftian Faith, which he
did together with two hundred thoufand
of his Subjects. We may be lure
thefe People were true Tartars or Turks i
the fame Catholic being confulted by the
Bilhop, he lent into the Country, con-
cerning the manner how he was to
make them keep Lent, and celebrate
the Service ; they being accuftomed to
Milk and Flefh, and unufed to Corn and
Wine. His anfwer was^ that in Lent
they ihould abftain from Flefh; but that
during the fame they might have Milk
as ufual * and that as to the celebration
m they



lyS When the Mohammedans

they fhould abfolutely provide them-
felves with Bread and Wine. From that
time we, in the Ecclefiaftic Notitia of
the Neftorian Church, have a Metro-
politan of Turkefian, one of Tangut, one
of Chanbalig or Cambalu, and one of Ca-
Jhgar and Ncwakat ; as they had Me-
tropolitans they muft needs have had
Bifnops under them * and accordingly we
Abulfar. find one called Mar Danha, in the Hi-
p. zS6. ftory oijenghiz Khan • Mar is conferred
on Saints and Bifhops, and Danha is a
proper Name, very common among the
Neftorians, but not to fignify a Town as
W' yl f Jenghiz Khans Hiftorian mi flakes. The
fchfnp ^ ej k -Arabian Authors agree that Cabal,
18.6. which they place in an extent of Coun-
Abulfed. try they call Banian, whofe Capital was
P- 522. half a Day from Balk, was the laft City
inhabited by Mojlems, tho' pretty much
blended with Chrijfians, Jews, Magians,
or Worjhippers of Fire, and Idolatrous Jn~
dians. Now altho'the Mohammedans were
very powerful in Chora/fan, Chowarazm,
the Mawaralnahra or Tranfoxane, and tho'
among the Turks and Tartars, we juffc
now mentioned, there were thofe who
had received Mohammedifm ; their Num-
ber was but fmall, and unable to ex-
tend their Colonies into China, fo that
tho' in the Courfe of feveral Ages feme
of them may have gone thither by Tar*
tary and have fettled, it is more likely
the body of them went through the //»--
dies. We have taken notice of the Set-
tlements



firfi went to CHINA* ff$

tlements they had upon the Coaft of A*
fric, and a Trade had been opened between
Perjia and China before, by the Canal de-
fcribed by our Authors : But the way
was ftill made clearer for them, by the Corid. E-
Indian Conquefts of the Gaznavid Sohans y mir Uh s
fo called becaufe the Seat of their Em- &*$&.
pire, which lafted one hundred and fifty
Years, was at Gaznab, a City which fome
Geographers make the Capital of a Pro-
vince of the fame Name, while others
place it in the Country of Baniian, and
others in Zablejiaan or Gout : For we
cannot too particularly inform our Readers
who have not applyed to the Oriental
Tongues, That the Eaftern Geographers,
even thofe who are cryed up for their
Accuracy, are feldom of one Mind as to
the Diviiion of Provinces. Ths firfl of
thefe Sohans was S abaci akin whofe Son,
Taminaddukt Abulkafem Mahmud, began :
his Reign in the Year of the Hejra %\*1
CCCLXXXVIIandofChriftDCCCXVIL L et>. \t*»
The Arabian Hiftorians and the Perfian rich.Qon*
write that he compelled a great many In- ^ mir . .
dians into Mohammedifm^ and among other ^bulfe 1 *
things it is obferved that he took the Geo. Per-.
City of Sumnaty upon the Sea Shore, Abulfed.
where there was an Idol which he or- n - 53 1 *
dered into Pieces. It is plain alfo that
during the ceafelels Wars between thefe
Scltans 7 and fome others with their
Neighbours, feveral of them, after a De-
feat, toov Refuge in the Indies, Whence
this Part fwarmed with Mohammedans^ and
m 2 ef-



iSto When the Mohammedans

efpecially after fome of the Kings of /#-
dojlan had embraced their Faith, as did
others in Malabar, Malacca, the Moluccas ?
and moil of the circumjacent Iflands } which
we learn from the Portuguese Authors on-
ly, the Arabians having ho mention at
„ all about it.

rssa T T K wen i £ ?r the A pa c rtly r hy

both by Sea Land through Turkejtan, and by Sea from
and Land. Sir af y as we read in our Authors, to
whom al ; oft alone we are indebted for
this Information. The Syftem of Bergeron^
I and fome Moderns that have followed
him, is grounded upon a falfe Supoli-
tion That the Arabs knew and ufed
the Compafs a long time before us, a
Notion countenanced by our latter Ac-
counts of China, that tell us the Chi"
tiefe had that piece of Knowledge, which
i is an empty Aiiertion. Our two Authors
1 report that Siraf was the Boundary of
the Chinefe Navigation, and that they
\ fleered the fame Courie the Arabs did ;
; creeping almoft continually along Shore,
and keeping the Land aboard as much
as poffible. So that the great number of
Mohammedans at Canfu, when that City
: was facked, had increafed there by the
* means of Merchants from Perjta and Sy-
\ ria, partly by Sea and partly by Land,
who there enjoyed the free Exercife of
their Religion, as well as the Jews,
rfhey did tne Chnfiians and Indians.

Hhe^Dot lt is obfavable That the Mohammed-
trin to am never attempted to fpread their Do-
China. Sria



firft went to CHINA. 181

Srin in China, as they had done in o-
ther Parts; either reftrained by the Laws
which made it Penal, or unable to win
over the Chincje who may have been more
hard to convince than were afterwards the
Kings and People of the Neighbouring
Iilands, who pro! efled Mohammedifm before
the Portugueje found out the way to them.
The Mohammedan Millionaries have never
been numerous, and of the great number
of Saints of their Seel:, concerning whom
they have long and tedious Stories, not
one Soul ever expofed his Life in the
Propagation of Mohammedifm. This a-
bominable Seel: was eftablifhed by Vio-
lence only, by Slaughter, and the Horrors
of War, and thus was it that it diifufed
it felf over all the Countries fubdued by
Mohammed and his Succeffors. Thus was
it that Taminaddulet Mahmud the Son of
Sab aft akin conveyed it into a part of the
Indies he conquered, lince when it has
infenlibly over-ran the Country, but efpe-
cially lince the Mogul Emperors, defcended
of famerlan, have made public profeflion
of it : Notwithstanding which, there are
ftill a great number of Idolaters in Indo-
fian, and in our Days there are many Ra~
jas or Indian Princes who adhere to their
old Syftem, as do alfo molt of the Pa-
tans or Nobles, the Banians or Merchants,
and the body of the common People.

By our laft Accounts there is a great 2%« »«»*-
number of Mohammedans in China, and ^ ^5?"
Navcirette writes That in his time they J^ m ^ "
m 3 were china.



if s' When the Mohammedans

were computed at above five hundred
thoufand, which is fufliciently confirmed
by our French Miifionaries. 1 hefe ailuie us
the Chinefe Mohammedans take no Degrees,
as do the reft of the Literati, to qualify
them for Polls; and that this they obierve
out of a Religious Principle, thinking it un-
lawful to perform the Chweje Ceremonies,
fo long the Subject-matter of Difpute,
and which, after a Deliberation of aimoft
feventy Years ftanding, have been a^
length condemned by the Holy See. By
feveral Accounts we are alio informed
That the Mohammedans who do take the
Degrees, are rejected by the reft as A pen
ftates, fo that they on their part quite
renounce the Mohammedan Faith, re-
taining nothing thereof but the averfion
they have contracted to Swines Flefh.



AN



A N

INQUIRY

CONCERNING

The jfE WS difcovered in
CHINA.

OU R. Authors obferve that in the ge-
neral Devaftation of China, and par-
ticularly when Canfu was taken, a great
number of Chriflians, Jews, Mohammedans^
and Farfes \_Parjhes~] were put to the Sword.
In the preceding Inquiries we have difcuffed
the Origin of 'Chn ft Hamty and Mohammedifm
in this Country- but it is impoffible to
fpeak fo pofitively concerning the Jews
there ; for theHiftory of the Country affords
no Light to guide us in this Refearch, the
Chineje for the molt Part, as is (aid, omit-
ting all foreign Matter, or what relates to
Strangers; and, if we may rely on the
Teftimony of the mofl learned Jefmts,
their Hiftory is quite iilent as to the Sub-
ject we are now upon: And yet there is a
great number of Jews in China, as may
be gathered from our two Authors, and
m 4 th§



184 An Inquiry concerning the Jews

the rather as they are ftill in feveral Pro*
vinces, but particularly in the Trading
Cities.

path, Matthew Ricci, whofe Work con-
tains the firft genuin Informations we
had concerning China, left behind rjim in
his Memoirs, from whence Tngatit com-
Tng uli piled his Book, De Chrifiiana Expeditions
fupra. apud Sinas, a very remarkable Story to our
Purpofe. & Jew of the City of Caifamfu y
the -Capital of the Province of Honan,
coming to Bekin to take his Degrees, and
hearing that this Stranger and his Compa-
nions adored one only God, and abhorred
the Superftitions of the idolatrous Nations
and the Mohammedans, had the Curiolity to
pay him a Viiit. Fath. Ricci conducting
him into the Chappel, he there faw a Pi-?
&ure of the bleiied Virgin with the Infant
Jefus in her Arms, and a St. John near at
Hand, and taking them for Rebekah, Ja-
cob, and Efau, thought he knew them:
And after the fame Manner he guelied at
(Sight of the four Evangelifts. The Fa r
fher put feveral Queftions to him, and by
his Anfwers under ftood he profefled the
Old Law ; and that he acknowledged him-
felf an Israelite, and not a Jew : Where-
upon Father Ricci concluded him a Def-
cendant of the Ten Tribes carried away
into Captivity, and difperfed over the
uttennpil Parts of the Eafi, He mewed
Jiim the Bible of Philipp II. printed by
pla#U%, and this Jew knew the Hebrew Char
facters but cou],d not read them.

He



difiwered ^CHINA. 185

He related that in the City whence he
came, there were ten or twelve Thcufand
Jewijh Families, who had a good hand^
fom Synagogue, which they had lately re-
built at a conliderable Expence : That for
fiVe or fix Hundred Years they had there
preferved the Pentateuch written upon
Kolls, which they held in great Venera-
tion : That at Hamcheu the Capital of the
Province of Cheqaiang, there was ftill a
greater Number of Israelites and a Syna-
gogue ; That fome alfo there were in other
Provinces, but, that being deftitute of Syna-
gogues, they were greatly decreafea in
Number. We are told, that this Jew in
pronouncing fome Hebrew Words differed
irom our Manner, as in Htercfoloim and
Mojeia : He informed them That fume of
his Countrymen underftood Hebrew, and
among the reft a Brother of his : That for
his Part, having, from his Youth up, ap-
plyed himfelf to the Cbinefe Literature,
he had neglected the other : He frank-
ly confelied, that for this Reafon he
had been deemed unworthy to enter
the Synagogue, by the Perfon who was
Chief of it: But that he was not very fe-
licitous about his Exclusion, provided he
obtained his Doctors Degree.

. It were to be wiihed Fath. Ricci or fome
other MiiTionary had been a little better
acquainted with Hebrew ; for by the read-
ing of their Books, they might have known
the Difference between thefe Copies which
rnuft have been ancient, and thofe at pre-

fent



iS<5 An Inquiry concerning the Jews

Voyages, fent in the Hands of the Jews. Bernier is
Tom. II. of Opinion there may have been of them
P- *i£' t u in the Kingdom of Kapemir ; and cites
Edition."' f° me Letters which Father Bufjeus the Je-
fuity who was at Dehli, received from a
German Jejlnt at Pekin, which informed him
he had feen fome who had preferved Judaifm
and the Old Teftament ; who knew nothing of.
the Death of Jefus Chriffc, and who would
have made the jeiuit their Kakan, if he
would but have abfiamed from Pork. Now
this Jefmt was Father Adam Schall, who
lived above fifty Years in China with great
Repute, being a Mandarin of the rirft
Order, and Prefident of the Tribunal of
Mathematics. He during his long Abode
in the Country, by his Inter eft and by his
Underftandiig, as well as his Succefiors in
the lame Employs, might have difcovered
fomething more than we have concerning
the Jews in China ; but they have neglected
the Thing. It only appears, by what Fath.
Trigaut writes, That their IS umber was not
very great, and that it rather diminifhed
than not, becaule many, to qualify them-
felves for Offices,conformed to the Religion
of the Country: And it is remarkable that
the Jews excluded thole who apply ed
themfelves to the Chinefe Studies, which
were neceiiary to attain to their Degrees;
by which it is plain they thought the
P radices of the Literati not free from
Idolatry; and the Mohammedans, who
were more in Number, thought the fame
Way, and no one of them could take his

Degrees



difcovered in CHIN A, i%j

Degrees without renouncing Mohamme-
difnu

Father Ricci who thought thefe Ifraeli-
tes of Caifamfa might be iome Remains of
the ten Tribes tranllated by Sbalmanefer,
does not feem to be much out of the Way.
Benjamin the Jew relates that in the Coun- in term.
try of Nifapor there were fome who pre- p- in-
tended to be of the Tribes of Dan y Zebu-
htn, Afher, and Naphtali: But we want
many particulars to enable us to judge what
there may be in this Notion, or whether
it is a mere Conjecture or no. We mould
have their Books, we mould know which
they admit and which they are not ac-
quainted with: For the Israelites of the
ten Tribes could neither have nor acknow-
ledge the Books of the Prophets which
fo leverely reproach the Kings and People
of Jfrael with their Idolatry; no more
than what was written during and after
the Captivity. Wherefore what Father
tfrigaut relates of the jfavrj That he re-
hearfed the Stories of EJiher and Judith^
gives us to underftand that he knew thofe
Books of Holy Writ, which had been
impoffible if he had not been acquainted
with the other Jews.

But what Rica fays of the Story of
Judith muft not make us fulpefk his Ve-
racity, becaufe that Book is not in the
Hebrew Canon; for the Jews had fome
Knowledge of it as appears by de Voi/uis
learned Preface on the Pugio Fidei, and by
the Hebrew Tranflations of it that have

been



iSS An Inquiry concerning the Jews

been printed ; and what is more, the Jews
oi Perjia have a Veriion of it in the Lan-
guage of that Country, whence it may
have reached China,

Father Ricci afterwards fent a Brother
Jefuit) a Chineje born, to the City of Cai-
famfu, to inquire into the Truth of what
the Jew had reported, and he found things
to be exactly as he had faid. He procur-
ed a Copy of the Beginning and Ending
of the Books theie Jews had in their Syna-
gogue; and upon collating thefe Copies
with the Hebrew Pentateuch , there ap-
peared an exacl Conformity of Parages
and Characters between them, excepting,
lays Trigaut, that, according to the ancient
Cuftom, theie Jews had no Points. The
Conformity of Character is a molt certain
Proof that thefe Books were not ol the
firft. Antiquity ; and the Obfervation add-
ed, That they were written without Points
is no Proof at all ; for at this Day the
Pentateuchs written upon great Rolls of
Parchment, as the Jews have them in their
Synagogues, are deftitute of Points. So
that irom fuch uncertain Documents it is
impoifible to fay whether the Jews went to
China foon after the Tranfmigration of the
Ten Tribes, or whether they came after-
wards, as did the Chr'tfiians and Moham-
medans, which is moft likely to have been
the Cafe. For without enlarging on this
Subject, we on all Sides learn That iince
the Deftru&ion of JeruJ/zkm^ there is hard-
ly a Country where they have not been

in



difcovered in CHINA. iSf

in great Numbers , befides thofe who were
in Pcrfia and Egypt before that Time.

Before- Mobammedifm there were whole
Nations of them in Arabia, as may be
proved by many Pafiages of the Koran,
where they are mentioned. We have the
Conteft of Gregentius, Bifhop of the Sara-
cens, with a Jew called Herb anus, and by
the Hiftory of his Life in the Greek Meno-
logies and other Authors, we underfbnd
that he was fent to Elefbaan,K'mg of Ethio-
pia, who was then at War with the Jew
Dunaan, King of the Homerites, & great p ococ ^
Enemy to the Chrlfiians, by the Arabs spectm.
called Dtinaas : But it is impoffible to ga- Hift.Jrah
ther any help from the MobammedanAuthors P- 33*
about thefe Affairs} for all their Hiftories
of theTimes before theirProphet,are a Heap
of grofs Fables without the leaft Authori-
ty. We murl: therefore confine ourfelves
to the Time thereabouts, and to their Hi-
ftorians who have written fince the Rife of
their Empire.

The Jews were perfecuted by the Chri-
ftian Emperors, and efpecially by Heraclius,
who put a very great Number of them to
Death, becaufe, fay the Arabs, he was
admonifhed to beware of a circumcifed
Nation, from whom he had every Thing
to dread : This he conftrued of the Jews,
not dreaming of the Arabs,who were many
of them circumcifed, as were afterwards
thofe who followed Mohammed', for all
the Arabs were not fo. This drove a
great Multitude of Jews into the Domi-
nions



1^0 ^Inquiry concerning the Jews

nions of Perjia, where fome of them
had been ever fince the firft Captivity;
and Hiftory informs us that they often
ftirred up thofe infidel Princes againft
the Chriftians : But they afterwards en-
joyed more Liberty under the Mohamme*
dans, who never difturbed them in the
Exercife of their Religion ; which was the
Reafon they multiplyed greatly in all the
Provinces of the Eaft. And when the
City of Bagdad was built by the Kalif
Almanfur, and became the Capital of the
Mohammedan Empire, the Jews fettled
there, and became very wealthy, and
very potent.

They thrived by various Means ; many
of them cultivated the Sciences, particu-
larly Philofophy, Aftronomy, and Phytic;
others concerned themfelves with Trade,
in which the Nation has ever been very
induftrious; and fome got into the pub-
lic Revenues and Cuftoms, as Receivers
and Infpe&ors. In a Word, they became*
fo numerous and fo potent, that as the
Chriftians had obtained the Privilege to
have their Patriarchs, they obtained almoft
the fame for a Chief of their Nation they
called Rap Haggola, or Haggalut, whence
the Arabs have their Ras al Joint, or Prince
of the Exiles, who exercifed the fame Ju-
rifdi£tion over the Jews the Patriarchs
did over the Chriftians.
Inlfm- This is what Rabbi Benjamin is very
tar. p. 7 1. diffufe on, but with too much exaggeration^
after the Manner of the Jews, laying he

had



difiovered in CHINA. %jt

had a plenary Authority and a kind of Pre*
rogative over thole of his Nation. Some
Jews by this imaginary Prerogative of
their Chiefs, have thought to elude the
genuin Drift of 'Jacob's Prophecy,7& Scepter
jhall not depart from Judah : But Confiantin
I'Emperear in the Preface to his Tranilation
of Benjamin's Travels, takes Notice of
fome Pafiages of this kind, and refutes
them very folidly ; for not to mention that
all their Authors agree They have had
no Prince of the Line of David to govern
them lince the Deftruction of the fe-
cond Temple } the Tellimony of Tra-
vellers, Ancient and Modern, confirm this
Truth beyond all Contradiction : But the
Jews for want of Proofs have embraced
and ever made a great Stir about the firft
Reports which have from Time to Time
prevailed of Jewijh Princes that have been
laid to be difcovered in far diftant Parts.

One of the moil remarkable Inftan-
ces of this kind, was upon the firffc News
that arrived in Portugal of the Difco-
very of the Prefter John or King of
Ethiopia. Thofe who had been fent out
reported that this Prince was of the Race
of Solomon, that all his Subjects were cir-
cumcifed, that they kept the Sabbath, that
they abltained from the Flefh of Swine,
and that they obferved many Jewijh Cu-
ftoms: And as there were two .Jews a-
mong thofe who went on this Difcovery
they failed not to magnify every Object to
their own People ; who wanted nothing
t more



jpt ^Inquiry concerning the Jews

to fatisfy them there was a Jewtjh King in
Afric y whence they deduced every Confe-
quence that could flatter them. Thus Rabbi
Ifaac Abarbinelj who was then at Lisbon, did
in fome Parts of his Commentary upon*-
the Prophets, recur to the firft Accounts the
Portuguefe gave of the great number of
Jews they iound in the Indies. The Jews
of Conftantinopk there printed a Spanijb
Tranflation of a pretended Letter from
Prefier John, in Hebrew Characters, and
difperfed it about every where in different
Languages. But the Jews did not long
enjoy their Dream ; for the Portuguefe, go-
ing into the Country, found that as much
as the Ethiopians were wedded to certain
jfudaical Practices, in which fome Writers
have in vain endeavoured to juftify them^
they were neverthelefs Chriftians.

But, to drop this delufory Prerogative, it
is certain the Jews have for many Ages
fwarmed all the Eaft over; Perjia is full
of them, and they had a Synagogue at
Modain, the ancient Sekucia of the Par-
thiansy out of whofe Ruins Bagdad was
partly built ; and when the Jews removed
to this new City, they became very
powerful, and obtained of the Kalifs fuch
Privileges as differed but little from tnofe
the Chriftians were allowed. And parti-
cularly they attained to the Honour of
having a Chief, the fame the Arabs call
Ras al Joint, fo much talked of by Benja-
min and Abraham Zacui, the Author of the
Jukhajftn. Some learned Men of our

own



difcovered in C H I N A. Jpj,

own Times have doubted of what the
Jews relate of the Ceremony of In-
italling this their Magiftrate, but it is
very true ; and ought not to be reckoned
a flight enfign of Sovereignty. We read
in the Hiftory of the Eafiem Chriftians,
that it was the ufual Cuftom for the Mo-
hammedan Princes to leave them the free
Choice of their Patriarchs ; but the Per-
fon elected, could not be inverted with this
Dignity, till approved by the Sovereign*
There were even Canons which made it un-
lawful for Bifhops to inaugurate or in~
throne a Patriarch till his Election had
been confirmed in public Form, which
thefe Chriftians wifely ordained to obviate
fuch Inconveniences as have frequently taken
Eirth from the Ambition and Jealoufy of
fome private Men. Wherefore, before they
Confecrated or inftalled a new Patriarch,
they, befides the Conge d'Eltre, ufually
brought him into the Soltan's Prefence,
or to the Governor of the Country ; and
when the Election was confirmed, the new
Patriarch was in great State conducted to
the Church, or the Patriarchal Palace.

We find many Inftances of this in the
Hiftory of Egypt y and in that of the Catho-
lics or Nefiorian Patriarchs ; while nothing
of the like is recorded of the Jermjb
Chief. But as they were very rich, and
oftentimes very powerful at the Courts of
thefe Mohammedan Princes, where every
Thing gave way to Gold, it is very likely
they obtained much the fame Honours

n con-



:sp4» -A n ^ n T a ^ r y concerning the Jews

conferred on the Chriftians. According-*.
ly if we examin the Recital of Abraham
of Salamanca, and fome other Jews, as
Benjamin and others rince him, it will be
perceived thefe Cafes were almolt the
lame. It is impoffible to fuppofe their
"Writings are iabulous} they do not
prove That the Princes of the Exiles held
any Sovereignty over their own Nation,
nay, their belt Authors ingenuoufly confefs
there was no fuch Thing, if we except pri-
vate Regulations and Orders among them-
feives. So that they were not much better
than Chiefs of Synagogues, or of the San*
hedrtm of latter Times, and coniiderably
inferior in Authority to the Patriarchs^
when it bapned that the Prince confirmed
the Election.

The main Difference between the Chri-
stian Patriarchs and the Jewijh Chiefs,
was, The former were inverted with a
Power over all the Churches within the
Limits of their See, and fuch a one the
latter feem not to have enjoyed. For
what Abraham of Salamanca, and Benjaniin
fay, That at Bagdad he was ufhered in
by the Title" of Son of David, when he
made his Entry, fo proclaimed by the ex-
ulting Voices of the Croud* is in the firft

• Place not much to be relyea on from fuch
Hands, and, in the next, is but a feeble
Proof of any Sovereign Power relident in
the Houfe of David. And belides that

! the Jews themfelves confefs There is a very
great Confulion in their Genealogies, there

is



difccvered in CHINA*" '*p %

is hardly a County where there have not
been Families who boaited of a Defcent
by that Line. The famous Ifaac Abarbi~
ml was of this Number, who has been
fo kind as to let us know that a Branch
of the Houfe of David migrated into
Portugal,, and that it was his own; this
reflected an Honour on them from the
Jews, but void of all good Authors

It were needlefs then to recur to their
Fables , now a-days fufficiently known,
to inquire after their Origin in the Eaft
and at length in China. It is very
likely fome remains of the Ten Tribes
exifted in the Upper Afia. Ifaac Abarbinel
cites Letters from Jews in the Indies
who laid claim to that Defcent : But as
they had Communication with the reft,they
moffc certainly conformed with them; ib
that tho' we had any particular Tradition,
or Account of a Cuftom, handed down to us
by the former, this Medly would only puz-
zle us the more ; and in Fact we find thatal-
moft all the Eaftern Jews, mentioned in
Hiftories, agreed with the reft in their
Obfervance of the Law, and in the Read-
ing of the facred Books, excepting cer-
tain Things we lhall mention in the Se-
quel.

We are aflured by all Authors, that
are come to our Knowledge, both Chri*
fitan and Mohammedan ; and by all Tra-
vellers, both ancient and modern, that the
Jews have been found in Perfta, in Cho-
n 2 raj/an



%$6 An Inquiry concerning the Jews.

rajfan y in the Mawaralnahra, and in the
Provinces farther! remote and neareil bor-
dering upon China, as well as in Afrk,
not to fpeak of Egypt, where they have been
always very numerous. Antony TenreyrOy
a Portuguefe Gentleman, the firft that
travelled from the Indies to Europe by
£ v Land, whofe Book was printed at
Coimbra in the Year MDLX, found of
them at Lar, and other Cities of Per/ia*
in his way. Abulfeda often obferves there
were Multitudes of them in the Indies]
efpecially at Calayata and Cingala , as alfo
at Coulam, according to Marco Polo. Nil-*
veiri fpeaks of them at Modain as being,
fo powerful that in the Year of the Hejra-
DLXXIII, of Jefus Chrift MCLXXVII
they had a warm conteft with the Mo-
hammedans. At Cochin there was a Jewry,
where, according to Diego de CcutOy they
fpoke the ancient Tongue : There were
alio great numbers of them all over Ma-
labar, where they quite peopled fome
Places.

It is certain alfo that for many Ages
pari: they have been very numerous in
Perjia, and all the Provinces which for-
merly depended thereon, or that at pre-
fent belong thereto ; and in all the Parts
where the Perfian Language is fpoken, as
it is in aimoft all the Dominions of the Mo-
gul. This is confirmed by the Yeriions of
the Scripture the Jews have made into
that Tongue, of which the Pentateuch
only was printed, in Hebrew Chara&ers,

at



difcovercd in CHINA. ipj

at Conftantimpk in the Year MDLI. But /
there are almoft all the Books of the
Bible of this Verfion in Libraries, and
particularly in Monf. Colbert's. The prin-
ted Verfion is by the Jews themfelves
fuppofed to be the work of one Rabbi
Jacob, a native of Tits, a famous City in
Chorajfan. We have another to the full
as good ; and this as well as thofe of
the other facred Books is in Hebrew Cha-
racters, a Verfe of the original preced-
ing a Verfe of the Verfion, juft like the
Chaldee Paraphrafes in Manufcript. The
Verfion of the Pfalms, which John Bap-
tift Vecchietij a Florentin Gentleman, got
copied at Ormuz in the Year MDCI, and
which I have among my Books in Per-
Jtan Characters, is from three very ancient
Copies, in Hebrew Letters, whofe various
Readings are between the Lines of the
Text. This is what Vecchietti has taken
care to obferve at the end of the Book,
adding That this Verfion is the more to
be efbeemed as it has fome old Words
ufed by Fardu/Jt, AzraJd and other Po-
ets, wnich being now obfolete prove its
Antiquity.

And what Hill farther corroborates this ;
In thefe Copies, in Hebrew Charac-
ters, you have none of the Corrections
and "Variations the Maforets have intro-
duced into the Hebrew Text, now in the
Hands of the Jews^nd much fewer of thofe
various Readings called Kari or Katib^
as I have paticularly remarked in the
n 3 Sa«



ip8 An Inquiry cmcerning the Jews

Sapiential Books which I have in .Ma*
nuicript, as well as in Eftker.

Again, the fame Per/tan Jews have
Books in their Tongue which the others
re j e&, as the Prophecy of Baruch, the
Hiftory of T'obit, and the Additions tq
Daniel^ which are not in the Hebrew.
Many Conjectures might be raifed upon
this Foundation, but nothing certain can
be thence deduced, no more than from
what little we are told by the ancient
Authors above cited. For the Antiquity
of thefe Perftan Tranflations tho* very
great, is not fufficient to determin whe-
ther or no they precede the Revifion of
the facred Books by the Maforets * and,
indeed, that they did not precede theni
appears plain by the Veriion of the Pfalms,
which tho* in fome Pailages it varies
from the Mafirets, there are important
Pailages where it follows them : The
firrl is in the 21 Pfalm the 22 according
to the Jt'dos'j and the 18th Verfe, where
the Jews inftead of Reading T\$!2 (ode-
nwtj as do the Septuagint and Vulgate,
read H&D Jicut Leo. The Per/tan reads
the fame; In the 144 or 145 Pfalm,
which is Abecedary, the 14 Verfe is
wanting in the Hebrew, tho* it ftands in
the Septuagint, the Vulgate and the Syr
riac Veriion which is very ancient, but
is not in the Perfian. As the Syriac is
from the Hebrew Text, and as there is not
the lean: Appearance that it was reformed
by the Greek, it bids fair to have been

once



dif covered in CHINA. 19$

once in the Original Text. For there is
no Caufe to be well afligned why in a
Pfalm, whofe Verfes are in Alphabetical
Order, there mould be one Verfe want-
ing, and we not be able to guels at any
Reafon for it ; and efpecially as nothing
of the like is to be obferved in others
of the fame kind. As old then as the Books
in the Hands of the Jews of Perfidy and
the moll remote Provinces of the Upper
Afta, where the Perjian Tongue was
fpoken, may have been, they cannot
have been lb old as the Tranfmigration
of the ten Tribes, nor even as the laffc
Difperiion, when Jeriifakin was deftroyed,
feeing their Books conform in fuch Ef-
fential Points, as thefe we have noted,
with thofe revifed by the Maforets.

It is moft likely then that the Jews
got into China as into all other Parts,
and that they may the more ealily
have done it, if true it be, as Benjamin
fays, That there were about fifty thoufand
of them at Samarcand, from whence they
may have travelled into China.



n 3 AN



200 ~]



DISSERTATION

O N T H E

CJ/INESEUammg.

WhaitU II7HAT our Mohammedan Traveller,
Arabian y y in the firft Account, tells us of the

Chinife 6 Sciences, muft feem fo extraordinary as
learning, to make us doubt every Thing elfe he fays,
after fo many Elogies the Modern Tra-
vellers have lavifhed upon the Philofophers
and Philofophy of China. We might at
firft imaginThat illiterate Merchants could
not perceive what has been fince difcover-
ed, and that therefore we are not to mind
them when they prefume to go out of their
Reach, but Men to the learned Men who
know better. But it is not the Miffiona-
ries only that may be fufpe&ed of having
talked a little too largely of the Wit and
Learning of the Chinefe, who have fo done
under a Notion of discovering fuch Truths
in the Books of Confucius, as might dif-
re,*- P°fe them to embrace the Chriftian Faith :
tvad'Bory For Ifaac Vojfius, a Man of great Erudition,
toYottms, has been more prodigal of his Commen-
dations



A DhTertation on the, &c. ^at

dations than any Body elfe ; * If any Man,
fays he, fhould collect all that every Nation
which is or has been, has invented, thd they
have all brought forth very great things, the
whole together would not be more excellent and
various than thofe exhibited by the Seres
alone, by the Portuguefe improperly called Chi-
nefe. This is the Opinion of a Man that
was never in China ; that was unacquainted
both with their Tongue and their Books,
but by Tranflations he could be no Judge
of; and who, as fome of his Friends fay,
was ready to believe every Thing, true or
falfe, that could be told him concerning
China and the Chinefe. Now the Arabian
Authors of thefe two Accounts had been
in the Country it felf, had probably fome
Knowledge of the Tongue, and confe-
quently were better able to judge of the
Chinefe Learning than Vojfius with his ex-
ceflive and ill founded PrepoflefTion. But
let us fee whether thefe Arabs knew
enough of what Men call Learning, to
qualify them to pronounce the Chinefe
Strangers thereto.

Our firft Voyage was made in the CC 4t the
XXXVIII Year of the Hejra, which cor- *"*« «**
refponds with the Year of ChriftDCCClA ^Ph;.

mmm m lofofhy was

well culti-
* Si quis omnium qui funt vel olim fuere gentium, v#t € d a-
pv&Iara jimul conferat inventa, quantumvis ea mult a &* r,1on g *%*'
memoratu digna cenfeantur, tanta tamen &> talia non Arabs.
ermit, quin longe iwueniantur plura & meliora qu& afJis
reperta fuere Seribus,^mf Lufitani per^mztfz Sinas appeU
Uvevvnt. Ifa, Vofi. de Magnit. Sin. Urb cap. 14.

and



S02 A Diflertation en the

and DCCCLII . Before that time of Day
the Arabs had entered upon the Study of
Philofophy, Aftronomy, Geometry, Phyfic,
and Natural Hiftory by the help of the Greek
Books tranflated into Arabic in the Reign of
the Kalif Ahnamun^ the Seventh of the
AbbaJftdS) who dyed in the Year of the
Elmacp. Hejra CCXYlll, of Chrifi DCCCXXXIII,
139. Ebn having reigned Twenty Years and fome
&b<fa- Months ? an( * t ^ iere were f° me °^ Tran-
ricb t &c. Nations before his Time. The Sciences
contained in thefe Books are thofe our
Arabs mean, and when they affert them
unknown to the Chinefe^ they advance no
more than fucceeding Ag;es have confirm-
ed, as it were no difficult. Matter to prove.
*fhe Chi- Philofophy, as defined by the greater!
nefe Phi- Names of Antiquity, Is the Study and
lofcphy Knowledge of Things Divine and Human^
their Caufes and Effects. We were for-
merly told Wonders of the Chincfe Phi-
lofophy, contained in the Works of Con~
fucius and Mencius^ but the Tranflations
we have of them, put it into our Power to
judge for ourfelves.
<fhh Me- ^ ° begin with their Metaphyiics, What
ttybyjlcs. can a People know of this kind, who have
no Idea of the Sovereign Beings or any
Name for him in their Tongue. Before
the Difputes which fo long perplexed the
Court of Rome^nothing was more univerfal-
ly granted ; Father Martini himfelf faying,
/} is a wonderful Thing the Chinefe jhould
never talk of the Prime and Supreme Au-
thor of all things * 7 for in their %ongue y rich

as



CHINESE Learning. 20$

#s it is y there is no Name for God. Indeed
they often ufe the Word Xangti to denote the
great Ruhr of Heaven and Earth. * Again,
we have a aemonitradve Proof of this in
the Chincfe and Syriac Infcription difcove-
red in the Year MDCXXV, and printed
in the China Illuftrata : For the Syrians,
who ere£ted it as a lafting Monument of
their Million, having been then one hun-
dred and forty-fix Years in the Country,
could not be ignorant of the Tongue, and
could they have found any Word in
Chinefe to exprefs the Sovereign Entity,
they would certainly have ufed it ra-
ther than their own Aloho. They did then
as the Spaniards have fince done in Ameri-
ca, who were obliged to ufe the Word Dios
when they inftru&ed the Indians, who had
no Idea of the Supreme Being, or Name to
call him by. And all that has been Jince
produced in the Progrefs of this long
Conteft, to make us believe there are fome ■
Words in the Chinefe Books that may iigni-
fy God, has been lb folidly confuted, that
it is not worth our Notice. All the ngu-*
rative Expreifions borrowed from the Hea-
vens and the Sun, which fome would have
to be pregnant of a Myfterious Senfe,
and applicable to God, proves nothing in



* Be fummo ac pvimo rerum authore mirum apuei
prpnes fikntium J^jftype-> in tarn cop*ofa lingua, ne wo-
men quidem Deus habet. $<epe tamen ntuntur voce
Xangti, qua fummum C<?M 'derraque gubernatorem in-
4igii<ipt. Martin, Kift. Sin, 1. 1 .

favor



<B04 A DifTertation on the

favor of the Chinefe ; for the fame are com-
mon to the Americans, even to the moft
barbarous Iroquois, who certainly had no
Notion of God. We might hearken to a
well meaning MifTionary, who, having
never ftudied the Ancients, fhould be
caught by fuch Ambiguities, and fancy
the Ancients had never once thought of
any Thing of the kind ; but it is hard to
conceive how a Man of fuch vail Reading
as VoJJms, fhould take it into his Head
That the Pythagoricians, the Platonicians,
Arijiotle, and almoft all the other Greek
Philofophers , the Epicureans excepted ,
have not fpoke of God more intelligibly
and conformably to Truth than Confucius
and all the Chinefe together.
What they As for the Origin of the World, Father
thinkofthe M ar f m i te \\ s us tn ey had various Opini-
*r£7r°L ons about it, all abfurd, falfe, and com-
mon toother Nations* lome believing it
Eternal, others thinking it the fortuitous
Work of Chance. Now can it be juftly
faid That the ancient Greeks and Romans,
informed only by the glimmering Light of
Reafon, did not treat more fagely upon
this Subject? But it is obfervable that
Vofjius does not exclude the fac red Writers,
not Mofes himfell^ who in a few Words
has taught us more Truths concerning the
Origin of the World than all the Philofo-
phers that ever wrote. We may judge what
a Sort of Philofophy that muft be, which
is deftitute of all Iaea of a Supreme Be-
ing, and which knows no more of the

Creation



CHINESE Learning. ?~£

Creation of the World than is borrowed
from the wild Extravagancies of Poets,
and borders upon the Atomic Syftem of
Democritus and Epicurus.

The two Principles which Father Mar- cfhetr tv*
tint calls Tn and Tang, the one, as he con- Principles.
tinues, Hidden and ImperfcoJ, the other, **ift Sl "
Manifeft and PerfecJ, are the fame the Ma- mc ' p ' I4<(
nichees admitted, the one Good the other
Evil-, for this Doftrin has of old Time
prevailed in the Indies, and over the Eaft,
whether it fprung immediately from Manes
himfelf, or whether it is of Indian Growth,
and tranfplanted into China as fome Perftan
Hiftorians relate.

The Story of the Egg, whence Pucncu, Talk of
their firft Man, and all Things elfe were the Egg.
formed, was, as fome take it, nothing un-
known to the old Greeks and Egyptians ; s P i xe ] ^
but if it was originally of Chinefe Extra- & e Liter*-
£tion, it would not be much for the Ho- ria Sina-
nour of their Philofophers : For the very rum.§io.
fame Thought came into the Head of
the Iroquois, who, as fome Perfons of great
Sincerity report, believed That in former
Times an Egg fell down from Heaven,
near the Huron Lake,that falling it broke to
Pieces, and that of the White were produced
Men, and of the Yolk Caftors. Their
other Notions about the Birth of the
World, according to feveral Authors, which
the Moderns have endeavoured to embel-
lilh by allegorical Explications, are by
no Means original, being known to the
Greeks and Egyptians : Buc nor the one nor

the



*o<5 A Bifiertation on th&

the other of thefe Nations had them front
the Chinefe, with whom they never had
any Intercourfe ; for not one of Philofo-*
phers who travelled to the remoter! Parts
of the Earth to' feek Inftru&ion, ever went
to China ; whereas many of them went to
Egypt r . to Chaldea, to Perfta, and to the:
Indies, to confult the Sages of thofe Parts.
It is very likely then that moft of thefe
Opinions which are. afcribed to the old
Chinefe Philofophers, came to them from the
Indies and Perfta, as they had' Commerce
with thofe Countries ; and that the fuper-
ftitious Worfhip, fo general in China, at
leaf! among the Bonzes and common Peo-
ple, they had from the Indies, as even thofe
confefs who fpeak of them in the moft ad-*
vantageous Strain.
tfhCirCom- Their Table of the Combination of
htnkttin Lines, to the Number of Sixty-four, is a
TabWL pretty ufelefs Obfcurity, whence you may
deduce jurl what Senfe you pleafe* but
behdes that it teaches nothing, it were
eafy to perceive it is a confufed Copy of
fome Fragments of the Timaus, and other
Writings of the Pythagoricians : This is
what Father Martini frankly conierIes v
when he fpeaks oi the Book they call
Yexing, a * which is, fays he, wholly taken

— — III I I F I I I ) fY I <

* Habent Sins lihrum Yexing di&um qui fetus in iU
lis figuris explicandis ejl y magni apud eos pretii oh res ar-
cana*, quas in illis. latere jibi perfuadent. Mthi quadam
Philofophia Myftica videtur eJfe y Pythagoric£q; perjimilis;
etfi multis fecut/s prior ; qu'rppe qu&ititium babu'it a Fo-
hio. Martin. Hift. in p. 16.

« up



CHINESE Learning. *oj

Cir up in explaining thefe Figures. They
u value it at a high Rate imagining it re-
a plete of many wonderiul Secrets : But
a to me it feems, continues he, a fort of
" Myfiic Philofophy fomewhat like that of
iC the Pythagorks, tho* many Ages the
"■ more ancient of the two, it being as
" old as Fohi.

This Antiquity being vouched by the
Chimfe only, is not much to be reived on ;
but tho' it were as far backward, as thefe
Moderns would have it, we mull grant
it can add no Sanction to fo frivo-
lous a Syitem as this. But when we
are afterwards told That the Chimfe : Phi-
lofophers pretend thence to derive not
only the Principles of natural Philofo-
phy, but the Rules. alfo of Morality;
it is almoit impoffible to think thofe !
who give out fuch Dreams, are in earnefl
with us. And what we elfewhere learn
concerning the feveral Notions of the
Chinefe in the Philofophic way, is not a
whit better, nor can we entertain any very
great or very favorable Opinion of a Peo-
ple who talk of five fuch Elements as
Metal, Wood, Water, Earth, and Fire.

It is Plain that the very ben:- of the Chi"
nefe Metaphyfics and Phyfics is by no
Means comparable to what was taught
by the ancient Philofophers, both Greek
and Barbarian : That even their Fables
cannot be faid to be all their own, they be-
ing to be fonnd in other Hands and that

this



a&8 A Diflertatton on the

this wonderful way of Teaching they had
from the Indians and Per/tans.

This is felf-evident from their Do&rin
Metemp- of a Metempfychofis which was very uni-

f Iilfm verfal > as k ml is with the Chim f e > Th . e y

Trkraut ^ lave n0 rat i° na l Id ea of the Immortality
Spkel. of the Soul, and a great Part of their
funeral Ceremonies evince they have no
Syftem of Tenets upon fo important an
Article, the very Balis of all Religion.
The Guardian Angels they revere fo
Genu. fuperftitiouily, are no other than Ge-
nii, Good and Evil, concerning which
there are numberlefs Stories in the Per-
fian and Arabian Writings. Fath. Mar-
tini fays the Chinefe call them Tchin, the
very Name the Arabs give them; the
Genii of the Latins, and the Damons or
Spirits of feveral Claries or Orders, of
whom Jamblicbus Porphyry, Phtinus, Eu-
napius and others have written fuch and
fo many childiih Things, as are a Scandal,
to Philofophy, and quite foreign to true
Religion.

In ihort thefe great Chinefe Philofophers
<fhe Chi- were f ucn Novices in Philofophy that they
nefeafton- admired the Abridgments of the Schools,
ijhtdat and among the reft That of the Profeffors
€ n rS Ji°}?~ of Coimbra which the Miffionaries tran-
mms ' S ~ *k te< i f° r them ; but they were no ordi-
nary Men that admired thefe Works,
they were Literati, who, verfed in the
Books of Mencius and Confucius, ac-
knowledged their Philofophy very imper-
fect



CHINESE Learning. io%

fe& in comparifon of that. What muft
they then have laid if they had been in-
formed of the great Truths to be found
in the Writings of the old Pythagoricians,
of Plato, and even of Anftotte, more
happily and Ufefully exprefs than the
fmail Number the Chinefe have, which
are not to be underilood but by Para-
ph rafes as obfcure as the Text it felf, and
which it is oftentimes difficult to re-
concile together. Father Intorcetta, Mar-
tini, Rougemont, Couplet, and others have
given us Tranllations of fome of Confnci-
tis's Tracts, and their Cladics, in which
you muft eternally help the Letter, and
great Differences there are between thefe
Fathers and what is cited by Navarette and
other MifJionaries.

Vojfius does not much inilft on their q%e ChU
Philofophic Difcoveries, but for Phy- nefe Phi*
fie he cries them up to the Skies, and f cianU
particularly for their Obfervations on the
Pulfe : he would have it that Galen, who
treated the Subject very amply, was quite
Ihort of them : " The Chinefe, fays he,
" not only feel the Pulfe in one' Part,
a but in feveral, and that, for a confider-
u able Time } which done, they are fo
a fure of the Difeafe that they tell all
u the precedent Symptoms to a nicety."
Fath. Gnteber was a Witnefs to this,
and told as much to the Sieurs Lorenzo,
Magalotti and Carlo Dati ; but added, that
the Medicines prefcribed to him thereup-
on, were fo improper for his Difeafe that he
o foon '



% iq A Differtation m the

foon loft all efteem for the Chinefe Pra*
&ice. This Treatife on the Manner of
Feeling the Pulfe is turned into Latin ;
and Vojjius Reading it, broke out into his
Praifes of this his favorite People : But
very able Phyficians have conlidered this
Work and made no great Account of it,
nor thought the Obfervations of any great
Ufe. But were they as ufeful as is fup-
pofed, it mult be granted That a Know-
ledge of the Pulfe is but a middling Part
of Medicine ; and hitherto the Chinefe have
afforded us nothing to make us fancy
they are as well acquainted with the
Principles of this Art as Hippocrates , or
that they have better explained them than
Galen, and the other Greek and Arabian
Phyficians.
*fbe Chi- They fay the Chinefe perform wonderful
nefepre- Cures witn Simples ; and fo they may,
***** *j tho' GrueUr and the reft do not fay much
%$imtks m behalf of their^ way of treating the
' Sick. But in this they do no more
than the moft barbarous Savages of Ame-
rica y who perform aftonifhing Cures as well
in the Cafe of Wounds as of Difeafes.
Nor do we underftand That the Chinefe
have been guilty of any great Improve-
ments in Botany, and ftill lefs in Chy-
miftry ; but tho* their Books wetfe richer
this way than we imagin, we mould, be-
fore we reafon as Vojjtus does, inquire
if thefe Books are old, or whether they
may not have been touched up by the

Mif-



CHINESE Learning. %i\

Miflionaries as well as their Aftronomical
Pieces, which is now time to fpeak o£

It is upon this Subject that our Mo-
derns have expatiated the moft, pretend-
ing That the Chinefe Aftronomical Tables,
their Cycle of fixty Years, and the Ce-
leftial Obfervations in their Hiftory, are
a Handing Proof that they have furpafled
all other Nations in Aftronomy. This
Notion gained confiderable Ground, when
Fath. Couplet brought Home thefe A-
ftronomical Tables, which had never be-
fore been feen in Europe.

They were firft examined by CaJJini and
Picard,who finding them to agree to a Mi-
nute, with the Tables of Tycho Brahe y began
to miftruft them a little ; and fpeaking of
the Thing to Fath. Couplet, who was a
very lincere Man, he ingenuouily told
them That the Tychonic Tables being by
all Aftronomers allowed to be the moft
exaS, his Brethren had reformed the
Chinefe Tables by them ; which I have
fince heard him fay my felf.

In the Year MDCLXXXVII the fame rtehChe^
Father printed his Abridgment of the ^£ %
Chinefe Chronology, together with the Cy- r^tlWms>
cles and fome Aftronomical Obfervations,
particularly that of the Conjunction of
the five Planets in the Conftellation the
Chinefe call Xe : But CaJJini undertaking
to Calculate this Phenomenon, difcover-
ed an Error in it of five hundred Years j
and the like in the Obfervation of a Win-
o 2 ter



2ia [* , A Diffevtation on the

ter Solftice, made, according to Martini^
MMCCCXLII Years before the the Birth
of Chrift. This is to be feen at the end
of De la Loubieres Account of Siam y prin-
ted in MDCXCI, where alfo you have
Cajfiriis Opinion of the Chinefe Tables.
" This Agreement between the Chinefe
" and iychonic Tables, aim oft' to a Mi-
a nute, makes us believe they were cal-
c< culated by the Jefaits who have for
" a Century paft refbrted to China, and
u not by the Chinefe. For if they were
4C not indebted to the Tychonic Tables,
a how is it they fo exactly tally with
a each other ? Our Aftronomers of this
" prefent Age, cannot well agree to a
" Minute in the Places of the fixed Stars,
" and we all know that between Tycho's
" Catalogue and the Landgrave of Hejfes,
a undertaken at the fame Time by ex-
" cellent Aftronomers, there is a difference
" of feveral Minutes. It is not likely
ic therefore That the Chinefe Obfervations
" fhould almoft always agree with thofe
a of Tycho to the \ fame Minute. The
Judgment of this great Man may teach
us what to think of thefe Aftronomical
Tables which have tempted fome People
to prefer the Chinefe to all the Ancients
and Moderns.
<fhe Igm- To this Decifion of one of the greateft
rame of the Aftronomers of this Age we may add a
Chinefe ver y na tural way of arguing which every
^hJlrCa- k oc ty mav under ftand : Firft, The Manda-
hfdar. rin Prefidents of the Tribunal of Ma-

the-



CHINESE Learning. ivi

thematics, whole Bufinefs it was to fix their
Calendar, fucceeded fo ill therein, that not-
withftanding all their Intereft and Intrigues,
they were obliged to transfer the Task
to the Miffionaries, who were odious to
them, both as Strangers and Preachers of
a new Religion. The Chinefe were firft
fet right by Fath. Matth. Ric'ci ; but a few
Years alter wards they were never the wi-
fer ; fo that Fath. Adam Schall was again
obliged to reform their Calculations, and
in fpite of them became Prefident of the
Mathematic Tribunal, and Mandarin of
the firft Order, as were afterwards the
Fathers Verbieft and Grimaldi, It is far*
ther to; be obferved That thefe Miffiona-
ries and their Succeilbrs, were not pro-
feft Mathematicians, or known for fuch in
Europe ; and yet they were able to dif-
cern and confound the Ignorance of thefe
Chinefe Artronomers on whom it was fo
incumbent to confult the Honour of their
Nation, and keep themfelves in Authority.
The moft rational of them were thofe,
who, confeffing their Ignorance, ftudi-
ed Euclid's- Elements, Clavius's Sphere
and fome other Traces, under the Di-
rection of the Miffionaries; and thefe
they read with aftonifhment, which had
never been the Cafe of thofe who had
but the leaft fmattering of the Mathema-
tics.

We are now to difcufs the Grand Point 5 ^ -^-
and that is the Antiquity of the Chinefe ^Jg*
Aftronomy, this is the moft boafted by jp^my

O 5 thole examined.



jjjjj A Differtation on the

thofe who undertake to raife the Chinefe
above all the Nations that are or have
been : Now for the famous Cycle of iixty
Years, in which Martini and Couplet have
ranged the principal Fa&s of the Chi-*
nefe Hiftory, and the Succeflion of their
Emperors. Father Martini led the way,
and Couplet trod in his Footfteps. We
are at a certainty about this Cycle from
a Traft ordered by Ulug Beig, a Tartar
Prince^ deeply verfed in Aftronomy, who
imployed very able Mathematicians to
compile the Aftronomic Tables we have in
Epch Ce- feveral Libraries. John Greaves, a learn*
Uhi. Jo- ed Englijhman, who was both a great
han.Gra- Matter of the Oriental Tongues and an
yn > excellent Mathematician, did in the Year

MDCL print a Treatife, of this fame
Prince's, Of the various Epochs and their
Computations. Therein the Chinefe Epoch
is called the Cataian or Igurian, which e-
qually comprehends the Chinefe y and the;
Tartars all over the vaft Continent of the
Upper AJia ; and Qolius in Conjunction
with Martini have fhewn That the Cathayan
or Catuian Names therein, are Chinefe. This
fame fexagenary Cycle is, by our late
\ Informations, ufed in Siani and the adja-
\cent Countries, who may have borrowed
'it from China,
tfhe Qho- The Greeks had feveral Periods of
w>iogy ac- Years ; but as they doe not feem to have
wording to b een known to the Arabs, the Per/tans,
fair* or t ^ le ^ artars -> w ^o would have commu-
nicated them to the Chimfe> it were a

pre*



CHINESE Learning. %ij

preemption to deny them the Honour
of having invented the Period before
us ; but we have two very weighty Re-
marks to make upon this Head.

The Firft is That after the Rate Mar-
tint and Couplet have marfhalled the Chi-
nefe Chronology by thefe Cycles of iixty
Years, either the Chinefe or they murl
have been egregioufly out, there being,
as has already been obferved, two Pa-
rachronifms of above five hundred Years
apiece difcovered therein ; which makes
us think it poffible there may be more of
them, if fome skilful Man would but
give himfelf the trouble of examining in-
to all the Eclipfes and Planetary Con-
junctions they give us. But this done 9
there would be ftill another Obffcacle in
our way : for after the ingenuous Con-
feffion or thofe who give us thefe
Tables, That they rectified them by
thofe of Tycho, we fhould be at a lofs to
know whether they are the Obfervations
of the Chinefe, or of that great Aftro*
nomer.

The Second Remark is by no Means of M* '*»»«*
lefs Moment : They exhibit this Series of^J^\
Cycles as a plain Evidence of the Accura- thefe* cl--,
cy of the Chinefe Science, and a Demon- chs.
fixation of the Truth of their Hiftory.
But for this to be true, we lhould have
iome certain Epoch to count from, fuch
as that of Alexander, of Ifdejerd, of JD/o-
ckjian, of the Hejra, and di Jelahddin Ma*
o q he



he Shah; whereas they begin this Suc-
ceffion of Cycles from the Year MMDC
XCVII before Chrift. Now according to
iff the Hebrew Copies and the Vulgate, there
v are but JVLMCCCXXIX Years between the
Flood and the Birth of Chrifi; and to
fupply this Defect it is, that thofe who
ailert the Antiquity of the Chinefe Hiftory,
recur to the Greek of the SeptuaginU They
agree indeed that what is recorded in the
Chinefe Annals above Fohi r is fabulous, and
no Soul doubts of it • fo they dare not af-
cribe this Sexagenary Cycle to him, but
bring it down to the Reign of Hoamti y
who flouriihed the abovefaid Number of
Years before Chrift. But we ihall not
readily conceive how fo very complex
a Cycle as this mould have been fo foon
difcovered, or brought to Perfection as
Couplet * advances ; whereas Martini \ tells
vis that Emperor himfelf invented it. This
Difagreement between two Authors who
had one and the fame Drift, who wrought
with the fame Materials, and in Points of
fuch Importance, makes us very much mi-
itruft the Hiftory they fo applaud. Turn
this Fact which way you will, you mutt
eternally be at a Stand.
It is jfrk The firjt and main Difficulty is how to
culture- reconcile it with Scripture, even with the

concile the . '

Chinefe • ' ~ ■■ — ■ ■ ' .' ■ " — fStm — - J ■ ' '

Chronolon-y '■ . rrr ^ _ . ■ ' . ~ .

>.t .7 < * Ufus opera Tanao Cyclum Sexagenarzum ferjiat.

Heb f Et ah hoc denrnm Imperatore tametfi hint ilium ante-

ffext cejferunty Sin a Cyclum fuum Sexaginta annis defcr'rptum

ipchowt, qutyfe ah eo rffo invenfum. Martin. Hiit. p. 25.

Septuagint



CHINESE Learning. 2 j?

Septttagint itfelf ; and this not only with
Regard to Chronological Suppurations,
but in Things of greater Confequence } for
if we admit the Chinefe Hiftory, we niuft ,
reject the Univerfality of the Deluge, not \
to fay that it attributes many Inventions ;
to the Chinefe Emperors, which Scripture
afcribes to others. This has been an Ob-
fervation made by late Authors, and parti-
cularly by the ProtefrantSywho adhere to the
Hebrew Text, and therein agree with the
Catholics, who acknowledge the Authority
of no other than the Vulgate. Both the
one and the other are moil afluredly more
ancient than the Chinefe Hiftory as it fbands
with us ; feeing they have none but printed
Copies extant* and as old as the Chinefe
may boait their Invention of Printing, no
Paper could laft eleven or twelve Hundred
Years. They have no Books fo old, and
w r hen they have found an old Infcription
they have not underftood it, as is inrtanced
by Father Rougemont.

We ihall always be at a Lofs then to ^ e fi c y~
comprehend how the Chinefe fhould have ZToidl
regulated this intricate Cycle two Thoufand petendel
fix Hundred and Ninety-feven Years be-
fore Chrift j and much lefs how they
Ihould have contrived to teach it to others
at a Time when they were very imperfecl
in Arithmetic, invented, as fays Martini, Hifi. Sin.
under the fame Hoamti, by Means of a p. at
Contrivance he reprefents. But after all,
as exact and circumftantial as this Cycle
appears to be^ it was fo defective, that

five



j£i8 A Diflertation on th$

five Hundred Years after Hoamti, the Chi**
nefe Aftronomers could not foretel an E-
clipfe which hapned under the Emperor
Choukangy who for that Reafon put them
to Death. It is to our Purpofe, that their
Hiftories differ about the Time of this E-
clipfe 5 a plain Indication of the Ineffici-
ency of their Calculations. Many Exam-
ples of the fame kind might be produced,
and the like have been very frequent in
latter Times ; for what reflected fo much
Refpecl on the Miffionary Jefuits, was
their Accuracy in thefe Predictions, while
the Cbinefe themfelves were out.
*fht poht ^^ e fe con d Remark we have to make
cf qhne PP° n this Cycle is,That thofe who brought
they are d^ : jit to Europe and made it the Standard of
dmcedfrom^xhQ Cbinefe Chronology, date it from the
r^/pteign of Hoamti MMDCXCVII Years.
i^«W v before Cbrifi^ or twenty-eight Years after-
formerly^* wards, that is, MMDCLXX before Chtift y
$M ™ when a great Mathematician called &anao %
rectified iu Now befides the Objections
that have already been made to this early
Epoch, fo irreconcileable with Scripture,
we. have another ; for Father Martini was
the firfl that ever deduced thefe Sexa-
genary Periods from that Point of Time,
| which the Cbinefe themfelves difown, and
is merely of European Invention. For
Scalig. & our firfl: Travellers that went to Cbina
Emend a^ under flood the Cbinefe to reckon after

tZm €m ~ the Rate of ei S ht Hundred and eigh-

pr t ?a. ^ Thoufand fixty and three Years ,

y^f from the Beginning of the World down



CHINESE Learning. $\$

to the Year of our Mr* MDXCIV, and
foine of them made very great Additions
to this enormous Number. And yet this is
not to compare with what we read in Ulug
Eeig,who has treated more exactly of thefe
Cbinefe Cycles, than any Body elfe whatfo-
ever : He tells us that in the Year of the
Hejra DCCCXLVII, of Gbrift MCCCC^&Cfc'
XLIV, the Catalans or Cbinefe computed le ^
Eighty-eight Millions, fix Hundred thirty
nine Thoufand, eight Hundred and fixty
Years from the Beginning of the World ;
which infinitely exceeds the immenfe Cal-
culations of the old Cbaldees and Egyptians^ ■
fo juftly rejected as fabulous by Cicero and
other Authors, and which none have afler-
ted but Libertins and the Author of the
Preadamitic Syjtem.

Thofe who have favored us with Com- *fhm <7V*-
pendiums of the Cbinefe Hiftory, confefs hles as the y
it fabulous till the Reign of Hoamti : but »™fi«»*
tell us that alter his Days we are to rai i„ an
deem it genuin, which they attempt to European
prove by a Series of thefe Cycles chiefly, Work than
according to which they compute the Years *Chinefe,
of the lubfequent Emperors down to our
own Times * but they cannot deny this
Contrivance to be their own, not Cbi-
nefe. Its Outfet is fictitious, and no more to
be relyed on than what we read, in Greek f h n f yH
and Latin Authors, of the Agronomical fali t 7 @
Obfervations the Babylonians boafted to
have made for one Hundred and feventy f lm ? • *?
Thoufand Years. Now many of their c ^? 6 \
Eclipfes, as Ptohmey has them from Callif- ' '}

thenes



£2q A Difiertation on the

thcnes who informed himfelf on the Spot,
are right; but the chief of thofe in the
Chinefe Tables, tho' reformed by lycho^ are
falfe. This is the Opinion of Mr. Co/fini,
the greater! Aftronomer of our Time,whofe
Words it may not be amifs to produce:
Voyage Je % The Chinefe Year, fays he y has often
Siam.T.2. « wanted Reformation to make it fet out
" from the fame Term or Point, with Re-
a fpeel: to which our Modern Accounts
a vary about ten Degrees ; Father Mar-
a tint fixing it in the fifteenth Degree of
a Aquarius, and Father Couplet in the fifth
i( of the fame Sign, as if it had retrogra-
a ded ten Degrees fince Martini wrote.
cc It is certain i that a great many of the
a Eclipfes and other Conjunctions the
" Chinefe give as obferved, cannot have.
iC hapned at the Times they fay, as their
iC Calendar Hands at prefent ; this we have
a proved by the Calculation of a great
* c many of them, and may be difcovered
" by a bare Infpeftion into the Intervals
" between them. For many of thefe In-.
a tervals are too long or too ihort to be,
a compleated by Eclipfes, which never-
a happen but when the Sun is near one of
u the Nodes of the Moon, whither he,
iC could not have revolved at the Times
u exprefled, if the Chinefe Year had been
u the fame formerly as at this Day'\ But
fflfiLiti. Father Martini lays fo great, a Strefs upon
P- 33 < this firft Obfervation that he breaks out in-
to a kind of Oath, Santle affevero. That
he found it in the Chinefe Books fuch as he.

gives



CHINESE Learning. 221

gives it ; and fo fully is he perfuaded of
the Thing, That he asks, What the
Europeans have to ,fay to it? Mr. Caffini
has on the behalf ot all Europe replyed,
That this firlt Obfervation is falfe, and fo
all the Confequences thence deduced mull
fall to the Ground.

After this we may judge if Vojjias could ACovfe
iuftlv include the Altronomy of this Peo- ^ ence
ple when he prelumed to lay 01 them, ^ uc n,jg m
That they alone had invented moreThings •
ufeful in Life, in the Arts, and the Sci-
ences than all the Nations of the World
put together. For we can know their Ob-
servations but by the Tables we have; and
fince thofe who turned them into Latin re-
formed them by Tycho \ iince the Con-
junctions and Eclipfes they contain prove
falfe ; and iince by the Help of tliefe Ta-
bles, rectified as they are, they have, for a
Hundred and fifty Years pari, never been
able to fettle a Calendar, or.ioretelan E-
clipfe; we mull pronounce them far infe-
rior not only to the great Aftronomers
that have graced our Days, but to the
very meaneft, fuch as were moll of thofe
who put them into fome certain Method.

And far lefs are they to be compared ^ he Chi-
with or preferred to the Greeks, whofe A- ne ^ e ^^
llronomical Obfervations are juft and right; ^wa^ws
wherein no fuch Thing as an Anachronifm wttb the
of five Hundred Years is to be picked Greek**-
out, or any imaginary Eclipfes, thofe in Ara kiaa
Ptolomy having been proved by the indu-
ftry of our own Aftronomers. Nor can the

Ghinefb



zit A Diflertation on the

Almag. Chinefe be even compared with the Arabs
*- 4- or the Perjians, who having imbibed the

found Principles of the Mathematics, in the
Greek Writings, improved them fo well,
that when our Authors went to China they
had able Geometricians and Aftronomers,
whofe Tables and Obfervations ferved as
a Rule to all Europe for many Ages toge-
ther. For tho* there have at all Times
Fetav. de been Men of fome Skill in Aftronomy, as

tffrrt"mm Weie m ° ft ° f th ° fe Wh ° laid d ° Wn Rul ? S

enqorum ^ ^ e Church Calendar in the Weft, in
Afta, and in Egypt ; that was the fole Ob-
ject of their Contemplations, they fought
no further, nor had we any Agronomical
Tables in Europe, before thofe which AU
fonfoy King of Caftile and Leon, ordered to
be drawn up in the Year MCCLXX : To
do which he employed fome learned Jews,
as is obferved by the Hiftorians who fpeak
of this Event : But they have not obferved
to us That thefe Jews were beholden to
Tables which had a long Time before
been prepared by Arabian Mathematicians,
the moft ancient of which were calculated
at the Command of the Kalif Ahnamun,
the feventh of the Abbaffids, who got
moft of the Greek Books translated into
Arabic.
<fhe Ara- This general Tranflation is on all Hands
bian and applauded, and from that very Time the
5/?™"- P er J* ans an d the Arabs began to have very
mrsT good Mathematicians. By thei r diligent Ob-
fervations they rectified the Tables of AJ-
mamun, in whofe Davs three famous Aftro-



nomers,



CHINESE Learning. |4j

nbmers, called the Children of Mufa, made Ebn Ka^
that famous Obfervation on the Meafure of likan -
Earth, which they firft did in the Plains
of Sinjar, in Scripture Shinar, and which
they afterwards repeated at Kufah. A
little while after this, they had very learn-
ed Aftronomers, among the reft Abuabdallah
Miihamed, the Son of Jaber, who calcu-
lated Aftronomical Tables very exactly, as
did many others down to Jelaloddin Make
Shah, the third Soltan of the Seljukid Grav. £*-
Race, who had new Obfervations made to P c bCM.
regulate the Epoch called Makkean or Jela- fJw^db
lean. The Jews of Spain, who generally Geograpb"
underftood Arabic, it being common in the Ulug.Be-
Country, while the Moors- were Matters of %• %<*e.
Corduba, Granada, and many other confi- ^M' f
derable Cities- had tranflated the Aftrono- p ix [ e ~
mical Books and Tables of the Arabian
Mathematicians into Hebrew, as well as
moft of thofe that treated of the Sci-
ences in general, which gained thern
great Credit and Reputation, After this
there was a great Number of very learned
Aftronomers among the Mohammedans, and
Ulug Beig, a Tartar Prince, having caufed
very nice Obfervations to be made at Sar-
tnarkand, ordered the Tables called Ilaka-
nian to be formed, which have been admi-
red even by the Aftronomers of our Age.
They did not, like the Chinefe, miftake in
their Calculations, they never obtruded
falfe Eclipfes, they never were at lofs to
fix the Beginning of their Years, tho', as
they reckoned by Lunar. Months, it is

more



324 A Diflertation on the

more difficult to compute them than the
Cbinefe Cycles ; and by what Uhtg Beig fays
j of the Matter, he feems to have known
the Myftery of thefe fame Cycles better
than the Mathematic Mandarins themfelves.
We muft not wonder then that Mohamme^
dan Travellers from Bagdad, the Abode
of the Kalifs, who were fenfible how well
thefe Sciences were cultivated in their own
Country, ihould, upon obferving nothing
like it in Cbtna, pronounce the Cbinefe igno-
rant of the fame.

ftbe Arabs We mi & ht here exhibit a lon S. V 1 ^
were great °f Arabian and Per/tan Mathematicians
Jdathema- from Almamun down to later Times • and
titians* their Works being extant and in our
Hands, we find them to have been perfect-
ly acquainted with all the Branches of the
Mathematics. They had tranilated Euclid
from the Beginning, and their Comments
upon him convince us they underftood
him thoroughly ; fo they tranilated Arcbi*
medes, Tbeodojius, Apllonius Perg<zas y and
almoft all the other moffc difficult Authors;
and by their Demonstrations it appears,
and by their Schemes That they were fully
poffeifed of them, and that they made
very intricate Calculations to the greateft
truth. We muft coniefs then that in this
RefpecT; they were far beyond the Cbinefe
who have had fuch Wonders told of them,
Wonders not confirmed by a long Series of
Time, or by Perfons not to be miftrufted,
but by a Handful of prejudiced Europeans,
Tranilators, and Reformers, as they them-
felves



CHINESE Learning. 22$

felves confefs, of Books they could hot
underftand. If the Chinefe had been but
middling Geometricians, Euclid's Elements
had not been fo novel to them } if they
had been grounded in the Principles of A-
rithmetic, they had long ago thrown away
the Frame or Mechanical Contrivance
they ftill ufe; by whole Affiftance it is
hard to conceive how they fhould have
calculated their Cycles with as much Exact-
nefs as the Perfians did, who actually knew
them, or as Greaves has done it for us in
his Epochs Celebrires.

Now if we take in Hand the Arts that rt* Chi-
depend on the Mathematics, we mall at nefe«»<K>
the firft Glance perceive the Chinefe are not ^ith^he
only far inferior therein to the Greeks, and j rts t { at
the Moderns \ but alfo that they are quite depend on
ignorant in Optics, Proportions, Painting, theMath^
Sculpture, Architecture, and in general maUcs -
every Thing that tends to the Improve-
ment of the fine Arts. We cannot appre*
hend that any Body will compare the Chi-
nefe Buildings, not even their Triumphal
Arches, no nor the Porcelane Tower, with
the noble Remains in Greece and Italy. If
you will go ftill farther back, there is Shih
minar, which many take to be the old
Perjepolis ; The Ruins of this far exceed
any Thing to be feen in all China. But if
it is thought too much that we compare
the Chinefi Architects with the Greeks, the
Romans, and the ancient Perfians, compare
them with the Americans, m<i they will ftill
be inferior ; For what Authors of undoubt-

P ed



21,6 A DifTertation on the

ed Credit report of the Edifices ere&ed by
T , the Mexicans, and Incds of Peru, may con-

notV7o"/. v * nce us t ^ ie X * ar outcu d tne Chinefe in
Vol. IV- Contrivance, it being very extraordinary
they Ihould have completed fuch vait
Works as they did,without the Ufe of Iron.
As thefe never had lb great an Opinion of
themfelves as the Chinefe have had, and
were never Ihy of learning what they
knew not, they in a very lhort Time at-
tained to a Perfection in the Arts, as may
be read at large in Palafox* This we can-
not fay of the Chinefe, who in a Hundred
and fifty Years Time, have not learned to
make a Dial,or draw a Figure. But welhall
refume their Arts hereafter} we are now go-
ing to touch on one of the principal Parts
of their Philofophy, which is Morality.
tffceChi- . This is one of the Articles late Au-
nefe J/o- thors are prolix upon, particularly extol-
?ahty. Y[ n g the great moral Truths which fo Urine
in the Works of Confucius, the moffc famous
of all the Chinefe Philofophers, honoured
by the Literati as a Saint, and whom many
compare with, nay prefer to the greateit
Genius's of Antiquity* For a long Time
we knew nothing of this Treafure but by
loofe Sentences, in Martini and others, till
; ,njhe Year MDCLXXXIH, when Couplet
gave us a Tranilation of the Works of this
Philofopher, or rather a Paraphrafe upon
it, without which it had been imporlible to
make Senfe thereof When we attentively
confider thefe Works, we find it a difficult
Matter to give a more natural Account

of



CHINESE Learning. 227

of this Philofophy than Lorenzo Magdhtti^
and Carlo Ddti, Florentine, very ingenious
and learned Men did upon the Conference
they had about China vith the Jefuits
Gruehcr and Orville, who were juft returned
from thence, E una Jpecie di Filofophia mor~>
ale, alter at a pro con certi ingredient i di Thec~
logia Scolaftica. They contain Truths as
common to all Nations as to China } and
when explained more amply by Interpre-
ters and Commentators, they generally tend
to trifling Ceremonies, and frivolous Su«
perfHtions* This it were eafy to, demon-
ftrate, if we had leave to examin the chief
of them, even the moft marvellous; but as
this would require a Volume by itfelf, let
it fuffice that we attempt a few important
Obfervations upon this Chapter.

No Body can deny but that all the great Mrai
Truths in Confucius, are more happily ex- truths of
prefTed, and more plainly taught in the C °^ JC 7 1U$
Scripture: His Friends to .be lure would ^nuiMnk
never allow him to be beholden to the of them.
facred Books, or that he thence ex-
haufted his Lights, and indeed it feemshe
did not ; for had he, in the leaft, known
the Truths revealed to the Patriarchs and
People of God, he had never contamina-
ted thofe afcribed him, by fuch great Ab-
furdities. And yet it is not impoffible but
fome feeble Rays may have reached China,
thro* other Nations } for the Antiquity of
the Sacred Writings, is as certain as that
of the Ghinefe is doubtful : But up©n this
Head we have wherewithal to fuggeft,
p z That



%i$ A Diflertation en the

That moffc of thefe Truths fo afcribed to
the Chinefe and to Confucius, are not of
their own Growth, and that they had
them from abroad.
Mofi of There is hardly any Truth in Morals

thefe J but is to be found in the old Gnomics, in
<f ruths an the Golden Verfes of Pythagoras, in the
w the old Mayings of the Seven Wife-Men, and in the
fcattered Fragments of the Pythagorics.
Now it is certain That the Arabs tranflated
moil of thefe old Collections of Sentences,
and that the fame were afterwards rende-
red into Per/tan ; fo it may have been That
by this Means they made their Way into
China; and that the exceffive Vanity of
the Chinefe may have prompted them to
call that their own, they had only borrow-
ed. For it does not appear by any Author,
Ancient or Modern, That the Arabs or
Perfeans ever had any Thing from the
"Chinefe, not even Fables: In their fabu-
lous Pieces mixed with Morality, as Kalila-
ve Damna, and others fuch, the grave
Perfons introduced to pronounce Sentences
are Bramins. They have many Roman-
ces, in Profe and Yerfe, which relate Alex-
ander $ Travels to the Spring of Life, which,
according to them, is in China, or fome-
where in the circumjacent Provinces ; and
herein alfo they have Philofophers but they
are Bramins, not Chinefe. They have a
Book in a more ferious Strain, which they
had from the Greeks of the Middle Age,
and which they greatly efteem; it is a
kind of Dialogue between Alexander and

fome



CHINESE Learning* zip

fome Philofophers, each of whom delivers
a Sentence, but they are rtill Indians. In
fhort it is very poflible that what the Chi*
nefe have in common with all civilized
Nations, may have been derived to them
from the Arabs and Perjians^ the Thing
may have been, and that it was fo, may
appear by the Incoherence between thele
nrit and great Truths, fuppofed to he
theirs, and the Confequences they thence
deduce for the Conduct of Life. This
is what we mult confider at large.

" The Chinefe, fays Martini, have ftudyed p. I4 &
ic and ftill carefully ftudy to perfect them- In what
" felves in the Knowledge of Heaven, of *&*" M< *~
« Man, and of the Earth. Hence they are J^"*"..
<c very difrufe on the Nature of Spirits, ^
" Good and Evil, of the Principles ofna-
" tural Things, their Production their
" Corruption, the Motion of the Stars, ,
a the Variety of the Sealbns, and many o- 4
* ther Things." If by their Study of
Heaven we are to underftand Aftronomy, it
has been fufficiently fhewn They have fadly
mifpent their Time ; But this is not the
true Senfe of the Words ; nor by Heaven
do they point at the true God, they being
void of ail Idea concerning him, and de-
stitute of a Name to diltinguilh him. What
they teach of the Nature of Good and
Evil Spirits, is an inexhaurtible Source of
the molt Itupid Superltitions they obferve
at their Feafts, and in their Sacrifices to
Genii of the Mountains, Waters, Cities ;
as did formerly the ancient Heathens,
P 3 The



■



2 3 o A Differtation on the

The Writers who have given us Extracts
from their moft famous Authors, have beeif
very brief upon this Head,feemingly aware
That if it was explained we fcould therein
dii'cover fomething like the Do&rin of the
old Maaichees, or thole the Arabs call Tan-
wisy becaufe- they admitted two equal Prinr
cipies, the one Good the other Evil : But
in Head of this, ibme have thought them
! commendable for their Knowledge of, and
| Refpeft they pay to Guardian Angels.

u The Knowledge of Man, according to
a the fame Author, comprehends Morality,
# Piety towards God, towards our Parents,
P towards all Men, and towards ourfelves.
If we. believe Martini, the Chinefe by this
Piety, recommended in the Books of Con-
fucius ^ underrland " The Love of God, of
4 * our Relations, of our felves, and of all
f c Men." But how ihould the Chinefe have
prefcribed Rules for the Love of God, and
not at this Day have any Notion of him,
no Naine to fignify this Supreme Entity
we are bound to adore and to love as foon
as we know him the Author of all Things,
and of all Good. He endeavors indeed
%o make the Words Thien and Xamti ex-
preflive of our Idea of God ; "but this
Point has been rnoft minutely difcufled in
pur I : yo, and gi^en againfl Martini: And
long Detore this Deciiion at Rome, Navar,
rette and other Millenaries maintained
That the Cbmcje did net accept thefeWords
jn Mar Urn's Seine, that they had no Idea
pf the true God, nor Name for him.

It



CHINESE Learning. Jf$t

It follows then That this Piety towards
God is not what Martini Would have it,
but what the Chinefe practice. Now what
they practice, are Sacrifices, in theirWay,
offered up to Heaven, to Genii, and their
ancient Heroes; to Confucius, Laoffu, and
to Foe or Fohi, one of their firft Emperors,
whofe Story is quite Fabulous, And
herein confifts the primary and principal
Part of the Chinefe Piety, void of any Ve-
ftige of true Worihip, the Sum and Sub-
fiance of Religion : But befides the un-
doubted Proofs we have of this, in the moft
lincere Travellers,we have fpeaking Proofs .
thereof in the Pictures we fee in theirBooks; p^in. &:
for above all the reft you have the Picture U ' '
of Fohi, and very far beneath you have
thofe of Confucius and Laojfu. Now Fohi y
according to the Chinefe, was one of their
old Emperors; according to the Indians^
one of their Gods. The two others were
their Saints, and great Philofophers; and
before thefe Figures do the Chinefe offer
Flowers, Perfumes, living Creatures, and ■
other Things ; in this confifts the Piety of
the learned Chinefe. If the Idolatry of the
People be more iimple and groveling, and
if the Idolatry of thefe Grandees be more
polite and refined ; they are never the lefs
equally Criminal,and equally Superftitious :
In fhort, this firft Chinefe Precept is contain-
ed in the very foremoft of the, Golden Verfes.

Piety towards our Parents, in paying Piety to-
them the Refpecl dfue to them from Chil- «"mfc Pa*
dren* as long as they live, is by no Means
P 4 »



rents.



%l% A DifTertation on the

a Truth of Chinefe Difcovery, it being or-
dained and obferved by the moil barba-
rous Nations. What is peculiar to them,
are the Funeral Honours they pay to their
Memory, which they have carried to the
highefl pitch of Superftition ; tho' the
Laws of God, and thofe of the wifeft
human Inftitution have fet Bounds thereto;
no idolatrous Nation has pufhed the
Thing fo far as the Chinefe. For the Cere-
monies called Inferiae, Libations, and o-
ther the like Superftitions were not of that
Import as the asking of fuch Favors from
their Dead, the Chinefe are guilty of. Thefe
Practices equally fuperftitious and frivo^
lous, have ever been condemned by wife
Legiilators and Philofophers ; and if they
are called an Act of Religion, fuch a Re-*
ligion cannot but be falfe, and all the
Opinions conducive thereto, murl: be
falfe likewife. They would be fomewhat
excufable in thofe who mould believe the
Immortality of the Soul, as did the old
Pagans ; but in the Chinefe who, as we are
told by the befk Authors, have Faith in no
fuch Thing, tho' they at the fame Time
unaccountably fancy the Soul of Confucius
and the Manes of their Anceftors repofe
themfelves upon Tablets they place upon
their Altars, they are intolerably fenfelefs.
The hcquois who believe there is a Coun-
try of Souls, where their Fore-fathers
hunt the. Souls of Caftors, are fcarce more
, abfurd in their Notions than thefe won«-
vle?|ttl Chinefe Sages. To be brief^ nothing

car*



\



CHINESE Learning. 23$

Can be more ridiculous than to fuppofe fuch
mean Train to be the Refult of Philofo-
phical Meditation, and, as it were, founded
upon the original Principles of Wifdom.

The ancient Greeks and Romans were q-^ e Qil-
unhappily involved in the grofTefl Super- nefe Cere-
ftitions : but they were far from being ap- monies hut
proved by the Philofophers, tho' few of %%f™
them ventured to attack them openly ; ^.^
they left the People to their Sacrifices, their
FeitivaJs, and all their religious Trum-
pery; the wifeft Legiflators gave Way
to thefe popular Errors. But if they hap-
pened to ordain a Sacrifice or any reli-
gious A £1, they did not derive it from Phi-
lofophic Reafbning ; they had Recourfe
to Oracles, to Revelations, which the
Philofophers always rejected, if we except
the latter Times ; when to maintain them-
felves in the Veneration of the People,
and as much as poffible to deter them from
Chriitianity, they carryed the Error to
its utmofl Length. If then we are to fay,
as by all Accounts it feems we mure, That
Confucius and the other Sages of China
taught the ridiculous Ceremonies in vogue
with the Chinefe^ and confidered the fame
as conftituent Parts of Morality and Piety,
it mull: be confefied They ill deferve the
Name of Philofophers.

If it be asked what Order, what Geo- fhe Chi-
metrical Method there may be in the Chi" n&Pbi-
nefe Philofophy ? We ihall be greatly at a l ff e d ff
Lofs to find any. For Martini himfelf, MuM.
who varniihes all they fay and do, in the

moft



'H



A Difiertation on the






moft beautiful Manner, having explained
what they mean by Piety, proceeds to
another Species of the fame; " They ac-
" knowledge, fays be^ three Cardinal Vir-
cc tues, Prudence, Piety, Fortitude or r
"Magnanimity: That Prudence teaches
<c the various Cuftoms and Ceremonies \
a that Fortitude puts them in Practice }
<l and that by Piety we are ally ed and at-*
" tached to the other Virtues." That is
to fay, a Chinefe is prudent when he knows
the Detail of their cumberfom Ceremo--
nies; that he is magnanimous v/hen he
puts them in Practice; and that herein he
difplays his Piety.
tfheir chit ^ e neec * on ty examin into the Nature
Ceremonies of thefe Ceremonies,, to be convinced That
apart of thofe who could imagin them in the leafl
their Vir- ana l gous with Virtue, had not the leaft
** Idea of Moral Virtues. The Chain of

thefe Ceremonies is fomething fo odd, that
the like is not to be found in any of the
Nations moil civilized and moll addicted
to Form. They are fo little of a piece with
the Simplicity of the earlier Times, that
we want no more to fatisfy us They are
not fo ancient as the Chinefe boail. The
Manner of inviting to a Feaft, of going
thither, of receiving the Guefts, of en-
tertaining them j of going to a Funeral, of
paying Viflts, and of receiving them, which
confift of an infinit Number of Circum-*
fiances, are the Science of a Gentleman-
Ufher, or fome fuch Officer, not of a Phi-,
lofopher.

But



CHINESE Learning, 23 y

But it may not be amifs to obferve Other V'tr
what the Chinefe underftand by the other tms accor 7 d
Virtues, which lead to this Piety of Cere- chinefe
monies and Forms : They are, fay they, Ju-
fiice, 'Fidelity to Friends^ and the Virtue by
which we meafure the Senfe of others. We
muft not wonder That thofe who had learnt
no -better after fo long a Study, fhould ad-
mire the Philofophy of Coimbr a : Or that
our Arabs) who had, perhaps in their own
Tongue, read the Morals ofArifiotle^ fhould
fpeak ft) contemptuoufly of the Chinefe
Learning. It were time loft to expatiate
on fuch abfurd Diftin£t.ions \ nor can any
Thing be more out of the way, than to
make a Virtue of what they call Meafuring
the Senfe of others. If thefe enigmatical
Words are expreffive of any; Thing, they
mean the Talent of diving into the
Thoughts of others, of gueffing at their
good and evil Intentions, of getting at
their Capacity, and of thence forming a
prudential Judgment, according to which
we are to behave. But this is not having
the primary or fimple Idea of Virtue, to
apply it to fuch a Character ; for a cunning,
inquifirive, miftruftful, artful, designing
Man, is for the generality better able to
Meafure the Senfe of other s y than an honefiy
plain, upright, and lincere Perfon.

But after all, fay the Admirers of Con- jr € »
fucius and the Chinefe Philofophers, it can- Sentences
not be denyed but in their Writings there m Proof of
are great Truths, among the reft this, Gkwd thei ^ Ca ~
tibi nonms f%m y alunm feceris 5 We grant it; P aca y-

but



2%6 A Diflertation on the

but we may, without any great Preemp-
tion, believe That this Maxim, and fome
others, came to them from abroad, in the
manner above fuggefted. But it were {train-
ing the Point too much, not to fuppofe the
Chuiefe may have known what Nature
herfeJf prompted to other Nations : Tho*
the little Ufe they have made of it to-
wards the Difcovery of fublimer Matters,
is a glaring Inftance of the fcantinefs of
their Genius, and a Proof of what our Arabs
pronounce, when they report them unac-
quainted with the Sciences, and that ail
they know, they had from the Indies.
*fhe Chi- gut if the Chinefe have the fineft Syftem
n ^ fe h fth °f Morality in the World, it does not appear
Ctemifiry f That & ^ as ^ een °f u ^ e to them in the Con-
duel of Life : The Cruelty of Fathers who
fell or. make away with their Children ; the
prodigious Number oi Eunuchs, mutilated
for the Ufe of the Court ; the Pride and
Cruelty of their Mandarins ; their Difho-
nefty ; the Fury wherewith they lay vio-
lent Hands on themfelves; their Debauche-
ry ; their Luxury * and many other Enor-
mities Rica notes of them, are fo many
Proofs of their Deficiency in Morals. Add
to this the Obftinacy wherewith fome of
their wealthy People feek after the Phi-
Icfopkers Stone y and the Grand Elixir y
which betokens a great Difturbance of
Mind; which, as they fay, has been upon
them for above two thoufand Years pall :
Tho', by the way, this their Attachment
to Chemiftry, makes their Antiquity look:

very



CHINESE Learning. 237

very doubtfuL For notwithstanding the
Fables the Chemifts have forged among
themfelves, to prepoflefs us with a Fancy
That their Art took Birth from the Patri-
archs and Sages of the firft Times, it was
never heard of before the third Century of
Cbrift. Moil of the Learned have taken
the Word Chemiftry to be of Greek Ety-
mology jbut they are wrong, the Word be-
ing no where to be met with in ancient
Authors, and being written with an H ?
whereas it mould be fpelt with a r to
be Greek. It is on all Hands agreed that
the firft Books of this frivolous Art, that
we know of, appeared firft of all in Egypt ^
and that, as feveral relate, under the Empire
of Dioclejian. &»/« is Egypt in the Lan-
guage of the Country, where it is pro-
nounced Kimi ; whence the Arabs^ who are
as much infatuated with this Spell as any of
the Orientals, have formed the Word
Chimia. It is very likely then That by
their Means it was the Cbinefe became ac-
quainted therewith, there being, as fhall
be obferved hereafter, no ftrefs to be
laid upon their Hiftories. The modern *
Greeks have many Treatifes of this kind,
which tiiey fet off with pompous Titles,
to perfuade us they are very Ancient :
Thefe the Arabs and the Per/tans have
tranflated, and afcribed to Hermes^ to Py~
thagoras, to Arijiotle^ and to other great
Perfonages of Antiquity; but we have no
Arabian Writer (and they are no very fcru-
pulous Critics ) that does the Chtnefi

ths



2j 8 A Differ tation on the

the Honour of having been, in any degree^
the Inventors, or Improvers of the Art
they fo much boaft*

After Morality come Politics, as one
of its mod noble Parts. Now we cannot
fufficiently admire That Men veried in
Antiquity, as many were who have
fo extolled the Chinefe, fhould fo empha-
tically in lift on the Sentences of Confuci*
us and Menciusj which are fo very trite,
that the heft of them are not comparable
to thofe which in a manner fill the Greek
and Latin Writings, not to fpeak of Scrip-
ture which contains more political Truths
than the whole Clafs of Profane Authors.
But if the Chinefe Philofophers have utter-
ed fome fine Sayings, It does not ap-
pear they have contributed much to the
forming of great Princes, or able Minifters ;
to the Rife of wholfom Laws, or to make
the People happy. For many Ages it has
been a faying, The People would be happy if
Kings were Philofophers^ or if Philofophers
reigned ; and we may fafely fay That if
Philofophers ever reigned in any Country,
China has been the Place. For the Manda*
rinsj who are all Men of Letters, and con-
fequently Philofophers, Difciples, and Fol-
lowers of Confucius ; have for many Ages
paft filled all the great Offices, both
Civil and Military, have enjoyed all
Governments, and prefided in all Tri-
bunals. And yet if we fearch into
the Hiftory of this Empire, embellifhed
as much as poffible by fruitful Pens,

wo



CHIN E S E Learning. $,$ g

We fhall not find Theie Sages have been
of any great Ufe in the extraordinary
Revolutions that have hapned in their
Country, or that they have exhibited iuch
Examples of Fidelity and Courage as a-
bound in the Hiftory of every other Na-
tion. This is particularly obfervable in
the very laffc Revolution, when the Tar~
tars made a Conquer! of China^ and placed
the reigning Family on the Throne. In
ihort, all the Defects which have been
deemed the Ruin of the great Empires
of the Earl:, defpotic Rule, the Luxury of
the Prince fhut up in a Palace with Wo-
men and Eunuchs, the Neglect of State
Affairs, the Contempt of Military Arts;
all thele infect the Government of
China. The Tartars without one jot of
Philofophy over-ran this vaft Empire
almoft as foon as they invaded it ; but
when they conformed to the Chtnefe Ways,
they flood expofed to the fame Misfor-
tunes as their PredecefTors. ^r havt
In truth it is hard to conceive how any m Printi-
body fhouki applaud a Morality and Po- pies of M**
licy fo deftitute of Principles, and fo pure- raht 3/-
ly made up of common Sayings and
Examples borrowed from Hiftory • fo void
of all fcrutiny into the Actions of Men
and their Paffions, their Spring, Ten-
dency, and End ; it being certain The
Chinefe have no fettled Doctrin on the
Immortality of the Soul, and that they
all agree the Good are rewarded and the
Wicked punifhed in this Life, either in

their



2^6 A Diflertation on tht

their own Perfons, or their Pofterity. W<&
can no longer hearken to thofe who would
make us believe, among other Obfcuritiesj
that by Heaven the Chtnefe intend the true
God ; for the Perfons themfelves who give
us this favorable Interpretation, grant,
with the fame Breath, That they have no
Idea of God. The fame rnuft we think
of all their Superftitions in honour of Ge-
niiy which are nothing lefs than Guardian
Angels : Nor is it lefs abfurd to imagin Con-
fucius to have been a Man infpired of God,
and that he forefaw the Birth of Chrijt y
becaufe in his Days certain Hunters killed
an uncommon Creature which looked
fomewhat like a Lamb. The Holy Patri-
archs and the true Prophets forefaw and
joyfully expe£ted the Coming of Chrifi :
Tour Father Abraham rejoiced to fee my Day :
and -he f aw it, and was glad: And by the
fame Spirit was Jacob moved to fay, I have
Martin, waited for thy Salvation, O LORJ) ; But Con-
p. 149. f uc ius no focner heard this Creature was
flain,than weeping bitterly he cryed out,His
Doctrin drew towards an End ; whence
w r e may infer it to have been quite dif-
ferent from the Do&rin Chrift was to
preach. Martini, who has this Story and
gives us the myftical Signification of this
Creature, puts it into the Mouth of a
Chinefe Philofopher, a Profelyte to Chri-
tftianity, prudently avoiding to vouch for
it himfelf But if he and others could
think That fuch were the Means to lead the
Chimfi into the Way of Truth ; others

have



CHINESE Learning. jjft

have thought, and will upon better Founda-
tion think, That this Condefcenlion is ra-
ther adapted to confirm them in their old
Errors. It were very itrange that God,
the Father and Infpirer of all Truth, ana
of the Way he is to be truly worfhipped,
mould reveal himfelf in the Old and New
Teftament to plain illiterate Men without the
Intervention of Philofophy, and that to this
general Rule of Providence there fhould
be an Exception for China, And it is ftill
more unworthy of the Divine Majefty to
fuppofe any Infpiration in Men who had
no Knowledge of his Supremity, of the
Soul, of the Origin of Things, and who
for two thoufand Years paft have perfifted
in vain and frivolous Tenets. The Moham-
medans with the bare Knowledge of an Al-
mighty God, the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, the Author of all Good, the Judge
of the Quick and the Dead, the Avenger
of wicked, and the Rewarder of good
Works, could not but exprefs themfelves
of the Chinefe with the Contempt obierv-
able in our two Voyages, a Contempt
of ancient Date with the Arabs } for in
Hircory we read of a Saying which came
from Mufa, who conquered Spam, to the
following Effefit : When Wifdom or Know-
ledge was fent down to Men, /he was lodged
in different Farts of the Body according to the
Difference of Nations ; She fettled in the Head
of the Greeks, in the Hands of the Chinefe,
and in the Tongue of the Arabs.

q la



24Z A Differtation on the

Of the in- In the Dialogue between the Em-
mentions peror of China and the Arab) in the fe-
fatdto he con( j j ccomt ^ we find that this Opinion
concerning the Greeks had reached his
Ears, and that he in fome fort acquiefced
therein* The Arabs have at all Times
had great Notions of the Beauty of their
own Tongue and Eloquence ; but they
yeilded the Greeks the Honour of having
iurpafled them in Philofophy and the Scien-
ces, tho' they would never allow the Chinefe
to have been any thing but ingenious Me-
chanics. Vojfius and the Authors of la-
ter Times, have not been unmindful to
extol them as fuch, and at the fame time
allow them to be the Inventors of many
ufeful and curious Things, which is not io
certain as to be beyond all Difpute. For
it will never be readily granted That
they found out the Compafs, and the Art
of Navigation. The Antiquity of Print-
ing among them is afTerted from the Te-
ftimony of their own Hiftories only, which
are much to be doubted, as is alfo the
Claim they lay to the Invention of Ar-
tillery and Gunpowder, the Conftruction
Martp.44 °f Celeftial Spheres and Globes, together
with other Items of a Mathematical Ap-
paratus. The Arts have every where
elfe been perfected by flow Degrees;
and if their firft Inventors be as old as is
fuppofed, it were aftonifhing That if we
except their Varnifh and Porcelane, every
thing elfe attributed to them fhould be
in iuch a State of Imperfection. For the

Miffi-



CHINESE Learning. 243

Miffionaries inform us, they were obliged
to get Mathematical Initruments made to
oblerve with, becaufe what the Chinefi
had of the Kind would not. do. As
much as they are pretended to ha\e been
skilled in calling of Cannon, Father
Adam Schall and Martini were at the Head
of all the Meltings in their Time ; and
notwithstanding what is commonly faid
That the fevere Prohibition againfb Infrin-
gements on the ancient Ufages,or receiving
Inrtru£tion from Strangers, has prevented
them from improving the Arts they inven-
ted ; thefe Strangers have taught them an
infinit number of Things, before unknown
in the Country. We muft then confine
our Elogies on the Cbinefe, to what they
have actually invented and cultivated, ani
not extend them to Inventions which are
none of theirs 5 for it can only ferve to
confound Hiftory, make us doubt of the
Authority of Holy Writ, and adminiiter
to the Pride of a Nation already fo puffed
up therewith.

The Invention of Letters has ever been g|* Chi-
efteemed the molt marvellous and ufeful ; nefe Cha*
infomuch that many of the Ancients would ra & m *
have derived it from Divine Infpiration, as
feeming, in fome degree, beyond the reach
of human Comprehenfion* The Hebrews y
and after them the Greeks and Latins ex-
preffed an infinit number of Words with
twenty-two or thirty Figures : The Chi"
nefe on the Contrary have fo multiplyed
their Figures, That they are computed at
q 2 up-



$44 -^ Differtation on the

upwards of fixty Thoufand, and fcarce can
the Life of Man attain them all, even tho'
they want the Sound of fome of our
Letters as R, and fome others. Thofe
who have impartially confidered this Mat-
ter, have agreed it to be a very grievous
Defect, and it is ealily conceived : For one
and the fame Noun, and one and the fame
Verb, admitting a great variety of Moods,
of Tenfes, of Numbers, may always be di-
ftinguiihed with us, becaufe the Characters
never vary. But this Multiplicity of Cha-
racters is what Voffius would have us moffc
admire, adding 'That hence their Tongue
has fuffered no Alteration for three or four
thoufand Years paft, and that thus they
xnurl have retained all the Difcoveries their
ancient Sages had made in the Sciences
and fine Arts, as well as the Hiftory of
their Empire. Thefe great and founding
Words ftrike us at firft, efpecially when
delivered with that Air of Authority Vqf-
fius aflumed, when fpeaking of Things he
knew the leaft of; but if we examin them
nicely, we fhall find that what they figni-
fy is quite falfe. For jirft he takes it for
granted that the Chinefe Characters have
always been as they are at prefent ; fecond-
ly, that they underftand them as readily
as a Gnek would read an old Infcription,
or a Jew the Hebrew Bible, which is a
Miftake. He might have informed him-
£-*3- felf from Martini^ That the ancient G&-
nefe Characters differed widely from the
Modern, and that they were not very un-
like



CHINESE Learning. 2 ^

like the Egyptian Chara&ers upon the Obe«
lisks at Rome. He adds, That he once
favv a Book written in fix feveral Sorts of
thefe old Symbols, which the Chinefe va-
lued and admired for its Antiquity : But
he does not fay they understood th6m, and
there is great Reafon to believe they knew
no more of them than of the Infcription
mentioned by Rougemont^ who frankly
confefTes That no Body could explain it.
Thefe Characters were ftrange to them,
and confequently the Tongue had under-
gone a Revolution, which overthrows
Vojfius's Argument.

But when he takes the Chinefe Books to
be fo very old, he advances a decifive
Fact without affording us any one Proof of
it. He himfelf could furnifh us with none,
for he was ignorant of the Language j nor
could he pretend to fay any Thing he had
not from Martini and others. Thefe have
indeed affirmed the Chinefe Hiftory to be
very Ancient,and feem unwilling we ihould
doubt it; but they have never faid They
had any Books fo very Old ; nay they even
fupply us with a confiderable Argument
againrt. this boafted Antiquity, by telling
us more than once That they have none
but printed Books ; and altho* they dis-
agree about the Time when the Art of
Printing was invented, no one has given it
out to be as Old as the earlier! Times of
the Empire, but only fome Ages before it
was known in Europe. It is alfo on all
Hands agreed, That the Chinefe Paper,
q 3 which.



2^6 A DhTertation on the

which is very thin, and can bear printing
upon one Side only, cannot laft as long as
purs, or as Parchment, which the Cbwefe
Mart. u f e nou Hiftory relates That fomewhat
p * 2 39* better than two hundred Years before
Chrjftf*the Emperor Ching caufed all the
Books to be burnt, and that Confucius
and Mmcius were preferved by an old
Woman, who had pafted them againft a
Wall, whence they were afterwards taken ;
and moreover that fome Paiiages were de-
Idem.-p. faced by the Wet. Thefe Books were
334. written upon Bark, the common Paper be-

ing then uninvented : But we cannot per-
ceive That thofe who for above fix fcore
Years pail have been fo minute in their
Accounts oiChina^ and have ran over all its
Provinces under theWing of Authority,have
ever met with any of thefe Books written
upon Bark, tho' fuch there are in feveraj
of our Libraries ; or any Tnfcriptions upon
Metal, or Stone of undoubted Authority,
like the Eugubln Tables, the many Etrufcan
Tnfcriptions and Punic Medals,* not to
fpeak of Obelisks covered with long In-
scriptions, by far more intelligible than the
Cbtneje Characters } and yet they would
perfuade us thefe lame Characters are much
more perfect, becaufe truly they have been
always underftood, tho' at the fame Time
it is confelled That no one underrtands
the old Writing, and that fcarce any Spe-
cimen of it is left ; that thofe in prefent
i T fe are liable to eternal Ambiguity, and

that;



CHINESE Learning. 247

that it requires many Years to get only a
Part of them.

If we examin the Chinefe Writing and q% e chi-
Language by the general Rules of Speech, nefe way
and of exprefling ourfelves by Signs, it °f 'Writing
muft appear there never was any more de- ™JJ de fa~
fe&ive. For if we find fault with the
Hebrew^ the Arabian and Per/tan^ thefe two
the fame, excepting fome Letters, becaufe
they omit moll of the Vowels, which are
expreiled another Way ; this is nothing in
Comparifon of the Chinefe Writing, which
cannot be mattered but by a long and te-
dious Study of many Years. We fhall
never find that the Greeks and Latins were
obliged to ufe the Pen to be underftood in
immediate Converfation together, as the
Chinefe are forced to do with their Pencil :
This is what Trigaut exprefly obferves
from Rica's Memoirs: For having laid
that each Word has its Hieroglyphic, and
that there are as many Letters as Words ;
that they are to the number of Seventy or
Fourfcore Thoufand ; and that the Perfon
who understands ten Thoufand has as
many as are neceflary to write, and that
no Man in the Empire can know them all,he
continues, * u The Sound of thefe Chara-



* Horum etiam charafterwn, ut plurtmum y idem efi
/onus, figura r.on eadeni^ ityio etiam fignijicatio ncn una s
unde fit ut aliud nullum idioma £qmvocum <zque repevia-
tur y neq. } a loquentis ore fcripio ulla exczpi fotefi y ah
audientibus exfcvihenda ; nee liber unus ah audiwtibus cum
frtlegxttw intelligi, niji librum emdem p& octtlis habeani,

q 4 clers



^4? A Diflertation m the

a &ers is commonly the fame, tho' they
u vary in Figure, and the Signification be
a different. Hence it is there is no Ton-?
" gue more fubje£fc to Equivoques, that
* 4 there is no writing what is dictated by
i( another, or understanding a Book and-
a ther reads, if the fame Book does not
" ly before you, to afcertain the ambigu-
iC ous Sounds the Ear cannot diftinguiih.
a It fometimes happens, That you fhall not
^ underftand a Man tho* he fpeak with the
F* neater]; Propriety and Elegance, fo that
*< he fhall be obliged not only to repeat
%c what he has faid overagain, but even to
u write it down.
Vbe great This Defect is fo great and of fo exten-
Lefeti of five a Nature, that it may be pronounced
this <tw- t0 include all the reft, and that the Wri-
$™' ting of no civilized Nation has ever been

fo imperfect and wanting. It is common-
ly faid That the Cbinefe Characters amount
to Seventy or Fourfcore Thoufand ; and, as
has been already obferved, VoJJius will
have this Multiplicity to be a Sign of the
Copioufnefs of their Tongue, but it is quite
the Reverfe. For were we, for inftance,
to reckon up all the Words in the Greek
Language, we fhould have above five hun«*



ut aquivocos <vocumfonos % quos aurium judicio minimedi-
ftinguunt, ocuhrum fide fgurets mtuentium wtevpofcant.
Imo etiam inter loquwdum non raro evenit, ut alter alte-
ritts conceptttm, accurate alioqui proferentis & polite h-
tjuentis i minime affequatw % ipfe mn repetere folum coga-
ipry fed etiam fcribere.

d*ed



CHINESE Learning. 249

dred Thoufand, and perhaps, a Hill great-
er number if we took in the Variations of
the different Dialects, and if we thereto
added the vulgar Tongue, as the Chinefe
reckon the ancient and modern together.
If to this we accumulated all the Inflecti-
ons of Nouns and Verbs, which have each
a Character apart in the Chinefe Writing,
the Number would infinitely furpafs that
of the Chinefe Characters. The fame might
be alledged of the Latin y and ftill more
of the Arabic, the Perjian, the Armenian
and moll of the Oriental Tongues.

Accordingly, as the Chinefe have thought
it beneath them to learn any Thing of
Strangers, the few who were rational
enough to fubmit to the Inftruction of the
Miflionaries, have been obliged to ufe, or
to form an infinite number of new Words,
and confequently new Characters, or it is
impoffible to conceive how they mould
underftand the Philofophy of Coimbra, the
Epitome of Clavius, his Sphere, his Gno-
monics, Military Architecture, the Man-
ner of compofing and touching the Harpfi-
cord, and other Tracts enumerated by
Rircher. This fuppofed, we mull needs
confefs the Chinefe Tongue to be very
imperfect,as well in the Pronunciation, as in
the Writing* and that the ancient Hebrews
and Ph<znicians, the Greeks and Latins, who
were indebted to the former for theirKnow- -*

ledge and Ufe of Letters, did from the
Beginning extend this admirable Inven-
tion to a Degree of Perfection the Chinefe

are



25° *A Diflertation on the

are far wide of to this very Day. For
other Nations with lefs than thirty Figures
have expreffed almort all the Modificati-
ons of Speech, nay many the Chinefe never
heard, whereas thefe with an infinit num-
ber of Characters have never been able
to fettle their Pronunciation, or the Senfe
of their Words.
€fheChan- ^ ne Experience of many Ages allures
ges of Pro- us it is impoflible to fix any Pronuncia-
jmmiation tion, and that it is liable to imperceptible
Rented Alterations in the Courfe of Time. We
ctheTtfcn- ^ nc ^ t ^ e Greek Tongue was otherwife pro-
gues from nounced by the Ancients than by the Mo-
Idngun- derns; tho* we can neither difcover the
dtrjtood. Time, or the Caufe of this Change. We
cannot doubt but that the ancient Greeks
pronounced the B like the Latins^ and yet
they for many Ages pari have been obliged
to ufe the Conjunctive /^tt, to exprefs the
Power of that Letter, efpecially in exotic
Names. A like Alteration has befallen
the Latin Tongue, whofe genuin Pronun-
ciation we rather guefs at than know ; and
by the various Ways the Hebrew Words
and Names are written by the Greek In-
terpreters, and by the MaforetSj we learn
that the fame has betid ed the Hebrew Ton-
gue : But this great Variation has been
no Hindrance to the reading of the old
Greek and Latin Books and Infcriptions, or
the facred Books of the ancient Jews.

Several barbarous Nations, as the Goths
and Saxons ) who had no Characters of
their own, adopted the Greek and the La~



tm %



CHINESE Learning, 25 *

thiy and therewith expreffed many Sounds
unknown to thofe two learned Idoms,
which they could not have done with
the Chinefe Characters, This want of fome
Letters has been the Caufe we have
for a long time been ignorant That Sa~
maband) which the Chinefe mention as con-
terminous with their Country, is Samar-
kand: But if iince that Time the Miffio-
naries have contrived an Alphabet and
Syllabary for them, in the Nature of ours,
they are highly to be applauded for having
thereby fupplyed what the Chinefe fo want-
ed } tho' at the fame Time they furnifh us
with an inconteffcable Truth o{ what we
have been faying.

We have nothing to remark on the Chi" <fhe ChU
nefe Eloquence and Poetry • to be a Judge ne ** e P**-*
thereof, requires a perfect Familiarity with tr f'
their Tongue : Martini and others com-
mend it much, the former writing That
the Emperor 7>, who according to him
reigned DCCCCXXXIX Years before
Chrifi, did by his ill Conduct exafperate the
Poets againft him, and thereupon adding ;
" * There are many Poems of their Compo-
iC lition extant ; for the Art of Poetry is of
u ancient date in China, confifting of feve-
ic ral forts of Verfes of different Meafure,
a and a certain number of Letters, with
" five Words ranged in Order." It is

* Multa exifluni etiam num ex eorum Cavminihus, nam
& ars poetica efh apud Sinas antlquijjtma^ Qp varia va~
rio metro Carmina compleBHur. Ea omnia legitimo Utera-
vum numtro confiant i 8? quinine vocttm or Aim.

no



ij2 A Diilertation on the

no eafy Matter to get at the Meaning of
thefe laft Words, and needlefs to attempt
an Interpretation of them : But we are
much at a Lofs to conceive what Poetry
can be formed out of Monofyllables, which
tor that Reafon mould have but little or
no Harmony ♦ perhaps it is kept up by the
Richnefsand Pomp of Expreffion. In this
we mutt fubmit to the Judgment of thofe
who are Matters of the Tongue, and the
rather as there has been no Nation fo bar-
barous but has had its Poets, and preferred
its Poetry before all others. The Ameri-
cans have their Poetry as well as the Bar-
barians of Afric, the old Gauls, the Saxons,
the Goths, and generally fpeaking every
Nation we have ever heard of, tho' infinit-
ly inferior to the Chinese in point of Civi-
lity. Nor muft we wonder at this Prepo-
fieflion in Favor of our own Country ', for
in our Days the Learned of the North
have beftowed great Elogies on the Runic
Poetry, the Ifelandifh and others fuch. Lu-
doJfus out of his lingular Efteem for the
Ethiopian Tongue, admires the Ethiopian
Verfes, the Amharic and Gafatic, as our
Anceftors did the Hobbling-rhymed Profe
of their Romancers.
^he A- ^ ^ye are not to wonder our Arabs make
T 1Z*HI no mention of the Chmefe Poetry, which

y.# mention J J J, . r

ef the Chi- they may have known nothing or; but it
nefe Poe* they had really underftood it they would
try as be- jj ave b een more backward in their Praifes
7Te!t nd Pfthawhan of the Cbinefe Philofophy. For
l^ eir the Ar&bsy befides the Opinion they have

Pf



CHINESE Learning. aj j

of their own Eloquence, in which they
imagin they furpafs all other Nations, have
ftill a fonder Conceit of their Poetry ; and
indeed were we to judge of it by their
number of Poems and Poets, no Nation
may compare with them : Were we to collect
all their Pieces of this kind, we actually
know of, they would form a Library of
feveral thoufand Volumes. But they kindled
not their Genius for Poetry from the
Greeks >xogethei with their Tafte for Philo-
fophy, Mathematics, Phyfic, and other
Sciences ; for they feem not to have known
any of the old Poets, tho', according to
fome Authors, Homer was formerly tran- Atmlfa-
flated into Syriac. But the Arabs knew "&_E mir *
fo very little of him, that when they
happen to mention him, which is very fel-
dom, it is as an old Philofopher, not as
a Poet. This Genius obtained in the Na-
tion long before Mohammedi[m\ they fpoke
in Verfe at their public Meetings, in their
formal Vifits, and even in the Field of
Battle. In the firft Ages of their Empire
they had an infinit number of Poems, made
by the old Arabs of the Times of Igno-
rance, as they exprefs themfelves \ beiides
many that were particularly efteemed and
lodged in the Temple at Mecca. A few
Examples from Hiitory will enable us to
judge of this Matter ; in the Year of the
Hejra CLV, of Cbrift DCCLXXI, Hifto- E $-^
rians take Notice of the Death of a fa-£"?Ward
mous Man, called Abulhafan Ahmsd y fur-EbnKa-
named Rowaia^ who was honoured and Kkan.



magni-



*54



Atmlfed.
Htft.M-



*fhe evil
Consequen-
ces which
may attend
our high
Notions of
the Chi-
aefe An-
tiyuity.



A t)iflertation on the

magnificently rewarded by the Kalif M-
jham the Son of Abdahnalec, Tazid and
Walid, for he lived ninety-five Years ; be-
caufe of his great Skill in the Arabefque y
and becaufe he was particularly verfed in
the old Poets before Mohammed. Another
could repeat eighty thoufand Diitichs of
thefe fame Poets by Heart ; this was the
Emir Afama y who dyed in the Year
DLXXXIV . But Jafar, the Son oiAbdaU
M, who dyed in the Year CCCLXXXIV,
outdid him, he could repeat one hundred
thoufand. Their mofh ferious Hiftories are
full of Verfes, and yet the Rules they are
made by are as hard as the Greek and
Latin, which they feem to have known as
little of] as of the Cbinefe. But tho* the
Chinefe were more barren of Expreffion
and Thought than the Arabian, Perfian,
and Turktjb Bards, who err from our Rules,
they might not be the lefs valuable \ all
that we have faid of their Learning is
not to take away from the Efteem we
ought to have for them, but to reduce their
Merit to its natural Bounds.

The Writers of the laft Age have ftray-
ed too far out of the Way, in preferring
a few faint Sparks of Reafon, and cer-
tain Truths veiled over with Enigma, to
what has been ftarted by all other Nations,
and in offering to excufe the eflential De-
fects of their Philofophy. Thefe exceffive
Commendations might be excufable were
they not productive of dangerous Confe-
quences j but chiefly as they tend to make

m



CHINESE Learning. 255

us doubt the Authority of the facred
Books, which, fetting aiide Religion,
ought not to be compared with the Chinefe
Hiitory. Thofe indeed who are moft
tenacious for them, give them up in this
refpecl;* but by labouring all they can
to prove and confirm the Antiquity of this
fame Hiftory,the Anfwers they make to Di-
fficulties are much weaker than the Objecti-
ons raifed, and thus they put Weapons into
the Hands of Libertinsand Free-Thinkers.
An Initance of this we have had in the
Author of the Preadamite Syftem, who
tho' as is faid by his Acquaintance, he was
fo ignorant that he fcarce underftood La-
tin, yet having formed a jSyftem by wrert-
ing fome Paflages of Scripture to his own
Mind \ and being informed, by fome, who
had moreLearning than himfelfjofwhat was
reported of the great Antiquity of the Cki-
nefi] and the fame being confirmed by Mzr-
ft»i ? sHirtory,which appeared juft at the fame
Time ;he laid hold on it not only as a very
valid Proof of his own Whims, but alfo of
the infinit number of Years the Myrians y
Babylonians, and Egyptians reckoned, which
the very Heathens themfelves rejected as
fabulous. He met with People who fur-
nifhed him with the Memoirs in his fecond
Dillertation, where the Subject is more
amply treated ; and but too true it is that
many have been infnared thereby; not to
become Preadimites indeed, but to harbor
other Notions equally fubverfive of Religi-
on, For thefe preteaded Antiquities of the

Chinefi



2 5 6 A DifTertation on the

Chinefe infenfibly wipe away the Con-
tempt which not only Chriitians but the
old Philofophers have had for the Egyptian
and Babylonian Traditions. On the o-
other Hand we are told the Per/tans have
Hiftories which go much farther back than
the facred Books ; and tho fuperficial Peo-
ple, Scioliits, and thofe who believe they
know every Thing, becaufe they react
much, do not abfolutely admit thefe Fa-
bles, they yet fuppofe they mult be found-
ed upon ibme fort of Truth. They
dive after this Truth in their wandring
Imagination, but find it not, it being re-
pugnant and foreign to what we know
of the Origin of Things, revealed to
the People of God, and contained in
holy Writ. Now every Thing contra-
dictory thereto, ought not only to be
fhrewdly miftrurted, but to be abfolutely
rejected as Falfe, as well on a rational
as a religious Account ; for it muft be
allowed There is no Book fo old as the
Books of Mofes ; not even the Chinefe y
it being by themfelves recorded That
they were all burnt about two hundred
Years before Chrift, and that but a ve-
ry fmall Number of them was faved.
Our Con- The Advantage the Miffionaries thought
defavfion to h ave obtained by flattering the Chi-
towards ne fiy anc ^ letting them believe the moft
their Con- fublime Truths were in the Writings of
verjten. their own Philofophers, has not always
anfwered Expectation ; this Complaif-
ance has been more apt to fwell their

monnrous



CHINESE Learning $<££

monftrous Pride than to difpofe them to
an humble Reception of the Gofpei
Simplicity. The Athenians had at leaft
as much Senfe as the Chinefe\ we fancy
no Body can prefer the Books of Confucius
to thofe of Plato and Arijlotk ; or the
Chinefe Treatifes of Phyfic and natural Phi-
lofophy to Hippocrates j Diofcoridcs y Theo>
phrajius and feveral others 7 and yet when
St. Paul preached to them he did not of-
fer to convince them they had any Know-
ledge of God, but declared to them That
they were Strangers to him, that they
were ignorant of him ; tho' at the fame
time he might have proved to them that
their old Poets, and greaterl Philofophers
had owned a Supreme Beings much clearer
than thofe who have undertaken to de-
monftrate Thien and Xanti to mean the
fame Sovereign Entity. For the old Phi-
lofophers at leaft, and even the Bo-*
dy of the People had fome confufed I-
dea of God, which ever obtained, not-
withstanding the Cloud of Fables that in-*
terpofed : But nothing can be added to
what has already been faid upon this Subje£h
what the firft Authors of Accounts and
Hiftories of China, cited as from Books
of that Country, was implicitly believed
by many learned Men 5 for as they knew
nothing of the Tongue and Books of
the Country, they were of Courfe to rely
on thofe who had made it their particu-
lar Study ; and others who fince that
time have applyed to the fame, have

r power*



H^e A Diflertaticn en the

powerfully afferted what the firil had ad-
vanced. The Point w r as of immediate relati-
on to the Miffionaries, as they had taken
on them to propagate the Faith ; but the
Learned who were not fo immediately
concerned look'd upon the Thing as a
Curiofity that might help them to fome
Knowledge of thofe remote Parts* whence
Golius and VoJJtus who had frequent Dif-
courfe with Martini, while he ftaid in Hol-
land to print his Chinefe Atlas, without
any Scruple received all he told them
about China. As for Golius, he applyed
what he heard to the Improvement of Geo-
graphy and Explanation of the Cycles,
Gnaws had given us by Tranflating
the Original of Ulug Beig ; but Vojfius who
was quite fond of the Marvellous, did not
confine himfelf to what he had from Mar-
tini ; he went on farther, he laid it down
as a certain Facl:, that the Chinefe Hiftory
was much elder than the Books of Mofes y
which the Miffionaries never advanced;
on the contrary, it is what they have
endeavored to refute; tho' by very
weak Arguments, it mull be owned, while
they fuppofed the Chinefe Hiftory to be
as ancient as they gave out. Vojftus did
not trouble his Head about the Con-
fequences that might attend his AfTertion
he did not perceive what a Handle it
might be made by Free-Thinkers and
Libertins, but at once declares for the An-
tiquity of the Chinefe Eooks : But, con-
trary ta the sprnmQa Cuftom of the

Learned >



CHINESE 'Learning. 25%

Learned, he afFe&ed to quote but little, es-
pecially when he was upon fome new Para-
dox, tho' upon fuch Occafions, it is more
than ever incumbent on the Party to call up
WitnefFes. It hapned indeed he had
none to call but Martini, who in the Year
MDCL publiihed the firft Decade of his Hi-
ftory of China. This Author himfelf con-
fefles The Chimfe carry their Hiftory much
higher ; and when he allows the reft to be
fabulous, he only fpeaks for himfelf, not
for the Chinefe, who admit the whole as
equally authentic, except they have been
undeceived by the Miffionaries. Be-
fore Martini, we had fome Summary
of their Antiquities, extracted from Books
that are cited, but whofe Falfehood is
perceived at firft Sight : This fufficed
to raife an equal doubt as to the one and
the other, and no Man will ever be able
to decide the Matter without under-
Handing the Tongue, and actually peruf-
ing the Books, which was not Voflius's
Cafe. He could then only form his judg-
ment by what he was told by Fath. Mar-
tini, who never pretended That the Chi**
nefi Books were older than Mofes* On
the contrary, he has endeavored to evince
That by recurring to the Chronology of
the Septuagint we may reconcile the
Chinefe Hiftory with the Scripture, which
was the leafi of Voffius's Care. This
his Inadvertency is of fuch a Nature as
to fap the Foundations of Religion *
which has induced us to be fomewhac

x z di£*



s6o A Diflertation on the

diffufe in our Remarks thereon, to the
end that no one may be prepoffefled by
the Authority of a Learned Man who
pronounced upon he knew not what, who
in his very Outfet is guilty of a grofs
Miftake upon the Word Sin# y averring the
Portuguefe to be the firffc who fo called
the People he would have to be called
Seres. Our two Arabs ufe the Word Sin\
they were there in the ninth Century,
and the Portuguefe went not to China till
the iixteenth. Now they called the Peo-
ple of this vaft Empire by the Name of
Sin ; becaufe the Per/tans and Tartars
had fo called them, Ages before the Por-
tuguefe conduced their Fleets to the
Indies,

FINIS,




INDEX



[ m ]



THE



I N D EX.

N. B. There being two Chains of Numbers in
this Book, the Reader is deiired to take
Notice That the Pages of the firft are diftin-
guilhed by the letter (a) and of the fecond
by ftji



A Aran R a/hid, or Aaron
King of Perjia, his Con-
queits and Power, 23. b
Abaka Khan, Emperor of the
Tartars fends to vifit the ho-
ly Places at Jerufalem, \zz.b
Abundance of all NeceiTaries in
China , 60. b

Adam, the Print of his Foot
on Mount Rabun, 3. a,S.b
Adultery, how punimed in Chi»
. na, 45 . a

Age of the World, 56. a

Various Opinions concerning it.
ibid
Almamun, the Son of Aaron
Rajhid, orders the Greek
Books to be tranflated, 23. b
Alms, of the Emperors of ChU
na, 58. b

Alnian, [ the Ifland of ] 3. a
Ambergnefe, its various reputed
Origins, 64. b, & feq.

Extraordinary Lumps of it.
66. b
Of three forts, 67. b

A fourth fort of it, , 94. b



A very extraordinary Quan-
tity of it, 2. a, 4. b
Not found in the River Jor-
dan, 67. &

Amufements and Games of the
Indians, 84. a

Andaman [ the Sea of ] 4. a.

Animals, the manner of kil-
ling them in India and China ■,
35. a

Anthropophagites, 4, 1 2. a. 5, 6. h

Arabs [the], knew little more
than the Maritim Places in
China, 135. b

Their Ignorance of the true
State of China proved by
their Geographers, 136. £
Went MX to China by Sea,
141. b
Whether they had the ufe
of the Compafs before us,
142. b
Proofs to the contrary, 143. b
Whether they had the Com-
pafs from the Chine fe, 145 .b
Bad Reckoners at Sea, 1 49, b
Why no deeper skilled in the
Art of Navigation, 150. &



INDEX,



attempted no great Things
at Sea, 1 5 1 . £

navigation of no Ufe to
them. ibid.

made no great Difcoveries
at Sea. 1 S7-^

their Colonies in Afric and^
the Indies, 1 59. ^

went to China both by Sea
and Land, 1 80. b

did not fpread their Do&rin
there, ibid.

were well verfed in the Ma-
thematics, 224. b
their Poetry, 252. b

&itronomers the Arabian and
perjian, .. 222. b

[The Chinsfel not to com-
pare with the Greeks and
Arabians, zzi. 224. 225. b

Aftroncmy of the Chiaefe 3 zu.b.
its Antiquity, 211. b

B

'"0Aichu, a Ghinefe Officer,

Jj> revolts, 41- a

takes and deftroys Caftfu,
ibid.
kills 120,000 Men exclufrve
of the Chine fe, 42. a

ppffeffes himfelf of feveral
other Cities, ibid.

Balbara, an Appellative com-
mon to a Succeffton of Kings
15. b

Balhara, a mighty Prince m

the Indies, ibid. 24. b. & fey,

fond oitheArabs, 15. a, z^.b

his Country begins on the

Coaft of Kamkain, 2.5. b

a Title that fuits with the

Samorin ILmperor of the

Indies" z6.b

" ; ng, the ufual Punifh-

rwi.&ed in China

$z.b



Bankrupts, how treated in Cht
na, 27. a

Baptifm, in the fixth Column
of the Chine fe aud Syriac In-
fcription, 95 b

Barygaza, [the City of] may
have been the Seat of the
Baihara, 25. a

Bajfora or Bafra, the Princi-
pal Scale for the Merchants
of the Red-Sea and other
Parts, 14. b

Bell, of the Imperial Palace,

70. a

they were " ufed to ring in

China to demand juftice of

the Governors, 49. b

Benares, a City and kind of
Univerfity belonging to the
Bramins, 34. b

Berid, Poft-horfes in China,

5 i.*

Betuma, the Name of 3 Place

where Water is to be had,

10. a. 16, 17. b

Biju, or Bi/hu or P^«/«, a City
and Seat of the Emperor of
China, according to Abulfe-
da 44. b

Bifhops, their Tranflation, 1 1 8. £

Bodies [deadj burnt in the In-
dies, 3 1 . a

Books, of the Chinefe, their
Antiquity, 245. b

Hebrew., of the Jews in
Perfia, 198.*

Boutan. a Kingdom which at
prefent drives the greateft
Trade with Musk, 72. b

Bramins, or Indian Doclors,
86. a, 34. b

Bread-Corn, ufed by the Chi-
nefe, not by the Indians, 34. a

Buildings of 'China, 48. a, 50. b
~Of



I N D E X.



of the Chinefe and Indians,
34. a
Burials, of the Chinefe, 21. a
C

CAfres, difpoffeffed of the
Coaft of Afric, 1 64. b

Calabar, the Name of a Place
beyond the Indies, to- a, 15.6

Calicut, a City, the Reftdence
of jhe Emperors of the In-
dies, 24, b
the moft ancient Settlement
the M»bam?nedans had in
the Indies, 26. b

Calendar, the Ignorance of the
Chinefe in what concerned
theirs, z.iz. b

Canfu, a Sea-Port of China,
the Place of Refort for the
Arabian Shipping 14, 11. a
42. b
the times it Ebbs and Flows
in this Port, 1 1 . a

Capacity of the Chinefe not to
be gathered from a few fine
Sayings, 235. b

Caravanferds, built out of
Devotion, 35. b

Cajhgar, the ufual way the
Moha?nmedans took for Chi-
na, 129.6

Catholic, a Title added to that
of Patriarch in the Chinefe
Infcnption, 88. b

Ceremonies, and Cufloms of the
Chriftians taken notice of in
the Chinefe Infoription, 96. b
the Funeral Ceremonies of
the Chinefe ridiculous, and
unbecoming of Philofophers,
231. b

. the civil Ceremonies of the
Chinefe, reckoned by them
to be constituent Parts of
Virtue, 234. b



they produce Juflice and
the other Virtues, 23 5 . £

Ceylon or Sarandib, 2. a

taken by fome to be the

Taprobana of the ancients,

7. b

by others for Sumatra, 9.6

Char din [Sir John] what he
thinks of the nrft Invention
of the Compafs 146.6

Charts for Sea Ufe, and others
among the Orientals, i$6.b

Chemiftry, the Chinefe much
addicted to it, 236. b

China, more populous but le&
in extent than the Indies,
36. a
a pleafant Country, 37. a
divided into many Princi-
palities 44. a

Chinefe [the] are more hand-
fom than the Indians 38.^
drefs in Silk, 1 3 . a

feed upon Rice, ihicL

fond of Gaming, 32. a
20. b
not addicted to Wine, 32. a
zz.b
their Wars with their
Neighbours, 33, a

they all learn to read and
write, 22. a 58. b

very expert Mechanics, 50. a
ignorant of the Arts that de-
pend on the Mathematics,
225.6
not fo well verfed in the
Metaphyjics and Philofo-
phy as the old Philofo-
phers, 207. b
even their Fables not their
own, ... ibid.
what they think of the O-
rigin of the World- 204. b
a 4 their:



INDEX.



their two Principles, 205 . b
the Refpect they pay to
their Emperor and Kings
when they meet them, 53.6
the dangerous Confequen-
ces of being Exceffive in
our Notions of their Anti-
quity, 254, b
Cborafan, a Province contermi-
nous with China, 75- a
ChriJIians did not fly Perjta to
avoid the Perfecution of the
Arabs i 1 1 1 . b
among the Tartars, 177. b
thofe of the Eaft did not
elect their Patriarchs with-
put the Confent of the Mo-
hammedan Prince, 193. b
the Difference between the
Patriarchs and the Jewijh
Chiefs, in the Eaft, 194.6
Chriftianity, no Proof that it
had made its Way into Chi-
na before the Seventh Cen-
tury, 82. 6
that it had Footing in China
by the Year 636. proved
. by an Infcription, ; 83. £
now long it kited in Chi-
na, 1 20. b
Chronology, of the Chine fe,
according to their Cycles
21 1. £
is falfe, 214. £
without any fixed beginning
215. b
hard to be reconciled with
Scripture, 216. £
the Chinefe Chronological
Tables of our time, are
more the Work of the
Europeans than of the Chi-
nefe, 219. b
yet they are defective, ibid.



confequence thence to , be
deduced. 221.6

Cities, or Towns, a "great num-
of them in China, 19. a

Cleanlinefs, Vide Neatnefs.

Climate of China, more healthy
than that of the Indies, 37. a

Coco-nut Tree, alone fupplies
wherewith not only to build
a Ship, but to load her when
fhe is ' compleated, 2. 89. a
10,75. b
the Nut it felf and its Vir-
tues. Hid.

Cocks, the cuftom of Fight-
ing them, 84, a, 35. b

Combination Table of the Chi-
nefe, 206. b

Commerce, between Chorajan
and Ciw-sbyLand, 140.6

Communication of the Ocean

with the Mediterranean 59. a

30. b

Confucius, what we are to think
of his Morality, 227.6

moil of his Sentences in the
old Gnomics, 228. b

Conjectures, needlefs as to the
the Names of fome Places m
the Indies. 26. 6

Conkan or Kamkam, the Pro-
vince where the Balhara
mull have kept his Court,
25. b

Cordiliere, of the Kingdom of
the Balhara, how far its
Mountains ilretched, ibid

Cotbat, or Sermon of the Imams,
or Rectors of Mofchs, 7, a
the Perfon in whofe Name it
was delivored, thereby ac-
knowledged Supreme, 19. 6
Its Origin, 21. b

The Dehgn of it, ibid.
could



INDEX



could not be canonically per-
formed without a Miffion
from the Prince. 22. b

AbtdfedafL\X.za thereupon,44.£

Ciimdan, the City where the
Emperor of China kept his
Court, 58. a

Its Situation uncertain. 43* £
Mult have been Nankin,
ibid.

Cungqucn and Yeli, Pvoyal Inns,
a Day diftant from each o-
ther in China, 52. b

Cuftoms, of the Chinefe, 78. a

Cycles, of the Chinefe cannot
be fo ancient as imagined
217. b
The Date they are deduced
from, difagrees with what the
Chinefe themfelves hold, 2 1 8.^
Pofition of fome Provinces of
the Indies, 26 b.

Couplet [Fath. Philip] what he
fays of the Origin of the
Golpel in China, 99. b

Couriers, on Foot and on Horfe-
Back in China, 5 1 . £

Creation of the World explain-
ed in the fecond and third
Column of the Chinefe In-
fcription. 92. b

D.

DEbauchery of the Chi-
nefe 34. a 29. b
Of the Indians 85 a

Deluge, Univerfal, 54. a

Dervifes and Preachers of the
Indies, 90. a

Defarts, many in the Indies,
few in China, 38, a

Devotion, of a particular Sort, a-
mong the Indians, 89. a

Dimes and Plates, of the Co-
conut Leaf, 99. a



Diforders, confequent to the
Civil Wars in China, 44. a
Drams, lhartarian Drams, 1 5 a.
26. b
Drink, the Chinefe make of
Rice, 13. a

Drums, Enfigns of Dignity pe-
culiar to cities in China,
28. b
Beaten in all the Cities of
China, to tell the hour of
the Day and Night. 20. a
E

EAr-rings, the Kings of the
Indies wear them 98. a
Egg, the Fable of the Chinefe
Egg, 205. b

Elephants, in fome Provinces of
China. 61. b

Abhorred by the Chinefe,

47- a
Emperor of China, 24. a.

retires from his Capital, 42. a

returns thither again, 43 . a.

Eucharifl [the] confidered as
it relates to the Chinefe In-
fcription, 97 ,b

Eunuchs, the chief Officers in
China, 48. a

their Proceffion when they
appear, 49. a

their Habit, Ibid.

they enjoy the greateft Polls
in China, 48. b

cut by their own Fathers,
Ibid,

Examination [the] of the Sub-
ftance of the Chinefe Infcrip-
tion, 90. h

Exigence [the] of God fet-
tled in the iirft Article of
the Chinefe Infcription, 91. b

Extent of China but little
known, 41 . b



INDEX.



FISH, the Flying-Fifli,
15. a. i8.5

that petrifies, Ibid.

that has a Horn, 62.6

Flefh [ human ] expofed to pub-
lic Sale in China, 44. a

Form [the] of the Cities in
China, 48. b

fruits, of China, 1 3 . a

of the Indies and of China,

36. a

Funeral Rites and Mourning of

the Chinefe, 21. a

Of the King of Sarandib,

31. a

Fury, for Gaming, $$* a

G.

GA B Sarandib, 84. a

Government of the Chi-
•nefe, . a 45. £

Governors, of Cities in China,
23. a
G««/> or Guardian- Angels,
H. 208 £

Hierarchy, a new Form of
it fet up by die Nefto.
. rians, 1 i.b

Bitrange, a Kingdom ,of the
Indies, 1 8. a

Hoangcioqu, a Flying-Fifn, i8.£
Homicide, vid. Murder,
Horfes, few in India, more in
. China, 3.7. a

Human Fiem, expofed to public
Sale in China. 44 . a

I.

IDolatry [ the ] of the Chi-
nefe, 35. a
Idol [ the ] of Mult an, 88. a
Jefus Chrifc, 55. a
Jews, and other Sett in the Ifle
of Sarandib, 84. #
not eafy to fay when they



firft went to China, 1 83. h
of Caifamfu, 185.&

would have made a y*/»zV
their Kakam in China ,
186.J
where they are in no great
Number: 186. b

the Conformity of their Cha-
racters , with the Hebrew
Characters with us. 188. b
at what Time they may
have firft made their Way
into China? 1 89. b

whole Nations of them in
Arabia before Mohamme-
dijm, Jbid,

perfecuted by the Chriftian
Emperors, Ibid.

retire into the Eaft, and are
kindly ufed by the Moham-
medans, Ibid.
by what Means they made
themfelves confiderable, 1 90 b
pretend to have wherewithal
to elude Jacob's Prophecy,
We Scepter, &c, 1 9 1 . b
they perfift in their Notion
by the Difcovery made of
Prejier John, Ibid.
are very numerous in the
Eaft, 192. b
their Privileges, 1 90 . b
their Writings of no Uie to
inform us how they firft
penetrated the Eaft, and at
length to China, 185. b
in Ferfia, they have Books
rejected by the others. 1 9 8 . b
they got to, and fpread in
China as elfe where, 1 9 9 . b
Im polls and Revenues of the
Emperor of China, 24. a
29. a 54. b
Incarn-
