Selections from the Travels of 
Ibn Battuta


INTRODUCTION

§ I, IDN DATTUTA AND HIS WORK

To the world of today the men of medieval ChriAcn-
dom already seem remote and unfamiliar. Their
names and deeds are recorded in our hiftory-books,
their monuments ^ill adorn our cities, but our kin-
ship with them is a thing unreal, which coils an effort
of the imagination. How much more muil this
apply to the great Islamic civilization, that ilood over
againil medieval Europe, menacing its exiilcncc and
yet linked to it by a hundred tics that even war and fear
could not sever. Its monuments too abide, for those
who may have the fortune to visit them, but its men
and manners are to mofi of us utterly unknown, or
dimly conceived in the romantic image of the Arabian
Nights, Even for the spcdalifl it is difficult to re-
conflruft their lives and sec them as they %verc.
Hiflorics and biographies there arc in quantity, but
the hiflorians, for all their pi^resque details, seldom
show the ability to sclcft the essential and to give
their figures that touch of the intimate which makes
them live again for the reader. It is in this faculty
that Ibn Battdta excels. Of the multitudes that crowd
upon the 51age in the pageant of medieval Islam there
is no figure more inflinft with life than his. In his
book he not only lays before us a faithful portrait of
himself, with all his virtues and his failings, but evokes



SELECTIONS FROM THE

a whole age as it were from the dead. These travels
have been ransacked by historians and geographers,
but no estimate of his work is even faintly satisfactory
which does not bear in mind that it is firSt and fore-
moSt a human diary, in which the tale of faCts is sub-
ordinated to the interests and preoccupations of the
diarist and his audience. It is impossible not to feel
a liking for the character it reveals to us, generous
to excess, humane in an age when life was its . at
cheapest, bold (did ever medieval traveller fear the
sea less ?), fond of pleasure and uxorious to a degree,
but controlled withal by a deep vein of piety and
devotion, a man with all the makings of a sinner, and
something of a saint.

Of the external events of Ibn Battdta’s life we know
little beyond what he himself tells us. The editor
of the travels, Ibn Juzayy, notes that he was born
at Tangier on 24th February, 1304, and from a brief
reference in a later book of biographies we know
that after his return to Morocco he was appointed
qadi or judge in one of the Moroccan towns, and died
there in 1368 or 1369. His own name was Muham-
mad son of Abdallah, Ibn Battiita being the family
name, Slill to be found in Morocco. His family had
apparently been settled in Tangier for some genera-
tions and belonged to the Berber tribe of the Luwata,
which fir^t appears in hiCfory as a nomadic tribe in
Cyrenaica and on the borders of Egypt. For the re^l
he divulges incidentally in a passage relating to his
appointment as qadi iri Delhi, that he came of a house
which had produced a succession of qadis, and later
on he mentions a cousin who was qadi of Rondah
in Spain. He belonged, in consequence, to the re-
ligious upper-class, if the term may be used, of the
Muhammadan community, and mu^ have received
the usual literary and scholastic education of the
theologians. On one occasion he quotes a poem of



TRAVELS OF IBK BATTOTA

his own composition, but the other verses quoted here
and there ouviously bear a more popular charafler
than the elaborate produ£Bons of tnc bcR Arabic
poetic schools. His professional intercA in men and
matters rclipious may be seen on nearly c\'cr}* page of
his work. It isc\‘idcnt fromthcllilof qSdls and other
theologians whom he saw in cver^* town on his travels
(sometimes to the exclusion of all other details), but
above all from his eagerness to visit famous shaykhs and
saints wherever he went, and the enthusiasm with
which he relates inBanccs of their miraculous gifts.

But to rate him, as some European scholars have
done, for his “ripmarolcs about Muhammadan saints
and spiritualises and for his “ Aupidit)* ” in paying
more attention to theologians than to details of the
places he visited, is singularly out of place. Such
religious details were matters in which he and his
audience were mod closely intcrciecd, and arc by no
means dc>’oid of intcrcA and vi]uc c\’cn to us. Out
of them, moreover, spring some of the mofl lively
passages of his narrative, such as his escape at Koel
(the modern Aligarh), and his account of the Sharif
Abii Ghurra. But it is of far greater importance to
remember that it was because he was a theologian
and because of his intcrcA in theologians that he
undertook his travels at all and survived to complete
them. When as a young man of twenty-one he set
out from his native town with a light heart, and not
much heavier purse, it was with no other aim than
that of making the pilgrimage to Mecca and the holy
places of his faith. The duty' laid upon every Muslim
of visiting Mecca at IcaA once in his lifetime, so long
as it lies within his power to do so, has been in all
ages a Aimulus to travel, far greater in degree than
the Aimulus of ChriAian pilgrimage in the Middle
Ages. At the same time, it created the organization
necessary to enable Muslims of every class Trom every
3



SELECTIONS FROM THE

country to carry out this obligation. The pilgrim on
his journey travelled in a caravan whose numbers
swelled at every ^age. He found all arrangements
made for his marches and his haltSj and if the road
lay through dangerous country, his caravan was pro,-
tefted by an escort of soldiers. In all large centres
as well as many intermediate Nations were re^l houses
and hospices where he was hospitably welcomed and
entertained out of endowments created by generations
of benefaftors. When such was the lot of every
pilgrim, the theologian received ^lill greater considera-
tion. His brethren in every town received him as
one of themselves, furnished his wants, and recom-
mended him to those at the next Nation. Under
these circumstances the brotherhood of Islam, which
knows no difference of race or birth, showed at its
be^t, and provided an incentive to travel unknown in
any other age or community.

Nor was the Pilgrimage the only inSlitution which
smoothed the traveller’s path. Throughout the Middle
Ages the trade routes of Africa and Asia and the
sea-borne trade of the Indian Ocean were almo^
exclusively in the hands of the Muslim merchants.
The travels of Ibn Battdta are but one of many sources
which reveal how widespread were their aftivities.
Though their caravans were exposed to greater dangers
in times of lawlessness and disorganization than were
the pilgrim caravans, they offered at lea^ a measure
of security to the casual traveller. It is evident from
our narratives that in the great majority of cases they
were animated by the same spirit of kindliness and
generosity that has always marked the mutual relations
of Muslims, and readily shared their resources with
their fellow-travellers in case of need. Later on
Ibn Battuta had more than once occasion to appre-
ciate their services, but at the outset he had no thought
of what the future held for him.

4



TR-AVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

On his arrival in Egypt, with his mind 5lill wholly
set on Mecca, he received the fir^l premonitions of
his future from two of the illuminati^ or saints who had
attained a high rank in the hierarchy of the Muslim
orders. From this point we see his vague desires
gradually crystallize into a definite ambition, though
he Still hesitates from time to time, especially when
his contacts with persons of saintly life awaken all his
inStinfts of devotion. Foiled in his firSt intention
of taking the diredt route to Mecca through Upper
Egypt (the usual route of the pilgrim caravans from
the WeSt), he determined to join inStead the pilgrim
caravan from Damascus, and on his way thither taSted
for the firSl time the joys of travel for its own sake.
As time was not pressing, he wandered at leisure
through the whole of Syria as far as the borders of
Asia Minor, before returning to Damascus to join the
caravan as it set out for the Holy Cities.

Hardly was this firA Pilgrimage over than he set
out a^ain to visit ‘Irdq, but turned back sharply before
reaching Baghddd, and made a long detour through
Khuzi^tdn. By now, he tells us, he had taken the
resolve never to cover the same ground twice, as far
as possible. His mind was dlill set on the Pilgrimage,
however, and he planned his journey to cover the
interval before returning to Mecca at the end of the
year. This time he renounced further travelling for
a space of three years and gave himself up to ^udy
and devotion at Mecca. For the theologian the Pil-
grimage meant not only the performance of one of
the principal obligations of the Faith, but an oppor-
tunity of putting himself in touch with the adlivitier
of the religious centre of Islam. Mecca was the ideal
centre of religious dludy, in the company of many of
the mo5l eminent doftors of the day. All this, no
doubt, was in Ibn Battdta’s mind. But we may, I
think, discern a further purpose. He had already
5



hoiaia Syieu-- vgVbVe ^ ^

On corc^V^^ S ° ;nS as ^,nd ° ^

tbe'^fe

btotbetbood , TXbin ^ ^opportunity t (

£ fVte iVlo’^S®^ „ of an opt' rvenP^s
°'.V^,\dvantnge ot ^ *e ftep? „„


r?n*nsif ' „:rtbe BU* ^ Horde, ^on-

"totberboods, u ^ o£ *®„_ottunity “f -Hrid

^ -and beco^a^ & , Hnnfb® ivinS*

so'-' 'ving'ieS^'^ ’'tin^”"' tb
^CVio- tbougb b^ U fiS"'"’ vt

X)elbi, p, and . V. was t>ur -anY- r
n„lfan’s boun^ , ^^.^1, be ^ opg innnj ^n



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

tions which he afterwards wove into one of the moft
remarkable descriptions we possess of any medieval
Muslim court. Little did Sultan or courtiers think
that six centuries afterwards their reputations would
depend on the notes and reminiscences of the obscure
and spendthrift qSdi from the We^t. At laft the
inevitable rupture occurred, whose consequences were
usually swift and fatal to the viftim of the royal dis-
pleasure. Ibn Battdta took refuge in his laft resort,
the adoption of the ascetic life, resigning all his offices
and giving away all his possessions. It was a genuine
aft of world-rcnuncaition, such as always lay near to
the heart of the medieval theologian, and seems to have
convinced Sultan Muhammad of the traveller's real
integrity and devotion. At all events, when he re-
quired shortly afterwards a truftworthy person to send
as his envoy to China, it was Ibn Battiita whom he
summoned. Ibn Battiita, for his part, it would seem,
was reluftant to doff his hermit’s garments and
“ become entangled in the world again.” But the
bribe was too great, and in 1342 he set off in semi-
regal ftate at the head of the mission to the moft
powerful ruler in the world of his time, the Mongol
Emperor of China.

Scarcely had he left the walls of Delhi when his
adventures began. For eight days he was a hunted
fugitive, and though he escaped to rejoin his embassy
3 J 7 its progress throvgh Ind/a, it was only to be left
with nothing but the clothes he ftood up in and his
prayer-mat on the shore at Calicut. To go on with
his mission in the circumftances was impossible;
to return to Dehli was to incur the wrath of Sultan
Muhammad. He chose inftcad to indulge his love
of adventure with the independent rulers of the Malabar
coaft, and eventually found himself at the Maidive
Islands, once again a qddf and a personage of im-
portance. Here too after eighteen months of lotos-
7



SELECTIONS FROM THE

eating his reforming zeal made of him an objeft of
suspicion and dislike, and he found it expedient to
leave the islands. The devotee in him again asserted
itself, and his fir^l objeft was to make a pilgrimage to
the “ Foot of Adam ” on the highe^ peak of Ceylon.
This done he returned to the Coromandel and Malabar
coafts, paid another brief visit to the Maidive Islands
and prepared in earnest for his journey to China.
Some months had ^lill to elapse before the sailing
season, however, and he chose to spend them in a
voyage to Bengal, for no other reason, apparently,
than to visit a famous shaykh living in Assam. He
then intercepted the “ Chinese ” vessels — really vessels
owned by Muhammadan merchants, with Chinese and
Malay crews — at Sumatra and went by a route that
has taxed the ingenuity of his commentators to the
“ Shanghai ” of China in the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, the port of Ts’wan-chow-fu, or Zaytdn, as
it was known to the foreign merchants. For this
journey Ibn Battdta reassumed his role of ambassador,
though it may strike us as curious that no one seemed
to entertain any suspicions of an ambassador who
travelled without embassy or credentials. It was,
however, his only device for making his way through
China, though his theological reputation ^ood him in
good ^ead amongst his fellow-Muslims in the trading
ports. In every city on his progress to and from
Peking he was received with full honours, but at
Peking itself he was disappointed of seeing the Em-
peror, owing to his absence from the capital.

Returning to Zaytdn, he took ship again for Sumatra,
and thence for Malabar, but decided not to expose
himself a second time to the treacherous splendours
of Delhi, and made we^wards in^ead. He was in
Syria at the outbreak of the fir^ “ Black Death ” in
1348, and in a few terse sentences reveals its frightful
ravages. At this time he seems to have had no defi-

8



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

nite plans for the future, and was aiming only at com-
pleting yet another Pilgrimage, his seventh, to Mecca.
What eventually led him to return to his native land
is not clear. His own narrative places more weight
on the rapid access of Arength and prosperity which
Morocco enjoyed under Sultan Abal-Hasan and his
son Abu ‘Indn, than on those ties of family and
kindred which appear to us so much more natural
a reason. Possibly allowances should be made for
the part of exaggeration and flattery', but the brevity
of his dlay in Tangier, and the unemotional, almoft
brusque, manner in which he mentions it, scarcely
witness to an overmadlering homesickness, which, in
any case, was hardly to be expefted in a society so
cosmopolitan as that of medieval Islam.

The journey from Alexandria to the Barbary coa^l
was not without its alarms. Twice Ibn Battista
narrowly escaped capture by Chriftian corsairs, and
in addition his party was threatened by a robber band
almo^ within sight of Fez. Even yet his ambition
was not appeased. There were dlill two Muslim
countries which he had not visited — ^Andalusia and the
Negrolands on the Niger. Once again he took up
the dlaff of travel, not to lay it down again until some
three years later he could claim with justice the title
of “ The Traveller of Islam.” He was in fafl the only
medieval traveller who is known to have visited the
lands of every Muhammadan ruler of his time, quite
apart from such infidel countries as Con^lantinople,
Ceylon, and China, which were embraced in his
journeys. The mere extent of his wanderings is
estimated by Yule at not less than 75,000 miles,
without allowing for deviations, a figure which is not
likely to have been surpassed before the age of ^eam.

Unfortunately no account of Ibn Battiita has come
down to us (so far as is known) from anyone who saw
him on his journeys. There appear to be only two
9



SELECTIONS FROM THE

known references to him in the writings of contempo-
raries, and both are concerned chiefly with the credi-
bility of his Tories, which was hotly disputed. What
they thought of him personally we are not told, but
are able to infer occasionally from his own candid
^atements. Twice we find him, after receiving
a cordial welcome, becoming an obje6l of dislike or
suspicion, at Delhi and again in the Maidive Islands.
In the fir^ case the cause was his extravagance, in the
second it was fear of his growing influence and resent-
ment at his haughty independence. There can be
no que^ion that he expefted of princes and minivers
a lavish exercise of the virtue of generosity, which was
indeed in his eyes — as in those of his age and com-
munity generally — their principal claim to respeff.
It may be taken as a general rule that when Ibn Battdta
says of this or the other prince that he is “ a good
sultan ” or “ one of the be^l of rulers,” he means only
that he is scrupulous in the performance of his religious
duties and openhanded in his dealings, especially with
theologians. We can well underhand that this
attitude was apt to pall on his patrons and lead at
length to unpleasant incidents, or at least mutual
dislike. Apart from these rare cases, however, he

appears to have been liked and respefted wherever he
went.

In attempting to e^imate the value of Ibn BattiJta’s
work, some description mu^ be given of the book
Itself. Ibn Batata may have taken notes of the
places that he visited, but the evidence is rather again^
It. Only once^ does he refer to notes, when he says
that at Bukhara he copied a number of epitaphs from
t e tornbs of famous scholars, but afterwards lo^
them when the Indian pirates Gripped him of all that
^ ^ f epitaphs were of special interest to

j theologians because they con-

fine lifts of the writings of the deceased. Ibn

lo



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

Battista was not himself a man of letters who was likely
to regard his experiences as material for a book; on
the contrar}', he seems to haw entertained no idea of
writing them down.

On his return to Fez he had related his adventures
to the sultan and the court, where they were received
with general incredulity, as we know from a passage
in the works of his great contemporar)', the hi^lorian
Ibn Khaldiin. . He found, however, a powerful sup-
porter in the wazfr, at whose inRigation possibly
the sultan gave inAruftions to one of the principal
secretaries, Muhammad ibn Juzap', to commit them
to writing. Ibn Juza)ty accordingly compiled the
work which we possess at the diflation of Ibn Battuta.
The result is a book of somewhat composite chamber.
The writer was not always content to take down Ibn
Battista's narratives as they were delivered. He shows
commendable care in regiBcring the cxail pronuncia-
tion of every foreign name (a matter of some importance
in view of the nature of the Arabic script), but in some
other respc£ls his editing is open to criticism. By
his own ilatemcnt the work is an abridgment, which

f iossibly accounts for the brevity of one or two of the
atcr seflions. The bulk of the narrative has been
left with but little touching-up in the simple, straight-
forward ftylc of the narrator, out at points Ibn Juzayy
has embellished it in the taSle of the age, with passages
of rhetorical prose and cxfni^s from poems, whtch
seldom add much of interest. His interpolation of
incidents from his own experience may be excused,
but another of his proceedings is more questionable.
He had before him the narrative of the travels of
Ibn Jubayr, an Andalusian scholar who visited Egypt,
the Hij5z, and Syria in the twelfth centuty, and wrote
an account of his experiences which enjoyed a great
reputation in the Weft. Where Ibn Battiita covers
the same ground, Ibn Juzayy has often subftituted
XI



SELECTIONS FROM THE

rpossibly at Ibn Battiita’s desire or with his per-
mission) an abridgment of Ibn Jubayr’s work, notably
in the account of the ceremonies observed at Mecca
during the Pilgrimage and at other seasons of the year.
We have consequently to bear in mind that the book
is not entirely Ibn Battuta’s work; there ^ are indeed
indications (for example, in the transcriptions and
translations of Persian phrases) that the reputed author
did not himself read the book at all, or if he did, read
it negligently.

Taking the work, then, as a whole, we niuft regard
it as primarily intended to present a descriptive account
of Muhammadan society in the second quarter of the
fourteenth century. Ibn Battiita’s intereft in places
was, as we have seen, subordinate to his interest in
persons. He is the supreme example of h geogra-phe
malgre lui^ whose geographical knowledge was gained
entirely from personal experience and the information
of chance acquaintances. For his details he relied
exclusively on his memory, a memory, it is true, which
had been highly cultivated by the ordinary sy^em of
theological education. Involving the memorizing of
large numbers of works, but ^lill liable to slips and
confusions, more or less great. In his itineraries he
sometimes misplaces the order of towns, and twice at
lea^ leaves himself in the air, as it were, with a gap
of hundreds of miles. He gives wrong names at
several points, especially when he is dealing with
non-Muslim countries, where his knowledge of Arabic
and Persian was of little service to him. In his hi^ori-
cal narratives, which are generally tru^worthy, similar
miftakes are jFound. It Is indeed remarkable that the
errors are comparatively few, considering the enormous
number of persons and places he mentions. The mo^
serious difficulty is offered by the chronology of the
travels, which is utterly impossible as it ^ands. Many
of the dates give the impression of having been Inserted

12



travels of IBN BATTUTA

more or less at haphazard, possibly at the editor^
requeft, but the examination and correttion ot them
offtrs a task so great that it has not been attempted in

this seleftion. .

There is finally the queSion of his veracity. Thfe
can be no doubt that in his narratives of the Muslim
countries, notwithftanding errors of exaggeration ^d
misunderftanding, Ibn Batthta faithfully relates what
he believes to be true. Some critics have, however,
regarded his claim to have visited Conftantinople and
China with considerable dubiety. The principal diffi-
culties as regards the visit to Constantinople are the
vagueness of his route and his claim to have met the
ex-Emperor, when by his own chronology the ex-
Emperor had been dead for over a year. The firft
can be explained by the difficulties of an Arabic-
speaking traveller in such unfamiliar surroundings,
the second by an error in dating. The account of the
city itself is so full and accurate that it cannot be other
than the narrative of an eye-witness, who enjoyed
exceptional facilities such as Ibn Battdta had, and his
interview with the ex-Emperor in particular bears
the unmillakable ftamp of truth.

The difficulties contained in the narrative of the
journeys to and in China are generally of the same order,
and will be more fully considered in their place. It
need only be said here that to deny them raises even
greater difficulties, and that by exaftly the same kind
of reasoning it can be “proved” that though Ibn
Battuta undoubtedly was in India he never went
there 1 Ibn Battdta is always unsatisfaaory when he
relies on second-hand information, and it is moft
unlikely that he could have put together so personal
a narrative had the ftatements of others not been
supplemented by his own observations. There are
also some material arguments in favour of his claim to
have visited China. He had, in his capacity as envoy
>3



SELECTIONS FROM THE

from the Sultan of Delhi, very good reason for going
there, and facilities for travel in China which were
denied to the ordinary merchant. In the second place
one obscure passage in the narrative of his doings
at Khansa (Hang-chow) is cleared up by an earlier
passage relating to his visit to Shaykh Jaldl ad-Din in
Assam, with which the journey to China is closely
connefted. Thirdly, if his claim were false, he dlood
a reasonable chance of being exposed. He relates
with some emphasis that in his journey through
Northern China he met a merchant from Ceuta, the
brother of a man living in Sijilmasa, in Morocco, whom
he subsequently met also. That this merchant should
have had some communication with Morocco, even in
those days, is not impossible, since I bn Battiita himself
had once transmitted a sum of money from India to
Mequinez. On the whole, therefore, the narrative
dealing with China seems to me to be genuine, though
it is certainly related with greater brevity than usual,
either because Ibn Battiita could not recall the Chinese
names, if he learned them, with the same ease as the
more familiar Arabic and Persian names, or because it
was more dra^ically abridged by the editor. I can in
fa£t see no alternative, except to suppose that he was
hypnotized into the belief that he had gone there by
one of the miracle-working saints whom he met in
India.

Ibn Battiita was fir^ brought into prominence by
the translation of an abridged text by Dr. Samuel Lee
in 1829. The complete text of the Travels, which
was found in Algeria a few years later, was published
with a French translation and critical apparatus by
Defrdmery and Sanguinetti in the middle of the
century from a number of manuscripts, one of which,
containing the second half of the work, is the autograph
of the original editor, Ibn Juzayy. The French
translation, though on the whole remarkably accurate,

I4



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

suRcrs from the absence of cxplanator)* notes. Various
se£lions of the book (chiefiy from the French text)
have been annotated by scholars familiar with the
countries themselves, but a large amount Aill remains
to be worked over. In the present sclc^lions, w’hich
have been translated afresh from the Arabic text,
Ibn Battdla is treated as a traveller, and not as a writer
of geography. SulTicicnt indications have, it is hoped,
been added in the text and the notes to enable the
course of his journeys to be followed in detail on any
large-scale atlas, but many problems of geography
have been passed over in silence. The easy collo-
quialism of his ^yle has been retained in translation
as far as possible, in preference to a ^lilted Elizabethan
language. It has not been easy to make a selcftion
from the wealth of narrative and anecdote contained
in the work, and many intcreiling sc£lions have neces-
sarily been omitted or abridged. But until the appear-
ance of a complete version (such as the writer is now
preparing for the Haklu)^ Socict)’) it is hoped that
this extraft may be of service in introducing to a wider
circle of English readers one of the moA remarkable
travellers of his own or any age.

§ 2. THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF IBN BATT&Ta’s
TRAVELS

, The Islamic world in the fourteenth century differed,
in extent and outward splendour, but little from the
magnificent empire ruled by the Caliphs of Damascus
and Baghdad in the eighth. If in the WcA it had
been shorn of its outpoAs in Spain and Sicily, it could
juAly claim to have more than balanced the loss by its
extension in India and Malaysia. It had recently
wiped out the laA traces of the humiliation infliAed
upon it by the crusading Franks, and was on the
point of cxaAing a signal vengeance by the sword of
*5



SELECTIONS FROM THE

the Ottomans in Europe. Yet it was true, notwith-
standing all these apparent signs of progress, that the
political fabric of Islam was Stricken with mortal
disease. The centuries had taken a heavy toll of
vitality from that huge frame, and had left it Still
formidable, it may be, but wounded at the heart.

The laSt Crusader had indeed been driven from the
shores of Syria, but at what a coSt! Two centuries
of Struggle and intrigue had been necessary to repel
attacks that the warriors of the early generations had
regarded as the minor incidents of outpoSt warfare.
The sceptre had passed from the hands of the supple
Arab and the cultured Persian to those of the violent
and illiberal Turk. For more than two centuries
after the year looo the ambitions of Turkish generals
and chieftains had torn and retorn the body of Islam,
devastating its lands by their misgovernment and
continual warfare more effectively than any foreign
foe. Convulsion succeeded to convulsion, until at
length the heathen Mongols from Central Asia made
hares of the Turkish lions, and in 1258 formed the
derelict eaStern lands of Islam into a province of their
immense empire.

This event, the shock of which seemed to the
Muslim peoples like the LaSt Judgment of the Wrath
of God, proved in the end a blessing in disguise. Once
again the eaStern provinces enjoyed a period of firm
and relatively undisturbed government, under which
commerce and agriculture took heart and began to
re-create a prosperity that seemed to have vanished
for ever . Simultaneously Egypt and Syria, which
had withstood the Mongol onset, enjoyed under a
succession of capable rulers a rare period of peace and
prosperity. The Turkish captains who had hitherto
quarrelled over the mangled fragments of the central
provinces, were relegated to the frontiers, where they
indulged their taSte for warfare at the expense of the



TRAVELS OF IRN BATTOTA

infidel and the heathen, winning for themselves a
goodly portion of the riches of this world, and the
reputation of “ Warriors for the Faith ** to ensure their
portion in the world to come. The Mongol conqucRs
thus efTcflually contributed to the successes gained by
the arms of Islam in India, and a few years later also
in Thrace and the Balkan Peninsula, successes which
were supplemented by the missionary labours of saints
and darwish orders.

\V}ien in 1325 Ibn Bathita set out on his journeys,
the political conditions in the Islamic lands were, in
consequence, relatively AabIc and unusually favourable
for travel. From AswAn to the frontier of Cilicia the
word of the Sultan of Eg)*pt was undisputed; the
Crusaders were but a bitter memor)*, and relations
with the Mongols, though not cordial, had not led
to warfare since the laA great vlflory of the youthful
Nisir at Damascus in 1303. *Ir.Aq and Persia ^lill
acknowledged the rule of the Mongol IFkhAns, now
good Muslims, but dcAincd soon to disappear. To
5 ie north and north-eaA the other Mongol khanates
of the Golden Horde and of Jaghatdy were on friendly
terms. Finally in India the ferocious but energetic
Sultan of Delhi, Muhammad ibn Tughlaq, was imposing
his ovcrlordship on the crcalcr part of the suo-con-
tinent. On the fringes 0? the great kingdoms, and in
such outlying parts as Anatolia, Afghanistan, and the
shores of the Indian Ocean, there cxiiled a hoSl of
petty sultans and amirs, who acknowledged no maSlcr
and maintained a precarious throne on the proceeds
of trade or freebooting, but these could hardly inflift
serious damage, even had the)' been so minded, on the
Islamic community in general. Commerce proceeded
freely both within and without the frontiers of Islam,
in spite of heavy dues and occasional vexations; and
if the indigenous industries had declined, in some
eases to the point of extinction, the revival of the

17 c



s B L £ C T ^ O ^ ^ ted t?

B..ope.n — t'”

*e ‘^^SfcoBipettoo" ^„,^ircv dm^f'_

the weakness of -.i, the ^ ^ue

T-he essen inoft _

tion its several ^“'^'i^ecay.

the forces^ century lau<is ftot^

in the tentn .^^i^uted al^ ^ shait

“«“; ri.4» “* ™SS -< “'“J.S

"S::fe?S5sS2S='^'


T^nSotns \rr th- tou-^* ^aghnt^
f the hrugooi tn

ourts oi ica, Spatt^> ^ d

Botth-'^f?. together vnth Niu j^i„oravrds ^
otV/eft,rwh'*’ Imiplres o^ * ^as P^^'^aiinids

Mmohaas rn ^en tnr^ ^ the^^y^’^ .^d the

the thirteenth at V^tended

in the Vith their ^ of Ifr^^y?' . _ from

T:he dangers -ealousios

from _A3S ^g^nvent^ore dissipated ^Q^rces

this disme ^^ouses, as Joggles th®, „ds frot”
nf the reignmg ^^tual ^"^'S^tivated lands



TKAVELS OK IBN BATTUTA

Sicilians less than twenty* years later, and only recovered
it in 1334 with Neapolitan and Genoese help. Their
empire extended in faft only over the coa^al ^Irip,
with some few fortified towns in the interior. The
prosperit}* of Tunis was due solely to its advantageous
position at the debouchment of the main trade routes
from the interior, which made it the premier commer-
cial city of the Maphrib and second only to Alexandria
among the Muslim Mediterranean ports, while its
culture, like that of the Maghrib generally, was mainly
suftained by refugees from the reconquered provinces
of Spain.

Tnc Marinid dynafty of Morocco, makers of a
richer territor)*, were in ilill worse ease. Their
hiflor)' is a monotonous record of blood and ftrife;
few rulers were able to withiland the revolts and
intrigues of their ambitious relatives, and these few
used what respite they gained in militar)' expeditions
againfl their neighbours, or, more worthily, again^l
the ChriAians in Spain. The dynaBy rc.ichcd its
zenith under Abu*l-Hasan (1331-4^) bis son
Abii ‘Inin (1348-58), whose names frequently recur
in the latter part of Ibn Battdta’s narrative. Abu’l-
Hasan succeeded in capturing SijilmAsa and Tlemscn,
and, in spite of a sanguinaiy’ defeat by the Spaniards
at Tarifa in 1340, was able to add Tunis to his domi-
nions in 1347, only to lose it immediately and simul-
taneously lose his throne to his rebel son Abii ‘Inin.
The latter in turn, having recaptured Tlemscn and
re-entered Tunis in 1357, was deserted by his army
and ilrangicd on his return to Fez, leaving the king-
dom a prey to indescribable anarchy. Nevertheless
Morocco itself enjoyed during these two reigns a period
of relative prosperity, and its great cities were beautified
by many public buildings, which in their day can have
been little inferior to the magnificent monuments of
Egypt and India. There is, in consequence, some

19



SELECTIONS FROM THE

ju^ification for the exuberant praise which _Ibn
Battiita be^ows upon Abii Tnan’s beneficent adminis-
tration, especially if it is remembered how chaotic
were the conditions which, as will be seen, he had ju^l .
left behind in the Ea^.

It is a pity that Ibn Battfita did not put on record
the fir^ impressions left on his mind when, as a young
man fresh from the narrow provincial life of Tangier,
he traversed the highly cultivated Delta of Egypt and
set foot in its opulent and teeming capital, then the
metropolis of Islam. Alone of all the Islamic lands
outside Arabia, Egypt had preserved the heritage of
Muslim culture, while the Mongols in the Ea^l and
the nomadic Arabs and Berbers in the We^ carried
deva^ation up to its very gates. Though the dyna^y
founded by the great Saladin had given place to the
military oligarchy known as the Mamldks, or White
Slaves, a form of government than which in theory
none could be worse, Egypt from 1260 to 1341
enjoyed, with short intervals of turmoil, not only
widespread power and pre^ige, but also a high degree
of prosperity. This was due mainly to three things.
The Mamliik Sultans Baybars I (1260-77), Qala’iin
(1279-90), and al-Malik an-Nasir (i 299-1 341), what-
ever their personal faults (and they were many), were
exceedingly capable and far-sighted rulers. In the
second place the bureaucratic admini^ration which
Egypt had inherited from its Byzantine and Fatimid
governors was in all probability the mo^ efficient
in^rument of government which exited in the Middle
Ages. Thirdly Egypt enjoyed almo^ a monopoly
of the Indian trade, the mo^t profitable of all medieval
commerce, and drew from it the va^ revenues which
were needed for the upkeep of its elaborate organiza-
tion, as well as for the con^ruftion of the unsurpassed
series^ of architedlural monuments which are the
peculiar glory of Cairo. Under these circum^ances

20



TRAVELS OF iBN BATTOTA

the Maml<!ik sultans were able not only to maintain
their authority againfl the Mongols in Syria and the
Hijiz, but also to extend it into Nubia and Anatolia,
and even weflwards to TrinoH for a time.

The measure of Egypt's fortune may be gauged
from the flalc of the rival kingdom of 'Irdo and Persia.
Of its former imperial cities some, like iJalkh, were
now mere names dinging to mounds of rubbish, and
those which had escaped their fate were cither, like
Baghdad and Basra, withered and shrunken, or else
the prey of contending faflions, and though new
cities, such as Tabriz and Sultinl)*a, had risen into
prominence, their prosperity was evanescent. Already
trailed by the successive nomadic inwsions and civil
Aruggles of the two preceding centuries, the ruin of
'Irdq and Northern Persia seemed to have been con-
summated by the Mongol invasions between t2i8 and
1260. Under the firA heathen rulers of the Mongol
dynaAy, moreover, the Muslims were persecuted, but
with the ofHcial conversion to IsUm of Ghazin-Khin
in 1295 a brighter era seemed to dawn. Though
disorders continued to some extent under his succes-
sors Oljdytii (*305-16) and Abii Sa'id (1317-35),
Trdq, at Icafl, recovered some of its former prosperity.
The rich province of Fdrs, on the other hand, seems to
have been little affcflcd by the disaflers W’hich befell
the reft of Persia; though subjeft to the Mongols, it
remained, as it had always been, somewhat apart from
its neighbours, with its own peculiar culture and
traditions. To the norlh-eaft of Persia, across the
Oxus, were the territories of another Mongol dynafty,
the Jaghatdy-Khdns. During the early centuries of
Isldm Transoxania had been one of the moft flourishing
provinces of the Caliphate. Bukhdrd and Samarqand
had a reputation inferior to none of the great cities of
the Eaft, and even during the troublous times of
Turkish ovcrlordship in the eleventh and twelfth
21



SELECTIONS FROM THE

centuries something of their prosperity ^lill lingered.
But it was on Transoxania that the fir^ fury of the
Mongol onset fell in 1219 and 1220, and under the
Jaghatdy-Khins, the mo^ turbulent and barbarian of
all the great Mongol dyna^ies, the shattered cities
and wafted countryside had little hope of recovering
more than a shadow of their former prosperity

The Muslim ftates in India have a totally different
hiftory. Sind had, indeed, formed a province of the
Caliphate, but the beginnings of an Indian Muslim
empire go no farther back than the twelfth century.
It was a great misfortune for India that the lateness of
this conqueft delivered her into the hands of merciless
and turbulent Turkish generals, whose aim was solely
to eftablish themselves as independent princes and to
extort as much as possible from its almoft inexhauftible
resources for their interminable wars. The sultans of
Delhi, the line of which begins with Qutb ad-Di'n
Aybak (1206-11), claimed a suzerainty over the other
ftates, which they were able to enforce only sporadically
and at appalling coft in blood and treasure. Unre-
ftrained by the cultural traditions and bureaucratic
organization of the old Isldmic lands, which their
fellow-countrymen, the Saljijqs and the Mamldks, had
been compelled to respeft, they gave free rein to their
impulses. In consequence “ the bloodftained annals
of the Sultanate of Delhi,” as Vincent Smith, the
hiftorian of India, remarks, “ are not pleasant reading.”
Of all the successors of Qutb ad-Din down to the
eftablishment of the Timdrid dynafty (the “ Grand
Moguls ”) in i 52’6, there is scarcely one who was not
intolerant, tyrannical, and cruel, and the same may be
said, with few exceptions, of the minor dynafties.
Aniong the early sultans the moft notable were Altamsh
or ntutmish (1211-36), who completed Qutb ad-Dm’s
buddings at Delhi, and ‘Ala ad-Din of the Khilji
dynafty (1296-131^), who repelled a series of Mongol

22



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

invasions and added many monuments to the archi-
teflurc of Delhi in addition to building the new town
ofSiri.

In 1321 the throne was occupied by Ghi)-ith ad-Dln
Tughlaq, under whom some sort of order was rcSlored
and the authority of Delhi extended again into Bengal
and the Deccan. His son Jtinl, the Sultan Muhammad
of Ibn Battiita’s time, had his father murdered in 132^,
and ascending the throne without opposition “occu-
pied it for twenty-six years of human tyTanny as
atrocious as any on record in the sad annals of human
devilry and then died in his bed." Yet the ambition
of the sultans of Delhi to create a vafl Indian empire
tvas more nearly achieved by him than by any other
sultan prior to the Moguls. His success might have
been Rill greater had it not been for the Rrangc contra-
diflions in his charafler so impartially exposed by
Ibn Battiita (see Chapter VI.) and confirmed by all
other available evidence. It would take us too far
afield to discuss here in detail the aflivities of this
exfraordinarj- ruler, and the reader may be referred to
the penetrating analysis contained in Vincent Smith's
Oxford Hinoryof India, pages 236 to 246.

Such were the conditions svhich Ibn Battdta found
on his caftward journey. When we follow him as he
retraced his Reps, less than twenty years later, it is
impossible not to Rand amazed at the anarchy which
within so short a period had spread over all the central
lands of Isldm. In India itself, Sultan Muhammad’s
grandiose designs had proved impossible to realize.
Without an organized adminiRration and a syRem of
government both flexible and consiRcnt, neither the
central nor the outlying provinces could be ruled from
Delhi or anywhere else. Even before the sultan’s
death, Bengal, the Deccan, and Malabar had begun
to break away, and in spite of the talents of his cousin
and successor, FIriSz Shdh (1351-88), the preRige of

23



SELECTIONS FROM THE

Delhi rapidly decayed, and the dismemberment of
India for the profit of petty princes continued un-
checked.

The malady from which India was suffering had
broken out again with redoubled violence ^in ‘Iraq
and Persia on the extinflion of the Mongol Ilkhanate
in 1336. The hopes that their conversion had raised,
the promise of a government able and willing to give
commerce and agriculture a chance of recovery, were
savagely betrayed. It would have mattered little to
the people who or which of the amirs seized the sove-
reignty, but the division of the empire between a
dozen quarrelling amirs spelled ruin and disa^er.
Here and there, no doubt, were islands of prosperity;
Ibn Battuta speaks of one such on the Euphrates above
Anbar. But the moft serious feature was that the
population under these repeated bludgeonings had
lo^ heart, and a few years of anarchy now resulted in
more depopulation than a century of anarchy had
formerly caused.

Nor was Egypt exempt from the general decline.
The death of Nasir in 1341 opened the door to a
prolonged series of dynamic disputes. No fewer than
eight of his sons were thru^ upon the throne between
1341 and 135^5 though the druggies over the
succession involved only the Mamldk soldiery and
not the people as a whole, yet at a time of repeated
changes of government the wretched subjefts naturally
suffered more severely than from the calculated ex-
tortions of a settled regime, and the disordered ^ate
of the kingdom is sufficiently indicated by the diminu-
tion of the revenues.

Even yet the cup of misery was not full. In 1348
the Muslim lands were swept by the fir^t outbreak of
^e devouring pe^lilence known as the “ Black Death.”
The extent of its ravages there will never be fully
known, but, from the figures given by Ibn Battfita

24



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

(see Chapter XII.) and in other sources, the loss of
life during the visitation itself and in the famine which
accompanied it was certainly appalling. In a young
and vigorous society the effefts of such a disaster soon
disappear; but where the social order is already reeling,
many decades are required before equilibrium can be
regained. This respite was not granted to the Isldmic
world. A generation later, in I 38 ij the visitation
was repeated, with as terrible effeft, and before the
horror of it passed from men's minds the whirlwind
from Central Asia swept once more over all the Muslim
lands from Delhi to Damascus and Smyrna, when
Ti'miir, who called himself a fclfow-Muslim, reduced
to walte and ashes what two invasions of the heathen


Mongols and two visitations of the Plague had spared.

There is one other aspeft of the history of this
period which deserves a short reference. It may
cause surprise that Ibn Battfita, though he regularly
calls the Christians infidels or heathens, rarely betrays
any animosity towards them, and even travels on
Genoese and Catalan vessels. The inconsiilcncy is
explained by the several relations in which the Muslims
^ood to the ChriAians. The Sacred Law of IsUm


places all ChriAians in one of two categories: native
ChriAian communities, living peacefully in Muslim
lands with their own social organization, but definitely
inferior in Aatus; and unsubdued ChriAian Aates
with which the Muslim Aate is theoretically at war.
In general, therefore, its attitude, and that of the
Muslims, to ChriAians was either hoAile or frigidly
aloof. But Muslim and ChriAian met on a third
footing, which the Canon Law had not envisaged and
which the religious authorities on either side vainly
tried to oppose. When the Normans had wreAed the
command of the Mediterranean from the Arabs in
the eleventh century, the commercial expansion of the
Italian republics and of Roussillon led to the con-


25



SELECTIONS FROM THE

elusion of trading agreements with the INduslim ^ates
and the foundation of trading Nations in their ports.
Though for mutual safety and convenience the Chris-
tian traders were subjedf to certain reftriftions, such
as the Muslims themselves were subjeft to in China,
all these economic negotiations were transadfed on
the basis of complete equality and mutual respeft.
This friendliness, in spite of the frequency of piracy
on both sides, was maintained on the whole until the
sixteenth century, and is refledled in Ibn Battdta’s
relations with the Chri^ian traders and during his
visit to Con^antinople.


§ 3. THE RELIGIOUS BACKGROUND OF IBN BATTUTA’s

TRAVELS

To the Muslim world in general, however, political
events, though not devoid of intere^l, were matters of
minor import. The medieval Muslim society was
above all a religious society. To religion it owed its
exigence, for the religion of Islam was its sole bond
of union. To religion it owed its common language
of intercourse, for Islam intervened to prevent the
dissolution of Arabic into local dialedls, and imposed
a knowledge of Arabic on Persians and Turks. To
religion it owed its heritage of literature, for religion
had supplied the incentive to those studies out of which
Arabic literature (poetry alone excepted) arose. To
religion it owed its social organization and its Jaws,
for Islam had built up a new legal system, obliterating,
at leaft in all the civilized lands, the old social organi-
zations and social inequalities. To religion it owed
its corporate feeling, for Isldm gave to every believer
^e sense of common fellowship in its universal
Brotherhood. Religion, in fine, not only created the
cultural background and psychological orientation of
Muslim society, but supplied for its members a philo-

26



TRAVELS OF IBN BATT'OTA

sophy of living and ordained even the lea^ aftivities
of their daily life.

The whole of Arabic literature reflefts these social
circum^lanccs by an insi^ence on religious values and
an interest in matters of religion, which is apt to make
heavy demands on the patience and knowledge of
modern readers. This naturally applies with special
force to Ibn Battdta’s book, no version of which can
possibly exclude all allusions to religious subjedls.
For this reason it may lighten the English reader*s
way to give here some account of the religious infti-
tutions of Islim and the organizations which sprang
up on Isidmic soil.

The general beliefs of IsUm require little explana-
tion. The central dogma is that there is but One
God, Creator of heaven and earth. Who alone is to
be worshipped, the absolute Maftcr of all His
creatures, whose lives He has, in His inscrutable
l^ve and Wisdom, foreordained, and whom He shall
judge on the laA awful Day. For their guidance He
has raised up a succession of Prophets, the line of
which, beginning with Adam, and continued through
Noah, Abraham, Moses, David, Solomon, and Jesus,
together with an unnumbered hoil of minor Prophets,
culminated in Muhammad. The doftrine preached
by all these Prophets is essentially one and the same,
with slight modifications for time and place, namely
hlanty or self-surrender to the Will or God. It is
set forth in a series of verbally inspired books given
by Divine Revelation to several of the Prophets,
notably the Torah (Pentateuch) to Moses, the Psalms
to David, the Evangel (which is not exaftly the Gospels
of the New Testament) to Jesus, and the Koran — the
final and perfect repository of the Divine Word — to
Muhammad. Such revelations were made not direftly
to the Prophet, but transmitted through the Archangel
Gabriel. In addition to men and angels, there is a
27



SELECTIONS FROM THE

third class of created beings, namely the Jinn, who
being made of fire have bodies more subtle than those
of men, and possess superhuman powers, but, like
men, shall be called to account on the Day of
Judgment.

But Islam is much more than the mere affirmation
of certain beliefs. No one has fully earned the name
of Muslim who does not also carry out with regularity
the religious duties imposed upon him. The main
“Pillars of the Faith” are four: (i) The five daily
prayer-rituals, each made up of a fixed number of
repetitions of a uniform series -of bodily poftures and
recitations, with the face towards the qibla^ i.e. Mecca,
The prayers are to be performed either congrega-
tionally or in private at Elated hours : ju^ before sun-
rise, ju^ after noon, in mid-afternoon, ju^ after sunset,
and two or three hours after nightfall. Congrega-
tional praj^ers are performed in a mosque and are led
by one (it is immaterial which one) of the worshippers.
In the mosque there are no images, no paintings,
nothing to di^radl the mind of the au^ere monotheist
from concentration on the adt of devotion. At moSt
the yalls may be decorated with a tracery of geo-
metocal designs, whose endless interlacings may
perhaps serve to weary the outward vision and give
ruller play to the inner spiritual perceptions. The
principal congregational service of the week, which is
tieid only in ‘ cathedral ” mosques, is the noon prayer
on riday, when, in addition to the ordinary ritual
prayers, the official Preacher of the mosque delivers
rorn t e pulpit a formal Khutha or allocution, con-
taming inter alia prayers for the reigning ruler, fol-
Iqwed usually by a sermon or exhortation (mawHzJ).

great feSfival days,
close of the faSling month of
^madan, and the greater feSlival on the tenth day
e month of Pilgrimage. Before beginning to

28



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

pray the worshipper mu^l in every case be in a ^ate
of ritual purity, which is ensured by the formal ablu-
tion of face, arms, and feet at the fountain provided
in every mosque. (2) The payment of a fixed alms-
tax on all property, averaging two and a half per cent,
annually. (3) The observance of the annual fa^l
during the month of Ramadan, i.e. complete abstinence
from all food and drink (including nowadays smoking)
between the hours of sunrise and sunset for the period
of one lunar month. (4) For those who are of age
and have the means to carry it out, the obligation to
make the Pilgrimage to Mecca at leaSt once in a
lifetime.

Besides its dogmatics and its religious praftices,
Isldm includes a complete legal and social syStem,
based on the Koran and the Hadith — the sayings and
aftipns attributed to the Prophet. This IslSmic Law
was expounded b^ four schools of juri^ls in the second
and third centuries of the Muslim era. The schools
differ only in minor points of interpretation, and all
are regarded as equally orthodox. The Law was
administered by the and in the capital cities of
the Eafl there was usually a supreme qSdl for each
rite. In praflicc criminal aftions were often decided
by the Sultan or his officers and sometimes legalized
by the formal assent of a qddl. The point at which
the social sySiem of Islam diverges mo 5 l radically
from European syftems is found in the sphere of
marriage and divorce. It is commonly known that
a Muslim may possess up to four wives at one time in
addition to slave concubines, and that he is at liberty,
subjeft to certain none too rigorous legal safeguards,
to divorce the former at will, and to dispose of the
latter unless- they have borne him male children.
Such provisions were admirably suited to a roving life,
and Ibn Battdta took full advantage of them. Details
that no European — far less any Chri^lian clergyman —
29



SELECTIONS FROM THE

would communicate are set down by him quite simply
and naturally, since they ^and in a measure, outside
the moral field, in a category not unlike that of eating
and drinking. One should not, however, draw over-
hafty conclusions from the casual manner in which
Ibn Battfita speaks of his wives. It is not good
manners for a Muslim to refer to his womenfolk in
ordinary social intercourse, and when, on rare occa-
sions, Ibn Battiita breaks through the convention, it
is generally no more than a brief explanatory reference
made in connection with some other circumClance.

In regard to a second feature of the Muslim social
sy^em, the practice of slavery, it is important to bear
in mind that the slave was generally the body-servant
or retainer of his master, and that slavery was in no
sense the economic basis of Muslim society. Ma^er
and slave thus ^ood in a more humane relationship
than did the slave cultivator to the Roman landed
proprietor or the American planter. There was
consequently less stigma attaching to slavery, and in
no other society has there been anything resembling
the sy^em by which, as has been shown in the pre-
ceding seClion, the white slaves came to furnish the
privileged cadres whence the high officers of ^ate,
commanders, governors, and at length even sultans,
were almo^ exclusively drawn.

The following ^ory, told by a theologian of the
third century, represents without serious di^ortion the
relations, which, as numerous parallels in Arabic
literature indicate, often exiCled between ma^er, wife,
and slave.

I saw a slave-boy being auClioned for thirty dinars,
and as he was worth three hundred I bought him*.
I was building a house at the time, and I gave him
twenty dinars to lay out on the workmen. He spent
en on them and bought a garment for himself with
e other ten. I said to him “ What’s this ?” to which

30



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

he replied “Don’t be ha5ly; no gentleman scolds his
slaves.” I said to myself “ Here have I bought the
Caliph’s tutor without knowing it” Later on I
wanted to marry a woman unknown to my cousin
(j.e. my fir£l wife), so I swore him to secrecy and gave
him a dindr to buy some things, including some of the
fish called hdzibd. But he bought something else,
and when I was WTOth with him he said “ I find that
Hippocrates disapproves of hdzibd.” I said to him
“ 1 ou worthless fool, I was not aware that I had bought
a Galen,” and gave him ten blows with the whip. But
he seized me and gave me seven back saying, “ Sir,
three blows is enough as a punishment, and the seven
I gave you are my rightful retaliation.” So I made
at him and gave him a cut on the head, whereupon he
went off to my cousin, and said to her “ Sincerity is
a religious duty, and whoever deceives us is not one of
us. My maflcr has married and he swore me to
silence, and when I said to him that my lady mufl be
told of it he broke my head.” So my cousin would
neither let me into the house nor let me have anything
out of it, until at laA I had to divorce the other woman.
After that she used to call the boy “ The honedl lad,”
and I could not say a word to him, so I said to myself
“ I shall set him free, and then I shall have peace."

The mo^ original features of the IslAmic system are
to be found in its religious organizations, of which there
were two, to some extent rivals of one another. The
official religious system of Isidm excludes the concep-
tion of a clergy, and consequently of a hierarchy.
There are no sacraments. All believers dland on
an equal footing in matters of religion, and none is
entitled to claim any spiritual fundlions which are not
shared by every member of the community. In aftual
practice, however, it was impossible to maintain the
theory of equality. Where a society is bound up with
a religious system, the cleric, the expounder of dodirine,

31



SELECTIONS FROM THE

the arbiter on points of law, inevitably e^ablishes
a moral predominance over his more ignorant fellows,
that is none the less real or even tyrannical because it
has no outward legal support. The mere maintenance
of the religious sy^em thus called into being a religious
ari^ocracy, as we have already termed the body of
theologians, differing, however, from the Christian
hierarchy in that the elaborate gradations of the
latter were unknown, that it had no spiritual pre-
rogatives, and was open to all without seeking any
man's leave or taking any vows. For the re^l, the
sy^em had much the same merits and defefts as a
prie^hood, though the theologians of Islam generally
held more aloof from the civil administration than did
the Christian hierarchy, and adopted an attitude which
in the long run produced disastrous effedts on both
church and civil government. In the political field
their influence was mainly negative. Since it devolved
upon the community as a whole to ensure the obser-
vance of the Faith, the theologians soon found that
they could use their influence to mould public opinion
and create of it a weapon with which to intimidate
law-breakers and keep in check local autocrats and
tyrants. It was rarely that even the moSl despotic
ruler ventured to brave the public disapproval, as may
be seen from some of the Stories related by Ibn
Battfita. On the other hand the example of Sultan
Muhammad of Delhi is sufficient to show that when
the ruler was aStute enough to humour the theologians
with his left hand, there were few who dared enquire
too closely into what he did with his right.

On the^ community as a whole was laid yet another
duty, which could not be delegated to the pro-
fessional theologians, the duty of defending by the
^ord the^ territorial and religious heritage of Islam.
The ’Jihad ^ which was reckoned by some juriSls
as an obligation of the same degree as prayer and

32



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

failing, and in the early days had indeed been the
conilant occupation of every Muslim, in a form more
offensive than defensive, was revived by the Crusades
and the Chriilian rcconqueil in Spain. No longer,
however, was it regarded as the personal duty of every
Muslim to take up arms for the defence of Isldm, and
for the moil part the Syrians and Andalusians were
left to defend their territories by themselves. Never-
theless, the inducement of Paradise, held out as the
reward of the martyr who dies fighting for the Faith,
was ilrong enough to maintain a ileady movement of
volunteers to the theatres of war againA the Chriilian
or heathen. These volunteers lived on the frontier
in forts or fortified lines called by the name of rihdt
(which means literally “ pickets ”), and were known
as Qhdzii or MurdhUSy the ncarcil English equivalent
for which is “mounted frontiersmen.” By the four-
teenth century it was probably only in Andalusia
that the inilitudon preserved its primitive charafler.
Elsewhere it had developed along two very different
lines. On the one hand the fighting life attrafled all
the moft turbulent elements in the Muslim empire,
and the Ghdzfs rapidly degenerated into bands of
condottieri and brigands, a source of much greater
vexation to Muslim rulers than to the infidels.

On the other hand it was associated with the rise
of the ascetic and my^ical movement within Isldm.
Early Muslim asceticism was dominated by fear of
Hell. Since death on Jihdd was the only sure passport
to Paradise, it came about that in the early days ascetics
had generally taken a prominent part in the frontier
warfare. Later on Jihdd was interpreted to apply to
the inward and spiritual dlruggle againdl the tempta-
tions of the worla, and the S^is (as the mydlics were
now called) withdrew from secular warfare, but
retained the old terminology. The ribdt was now the
ascetic’s hermitage or the convent or hospice where
33 D



SELECTIONS FROM THE

the devotees congregated to live the religious life. In
course of time the loose primitive associations became
linked up in an organization which tended to grow
more elaborate and hierarchical, with ascending grades
of spiritual perception and power. We may here,
however, omit the details of this my^ical hierarchy,
and pass at once to examine the working of the sufi
or darwish orders in the fourteenth century, and their
relations with the theologians.

In general the followers of the mystic’s path were by
this time grouped in congregations, called after some
eminent shaykh, who was regarded as the founder of
the tariqa or rule, including the ritual litany, which,
as will be explained shortly, was one of the distin-
guishing marks of each congregation. Round the
convent of the founder rose a girdle of daughter
houses, as disciples of the order spread throughout the
Muslim world, and in moSt cases all the members
looked up to the descendants or successors of the
founder (for in Islam asceticism does not imply celi-
bacy) as their head. The older individualist asceticism
was not yet extindt, however, and everywhere, but
especially in North-weSt Africa and in Mt. Lebanon,
were to be found recluses who were completely inde-
pendent of the darwish orders, though they also often
claimed spiritual affiliation with and descent from the
great Sdfi leaders of the early centuries. Still more
freely, outside the walls of convent or cell, roamed
nurnbers of darwishes or faqirSy affiliated and non-
affiliated, distinguished by the patched robe, wallet,
and Staff, who scorned to earn so much as a mite by
their own labours, truSting to the Providence of God
and the charity of the Faithful, and who at times
displayed an importunity and effrontery more easily
associated with professional mendicants than pious
“ almsmen.” ^

The fundamental aim of the Siifi life, however or

34



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

wherever lived, was to pierce the veils of human sense
which shut man off from the Divine and so attain to
communion with and absorption into God. Their
days and nights were spent in prayer and contempla-
tion, in failing and ascetic exercises. At frequent
intervals all the inhabitants of the convent, or the
local members of the fcr/yc, met to celebrate the ritual
litany, the dhikr^ according to their peculiar rites. The
dhikr was intended to produce a hypnotic effeft on the
participants and so allow them to tailc momentarily
the joys of reunion with the Divine. With that
extravagance which accompanies all expression of
rising emotion in Eaflern life and thought, the litany
in mo^l cases passed into a fantaRic exhibition of
marvellous or thaumaturgical feats, such as Ibn
Battdta describes on seve^ occasions. Some would
whirl and pirouette for hours at a time, others would
chew serpents or glass, walk in fire, or thru^l knives
through their limbs, without any worse effe^ls than at
mofl a temporary nervous exhauftion.

The faculty of self-torture without inflidling visible
injury, which is amply vouched for by modern
travellers who have witnessed the lamentations of the
Shi'itcs for the death of Husayn, or, like the late Lord
Curzon, have attended the stances of the Tsawfya
darwlshes in North-weil Africa, leads up to a related
and difficult queflion. All European commentators
of Ibn Battdta have referred to his credulity, his fond-
ness for the miraculous and uncritical acceptance of
reported miracles worked by the famous shaykhs and
saints whom he met. His powers of belief are not,
however, entirely unlimited, as may be seen from the
doubts which he expresses on more than one occasion
in regard to extravagant claims. The Glories of
miracles which he relates at secondhand do him no
discredit; the power of saints to perform miracles was
and ^lill is believed by the mass of Muslims, and such

35



SELECTIONS FROM THE

tales intere^ed both narrator and audience. It is
when he tells of miraculous events direftly associated
with himself that the problem of their truth mu^ be
definitely faced. In some cases it may be possible to
explain them by hypnotism (if that in fad “ explains ”
them), as the Muslim theologian explained the Chinese
magician’s tricks at Hang-chow; in others, we may
susped the arts of the conjurer; but there is a residue,
including, for example, the account of his escape after
his capture at Koel in India, where we mud either
accept the miraculous element or give the lie dired
to the traveller. To the naturalidic and mechanidic
mind of the nineteenth century the choice was simple,
as it is dill to those who charge Ibn Battdta with
wholesale invention in regard to his travels. But
the twentieth-century reader has greater faith in the
powers of God and man, and while he may remain
critical he will not rejed a priori any narrative that
involves the “miraculous.” There can be no doubt
that in certain orders, at lead, the severe bodily and
mental training undergone by a darwish as he advances
to the higher grades of initiation is accompanied by an
expansion of mental powers, beginning with dmple
telepathy. The doubting reader may be referred to
an illuminating account by Professor D. B. Macdonald
{Aspeiis of Islam^ p. 170) of an ex-darwlsh converted
to Chridianity who dill retained his telepathic gifts.
The only prudent course, it would seem, is to suspend
judgment, and in the meantime give Ibn Battdta the
credit for relating what he at lead believed to be the
truth.

It is a little surprising, however, to find him so
deeply intereded in and so sympathetic in general
towards^ the darwishes and Stafis. - The average
theologian regarded them with suspicion, if not with
aversion, for various reasons, religious and secular,
while the mydic in turn frequently despised the



TRAVELS OF IB N BATTOTA

theologian for his formalism and cult of the letter.
The firA point of issue between them dealt with the
nature of religious knowledge. To the theologians,
there was but one road to the apprehension of truth,
V/n or savtir^ the science of tncology, with all its
scholaftic appurtenances involved in the ^udy of
the Koran and the Traditions of the Prophet. The
darsvlsh, on the other hand, sought na'rifa or (onttais-
sancCi that direft knowledge of God, which in his view
was often aftually hindered by the fludy of theology*.
Sufism showed an antinomian tendency which could
not but excite the disapprobation of the IcgaliA, who
sought and found satisla^lion for his religious inAinfls
in the ritual duties prescribed by the baith. More-
over the reverence accorded by the disciple to his
shaykh when alive, and the elevation of former shaykhs
to the rank of saints, to whom Invocations were
addressed, seemed to the theologian to deAroy the
non-saccrdotal principle, and even to trespass into
polytheism, the one mortal sin in IsUm. At firA the
breach between theologian and Siifi had been much
wider, but in course of time the popular influence
enjoyed by the Siifis forced the theologians, however
unwillingly, to terms in the matter of saint-worship.
The success of the SOfIs in legitimating their praAiccs
was possibly not a little due to pressure exertea outside
the purely religious field. They formed, as has been
seen, a rival religious organization, and it is evident
that some of the hoAility felt by the theologians was
due to competition for popular favour and support.
As the balance of popularity turned in favour of the
Sdfis, especially with the influx of the Turkish element
into the social and political life of Islim, the theologians
found it necessary to admit much that th<w had formerly
rcsiAcd and perhaps continued to chafe at. By the
fourteenth century their capitulation was complete,
when the laA outAanding opponent of the Siifi heresies,
37



SELECTIONS FROM THE

that Ibn Taymiya whom I bn Battiita saw in Damascus,
and whom he speaks of as “ having a bee in his bonnet,”
was silenced. But the ho^ility remained, now more,
now less openly shown. In North-we^l Africa it seems
to have been much weaker than elsewhere, possibly
because of the ftrong inherited attachment of the
Berbers, which they ^ill show, to the principle of local
sanctuaries and “ holy men,” islamized under the name
of murdbits (“ marabouts ”). This may serve to ex-
plain why Ibn Battuta, trained theologian as he was,
^ill had all a Berber’s interest in the holy men whom
he met on his travels.

The antagonism between legi^ and follower of the
Inner Light was, however, unimportant by com-
parison with the hatred engendered by the Great
Schism of Islam, the division between Sunni and Sht’ite,
The Shi‘ite movement began in the firCl century of
Islam as political propaganda againCf the Umayyad
dyna^y of Caliphs in favour of the house of ‘AH, the
son-in-law and cousin of the Prophet. It was then
hand in glove with the orthodox, and succeeded both
in impressing its hiClorical point of view on orthodox
sentiment and in overthrowing the hated dyna^y,
only to be cheated of its political hopes by the eftablish-
ment of the rival ‘Abbasid line, and to fall inClead'under
a more methodical persecution than hitherto. Shi'ism
now took to the catacombs, and soon became a separate
heretical seft, diftinguished by the doClrine of alle-
giance to a divinely appointed, sinless, and infallible
spiritual leader, the Imam, in^ead of an eleClive lay
head or Caliph. The Imamate they held to be heredi-
tary in the house of ‘AH, but the various sub-groups
differed on the point at which the succession of Imams
^^s^^i^^terrupted. The belief of the principal group,
or ^ Twelvers,” to which the Shi‘ites of Persia and
‘Iraq ^ill belong, was that the twelfth Imam of the
line disappeared about the year 873 into a cave at

38



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

HilJa, but that he continues, through the heads of
the religious organization, to provide spiritual and
temporal guidance for his people, and will reappear
as the promised Mahdl to bnng the long reign of
tyranny to an end. This Grange doctrine of a
“Hidden Imdm” or “Expelled Imdm,” often re-
ferred to as the “ Mafler or the Age,” is recalled by
the ceremony at Hilla, of which Ibn Battdta gives a
graphic description.

Shi'ism has always shown a much stronger seftarian
tendency than orthodox IsUm, and was diflinguished
from its earlieA days by the number and variety of
its offshoots. The general tendency of the sefts was
to. adopt, under the influence of various syncreti^l
philosophies, dlill more extreme views on the person
of ‘AH and his descendants, even to the extent of
defying them. Such GhuUt or “ Extremidls ” seem
to have found special favour in Syria where, indeed,
two of the largefl of these communities are Aill to
be found, the Druse and the Nusayris (now called
‘Alawfs), alongside the majority Shi‘itcs of the Twelvers
seft, locally known as MutawdHs. From the same
cause arises its intolerance. The Shi'ite hates, where
the Sunni merely despises. His hatred is by no means
reserved for non-Muslims, but is freely bellowed
upon the other Isldmic sefts, especially upon the Siifls,
whose views admit of no reconciliation with the ponti-
fical sydlem of Shi‘ism. With such feelings on the
one side reciprocated on the other, it is not surprising
to find a conAant feud raging in Syria, in spite of the
efforts of the Mamlfik governors. Over and over in
Ibn Battiita’s work the reader will note traces of the
enmity that divided Sunni from Shi'ite, not lea^l in
the writer’s personal animosity, which shows in the
substitution of the opprobrious Rdfidhi or “ Refuser,”
for Shi'ite or ‘Alawl. The explanation of this term
is to be found in a praftice adopted by the Shi'ites, as
39



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTCTA

a logical consequence of their Imdmate theory. Hold-
ing that ‘AH alone had the right to succeed his cousin
Muhammad, they regard the three Caliphs who
reigned before him as usurpers and traitors, and
sub^itute a curse for the blessing which the pious
Sunni Muslim pronounces after the names of these
the closest companions of the Prophet — a deliberate
insult which naturally arouses the indignation of the
Sunnis in a far greater degree than their more theoretical
dogmatic heresies.


40



IN THE NAME OF GOD THE MERCIFUL
THE COMPASSIONATE


Praise he to God^ Who hath subdued the earth to His
servants that they may tread thereon spacious waySy Who
hath made therefrom and thereunto the three moments of
growth^ return^ and recall^ and hath perfeded His Bounty
toward His creatures in subjecting to them the beads of
the field and vessels towering like mountains^ that they
may beSlride the ridge of the wilderness and the deeps of
the ocean* May the blessing of God red upon our chief
and mader Muhammad who made plain a way for
mankind and caused the light of His guidance to shine forth
in radiance^ and upon all who are honoured by relationship
with him*

Among^l those who preseoted themselves at the lUu^bas gates
of our lord the Caliph and Commander of the Faithful Abtl *lnjn
Fins was the learned and moil veradous traveller AM 'Abdallih
Muhammad of Tangier known as Itn Baitute and in the cailem lands
M Shams ad-D(n, who having joum^ed round the world and visited
its dtio observantly and attentively^ having inveiligaled the diveni'ties
of nations and experienced the cuiloms of Arabs and non-Arabs, laid
down the ilaff of travel in this noble metropolis. A |ra*dous command
prescribed that he should difiate an account of the odes which he had
seen on his journeys, of the intereiling events which he retained in his
memory and of the mien of countries, learned men and pious saints
whom he had met, and that the hnmble servant Muhammad ibn
Juzayy should unite the morseb of his dilation into a book which
should include all their merits and preserve them in a clear and elegant
I have therefore rendered the sense of the Shaykh Abti ‘Abdal-
lih’s narrative in language adequate to his purposes, often reproducing
without alteration his own words, and I have reported all his Glories
and narratives of events without inveiligatlng their tmthfulness since
he himself has authenticated them with the Slrongeft proofs.

Here begins the narrative of the Shaykh Abii
'Abdallah [Ibn Battiita].

41





BOOK I


CHAPTER I

I LEFT Tangier, my birthplace, on Thursday, 2nd
Rajab, 725 [14th June, 1325], being at that time
twenty-two [lunar] years of age,* with the intention
of making the Pilgrimage to ^e Holy House [at
Mecca] and the Tomb of the Prophet [at Madina].
I set out alone, finding no companion to cheer the way
with friendly intercourse, and no party of travellers
with whom to associate myself. Swayed by an over-
mailering impulse within me, and a long-cherished
desire to visit those glorious sanftuaries, I resolved
to quit all my friends and tear mvsclf away from my
home. As my parents were Aill alive, it weighed
grievously upon me to part from them, and both they
and I were afflifled with sorrow.

On reaching the’ city of Tilimsdn [Tlcmsen], whose
sultan at that time was Abii Tdshifin,’ I found there
two ambassadors of the Sultan of Tunis, who left the
city on the same day that I arrived. One of the
brethren having advised me to accompany them, I
consulted the will of God in this matter,® and after
a dlay of three days in the city to procure all that I
needed, I rode after them with all speed. I overtook
them at the town of Milidna, where we dtayed ten
days, as both ambassadors fell sick on account of the
summer heats. When wc set out again, one of them
grew worse, and died after we had flopped for three
nights by a dlream four miles from Milidna. I left
their party there and pursued my journey, with a
company of merchants from Tunis. On reaching
43



SELECTIONS FROM THE

al-Jaza’ir [Algiers] we halted outside the town for
a few days, until the former party rejoined us, when
we went on together through the Mitija^ to the moun-
tain of Oaks [Jurjdra] and so reached Bijdya [Bougie].®
The commander of Bijaya at this time was the chanaber-
lain Ibn Sayyid an-Nds. Now one of the Tunisian
merchants of our party had died leaving three thousand
dinars of gold, which he had entru^ed to a certain
man of Algiers to deliver to his heirs at Tunis. Ibn
Sayyid an-Nds came to hear of this and forcibly seized
the money. This was the firdl instance I witnessed
of the tyranny of the agents of the Tunisian govern-
ment. At Bijdya I fell ill of a fever, and one of my
friends advised me to dtay there till I recovered.
But I refused, saying, “ If God decrees my death, it
shall be on the road with my face set toward Mecca.”
“ If that is your resolve,” he replied, “ seU your ass
and your heavy baggage, and I shall lend you what
you require. In this way you will travel light, for
we mu^ make ha^e on our journey, for fear of meeting
roving Arabs on the way.”® I followed his advice and
he did as he had promised — may God reward him !
On reaching Qusantinah [Con^antine] we camped
outside the town, but a heavy rain forced us to leave
our tents during the night and take refuge in some
houses there. Next day the governor of the city
came to meet us. Seeing my clothes all soiled by the
rain he gave orders that they should be washed at his
house, and in place of my old worn headcloth sent
me a headcloth of fine Syrian cloth, in one of the ends
of which he had tied two gold dinars. This was the
fir^t alms I received on my journey. From Qusan-
tinah we reached Bona where, after laying in the
town for several days, we left the merchants of our
party on account of the dangers of the road, while
we pursued our journey with the utmost speed. I.
was again attacked by fever, so I tied myself in the

44



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

saddle with a turban>cIoth in case I should fall by
reason of. my weakness. So great was my fear that
I could not dismount until we arrived at Tunis. The
population of the city came out to meet the members
of our party, and on all sides greetings and que^ions
were exchanged, but not a soul greeted me as no one
there was known to me. I was so affefted by my
loneliness that I could not rcilrain my tears and wept
bitterly, until one of the pilgrims realized the cause
of my distress and coming up to me greeted me kindly
and continued to entertain me with friendly talk until
I entered the ci^.

The Sultan of Tunis at that time was Abii Yahyd,
the son of Abii Zakariya II., and there were a number
of notable scholars in the town.’ During my ^lay the
festival of the Breaking of the Fail fell due, and I
joined the company at the Praying-ground.® The
inhabitants assembled in large numbers to celebrate
the feilival, maki^ a brave show and wearing their
richeil apparel. . The Sultan Abii Yahyd arrived on
horseback, accompanied by all his relatives, courtiers,
and officers of ilate walking on foot in a ilately pro-
cession. After the recital of the prayer and the
conclusion of the Allocution the people returned to
their homes.

Some time later the pilgrim caravan for the Hijdz
was formed, and they nominated me as their qddl
(judge). We left Tunis early in November, following
the coail road through Si!ba, Sfax, and Qdbis,® where
we flayed for ten days on account of incessant rains.
Thence we set out for Tripoli, accompanied for several
^ages by a hundred or more horsemen as well as a
detachment of archers, out of respefl for whom- the
Arabs kept their distance. I had made a contrail of
marriage at Sfax with the daughter of one of the
syndics at Tunis, and at Tripoli she Was conducted
to me, but after leaving Tripoli I became involved

45



SELECTIONS FROM THE

in a dispute with her father, which necessitated my
separation from her. I then married the daughter of
a ftudent from Fez, and when she was conduced to
me I detained the caravan for a day by entertaining
them all at a wedding party.

At length on April 5th (1326) we reached iUex-
andria. It is a beautiful city, well-built and fortified
with four gates^° and a magnificent port. Among all
the ports in the world I have seen none to equal it
except Kawlam [QuUon] and Calicfit in India, the
port of the infidels [Genoese] at Sudaq in the land of
the Turks, and the port of Zaytdn in China, all of
which will be described later. I went to see the light-
house on this occasion and found one of its faces in
ruins. It is a very high square building, and its door
is above the level of the earth. Opposite the door,
and of the same height, is a building from which there
is a plank bridge to the door; if this is removed there
is no means of entrance. Inside the door is a place
for the lighthouse-keeper, and within the lighthouse
there are many chambers. The breadth of the passage
inside is nine spans and that of the wall ten spans;
each of the four sides of the lighthouse is 140 spans
in breadth. It is situated on a high mound and lies
three miles from the city on a long tongue of land
which juts out into the sea from close by the city wall,
so that the lighthouse cannot be reached by land
except from the city. On my return to the We^
in the year 750^ [1349] I visited the lighthouse again,
and found that it had fallen into so ruinous a condition
that it was not possible to enter it or climb up to the
door.^^ Al-Malik an-Nasir had Parted to build a
similar lighthouse alongside it but was prevented by
death from completing the work. Another of the-
marvellous things in this city is the awe-inspiring
marble column in its outskirts which they call the

Pillar of Columns.” It is a single block, skilfully

46



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

carved, crefted on a plinth of square Clones like enor-
mous platforms, and no one knows how it was crcflcd
there nor for certain who creeled it.“

One of the learned men of Alexandria was the qddf,
a mailer of eloquence, who used to wear a turban of
extraordinary size. Never either in the cailcrn or the
wcilcrn lands have I seen a more voluminous head-
gear. Another of them was the pious ascetic Burhdn
ad-Dfn, whom I met during my ilay and whose
hospitality I enjoyed for three days. One day as I
entered his room he said to me “ I see that you are
fond of travelling through foreign lands.” I replied
“ Yes, I am ” (though I had as yet no thought of going
to such diilant lands as India or China). Then he
said *' You muil certainly visit my brother” Farid
ad-Dln in India, and my brother Rukn ad-Dfn in
Sind, and my brother Burhdn ad-Din in China, and
when you find them give them greeting from me.”

I was amazed at his prediflion, and the idea of going
to these countries having been cail into my mind, my
journeys never ceased until 1 had met these three that
he named and conveyed his greeting to them.

During my ^ay at Alexandria 1 had heard of the

{ )ious Shaykh aI-Murshidl,who bellowed gifts miracu-
ously created at his desire. He lived in solitary
retreat in a cell in the country where he was visited
by princes and ministers. Parties of men in all ranks
of Jjfc used to come to him every day and he would
supply them all with food. Each one of them would
desire to cat some flesh or fruit or sweetmeat at his
cell, and to each he would give what he had suggested,
though it was frequently out of season. His fame was
carried from mouth to mouth far and wide, and the
Sultan too had visited him several times in his retreat.

I set out from Alexandria to seek this shaykh and
passing through DamanhiSr came to Fawwd [Fua],
a beautiful township, dose by which, separated from
47



SELECTIONS FROM THE

it by a canal, lies the shaykh’s cell. I reached this
cell about mid-afternoon, and on saluting the shaykh
I found that he had with him one of the sultan’s
aides-de-camp, who had encamped with his troops
ju^ outside. The shaykh rose and embraced me, and
calling for food invited me to eat. When the hour
of the afternoon prayer arrived he set me in front as
prayer-leader, and did the same on every occasion
when we were together at the times of prayer during
my ^fay. When I wished to sleep he said to me
“ Go up to the roof of the cell and sleep there ” (this
was during the summer heats). I said to the officer
“ In the name of God,”^^ but he replied [quoting from
the Koran] “ There is none of us but has an appointed
place.” So I mounted to the roof and found there
a ^raw mattress and a leather mat, a water vessel for
ritual ablutions, a jar of water and a drinking-cup, and
I lay down there to sleep.

That night, while I was sleeping on the roof of the
cell, I dreamed that I was on the wing of a great bird
which was flying with me towards Mecca, then to
Yemen, then ea^wards, and thereafter going towards
the south, then flying far eastwards, and finally landing
in a, dark and green country, where it left me. I
was aftonished at this dream and said to myself “ If
the shaykh can interpret my dream for me, he is all
that they say he is.” Next morning, after all the
other visitors had gone, he called me and when I had
related my dream interpreted it to me saying: “You
will make the pilgrimage [to Mecca] and visit [the
Tomb o^ the Prophet, and you will travel through'
Yemen, ‘Iraq, the country of the Turks, and India.
You will ^lay there for a long time and meet there
my brother Dilshad the Indian, who will rescue you
from a danger into which you will fall.” Then he
gave me a travelling-provision of small cakes and
money, and I bade him farewell and departed. Never



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

since parting from him have I met on my journeys
aught but good fortune, and his blessings have ^lood
me in good ^ead.

We rode from here to Damietta through a number
of towns, in each of which we visited the principal men
of religion. Damietta lies on the bank of the Nile,
and the people in the houses next to the river draw
water from it in buckets. Many of the houses have
^leps leading down to the river. Their sheep and
goats are allowed to pa^lure at liberty day and night;
for this reason the saying goes of Damietta “ Its walls
are sweetmeats and its dogs are sheep.” Anyone
who enters the city may not afterwards leave it except
by the governor’s seal. Persons of repute have a
seal damped on a piece of paper so that they may
show it to the gatekeepers; other persons have the seal
stamped on their forearms. In this city there are
many seabirds with extremely greasy flesh, and the
milk of its buffaloes is unequalled for sweetness and
pleasant taile. The fish called biiri“ is exported
thence to Syria, Anatolia, and Cairo. The present
town is of recent con^truftion; the old city was that
de^lroycd by the Franks in the time of al-Malik
as-Siiih.“

From Damietta I travelled to Fariskiir, which is
a town on the bank of the Nile, and halted outside
it. Here I was overtaken by a horseman who had
been sent after me by the governor of Damietta. He
handed me a number of coins, saying to me “The
Governor asked for you, and on being informed about
you, he sent you this gift ” — may God reward him !
Thence I travelled to AshmiSn, a large and ancient
town on a canal derived from the Nile. It possesses
a wooden bridge at which all vessels anchor, and in
the afternoon the baulks are lifted and the vessels
pass up and down. From here I went to Samanniid,
whence I journeyed upstream to Cairo, between a
49 ^



SELECTIONS FROM THE

continuous succession of towns and villages. The
traveller on the Nile need take no provision with him,
because whenever he desires to descend on the bank
he may do so, for ablutions, prayers, provisioning, or
any other purpose. There is an uninterrupted chain
of bazaars from Alexandria to Cairo, and from Cairo
to Assuan in Upper Egypt.

I arrived at length at Cairo, mother of cities and
seat of Pharaoh the tyrant, mi^ress of broad regions
and fruitful lands, boundless in multitude of buildings,
peerless in beauty and splendour, the meeting-place
of comer and goer, the halting-place of feeble and
mighty, whose throngs surge as the waves of the sea,
and can scarce be contained in her for all her size
and capacity.^^ It is said that in Cairo there are
twelve thousand water-carriers who transport water on
camels, and thirty thousand hirers of mules and
donkeys, and that on the Nile there are thirty-six
thousand boats belonging to the Sultan, and his sub-
jefts, which sail up^lream to Upper Egypt and down-
^ream to Alexandria and Damietta, laden with goods
and profitable merchandise of all kinds. On the
bank of the Nile opposite Old Cairo is the place known
as The Garden^^ which is a pleasure park and prome-
nade, containing many beautiful gardens, for the
people of Cairo are given to pleasure and amusements.
I witnessed a fete once in Cairo for the sultan’s re-
covery from a fra£lured hand; all the merchants
decorated their bazaars and had rich ^uffs, ornaments
and silken fabrics hanging in their shops for several
days. The mosque of ‘Amr is highly venerated and
widely celebrated. The Friday service is held in it,
and the road runs through it from ea^ to we^. The
madrasas [college mosques] of Cairo cannot be counted
for multitude. As for the Mari^an [hospital], which

cables ” near the mausoleum
of Sultan ^ala*dn, no description is adequate to its

50




A GROUP or DARWISIILS D \NCINC







TRAVELS OF !BN BATTOTA

beauties. It contains an innumerable quantity of
appliances and medicaments, and its daily revenue is
put as high as a thousand dinars.

There arc a large number of religious establishments
[** convents ”], which they call khtUsqiths^ and the
nobles vie with one another in building them. Each
of these is set apart for a separate school of danv/shes,
moilly Persians, who arc men of good education and
adepts in the myAical doflrincs. Each has a superior
and a doorkeeper and their affairs arc admirably or-
ganized. They have many special cuAoms, one of
which has to do with their food. The steward of
the house comes in the morning to the danvfshcs,
each of whom indicates what food he desires, and when
they assemble for meals, each person is given his
bread and soup in a separate dish, none sharing with
another. They cat twice a day. They arc each given
winter clothes and summer clothes, and a monthly
allowance of from t^venty to thirty dirhams. Every
Thursday night they receive sugar cakes, soap to
wash their clothes, the price of a bath, and oil for their
lamps. These men arc celibate; the married men have
separate convents.

At Cairo too is the great cemetery of al-Qardfa,
which is a place of peculiar sanflity, and contains the
graves of innumerable scholars and pious believers.
In the Qardfa the people build beautiful pavilions
surrounded by walls, so that they look like houses.^
They also build chambers and hire Koran-readers,
who recite night and day in agreeable voices. Some
of them build religious houses and madrasas beside
the mausoleums and on Thursday nights they go out
to spend the night there with their children and women-
folk, and make a circuit of the famous tombs. They
go out to spend the night there also on the “ Night
of mid-Sha‘bdn,” and the market-people take out all
kinds of eatables.^^ Among the many celebrated

51



SELECTIONS FROM THE

sanftuaries [in the city] is the holy shrine where there
reposes the head of al-Husayn.^“ Beside it is a va^t
monaftery of ^riking con^ruftion, on the doors of
which there are silver rings and plates of the same
metal.

The Egyptian Nile^^ surpasses all rivers of the earth
in sweetness of ta^e, length of course, and utility.
No other river in the world can show such a con-
tinuous series of towns and villages along its banks,
or a basin so intensely cultivated. Its course is from
south to north, contrary to all the other [great] rivers.
One extraordinary thing about it is that it begins to
rise in the extreme hot weather, at the time when
rivers generally diminish and dry up, and begins to
subside ju^ when rivers begin to increase and over-
flow. The river Indus resembles it in this feature.
The Nile is one of the five, great rivers of the world,
which are the Nile, Euphrates, Tigris, Syr Darya and
Amu Darya; five other rivers resemble these, the Indus,
which is called Pan] Ab [t.e. Five Rivers], the river
of India which is called Gang [Ganges] — it is to it
that the Hindus go on pilgrimage, and when they
burn their dead they throw the ashes into it, and they
say that it comes from Paradise — the river Jiin [Jumna,
or perhaps Brahmaputra] in India, the river Itil
[Tolga] in the Qipchaq steppes, on the banks of which
is the city of Sara, and the river Sard [Hoang-Ho]
in the land of Cathay. All these will be mentioned
in their proper places, if God will. Some di^ance
below Cairo the Nile divides into three ^reams,^^
none of which can be crossed except by boat, winter
or summer. The inhabitants of every township have
canals led off the Nile ; these are filled when the river
is in flood and carry the water over the fields.

From Cairo I travelled into Upper Egypt, with the
intention of crossing to the Hijaz. On the fir^ night
I stayed at the monastery of Dayr at-Ti'n, which was

52



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

built to house certain illustrious relics — a fragment of
the Prophet’s wooden basin and the pencil with which
he used to apply kohl, the awl he used for sewing his
sandals, and the Koran belonging to the Caliph ‘All
written in his own hand. These were bought, it is
said, for a hundred thousand dirhams by the builder
of the monastery, who also established funds to supply
food to all comers and to maintain the guardians of
the sacred relics. Thence my way lay through a
number of towns and villages to Munyat Ibn Khaslb
[Minia], a large town which is built on the bank of
the Nile, and moSt emphatically excels all the other
towns of Upper Egypt. I went on through Man-
faldt, Asyiit, Ikhmim, where there is a with

sculptures and inscriptions which no one can now
read — another of these herbas there was pulled down
and its Slones used to build a madrasa — QinS, Qils,
where the governor of Upper Egypt resides, Luxor,
■a pretty litde town containing the tomb of the pious
ascetic Abu’l-HajjSj,“ Esnd, and thence a day and a
night’s journey through desert country to Edfd. Here
we crossed the Nile and, hiring camels, journeyed
with a party of Arabs through a desert, totally devoid
of settlements but quite safe for travelling. One of
our halts was at Humaythira, a place infefted with
hyenas. All night long we kept driving them away,
and indeed one got at my baggage, tore open one of
the sacks, pulled out a bag of dates, and made off
with it. We found the bag next morning, torn to
pieces and with most of the contents eaten.

After fifteen days’ travelling we reached the town
of Aydhdb,^ a large town, well supplied with milk
and fish; dates and grain are imported from Upper
Egypt. Its inhabitants are Bejds. These people
are black-skinned; they wrap themselves in yellow
blankets and tie headbands about a fingerbreadth
wide round their heads. They do not give their
53



SELECTIONS FROM THE

daughters any share in their inheritance. They live
on camels’ milk and they ride on Meharis [drome-
daries]. One-third of the city belongs to the Sultan
of Egypt and two-thirds to the King of the Bejas,
who is called al-Hudrubi.^® On reaching Aydhab
we found that al-Hudrubi was engaged in warfare with
the Turks [i.e. the troops of the Sultan of Egypt],
that he had sunk the ships and that the Turks had
fled before him. It was impossible for us to attempt
the sea-crossing, so we sold the provisions that we
had made ready for it, and returned to Qds with the
Arabs from whom we had hired the camels. We
sailed thence down the Nile (it was at the flood time)
and after an eight days’ journey reached Cairo, where
I ^ayed only one night, and immediately set out for
Syria. This was in the middle of July, 1326.

My route lay through Bilbays and as-Salihiya, after
which we entered the sands and halted at a number
of stations. At each of these there was a hostelry,
which they call a khdn^^ where travellers alight with
their bea^s. Each khan has a water wheel supplying
a fountain and a shop at which the traveller buys what
he requires for himself and his bea^. At the Nation
of Qatya®° cu^oms-dues are colledled from the mer-
chants, and their goods and baggage are thoroughly
examined and searched. There are offices here, with
officers, clerks, and notaries, and the daily revenue is
a thousand gold dinars. No one is allowed to pass
into Syria without a passport from Egypt, nor into
Egypt without a passport from Syria, for the pro-
teftion of the property of the subjefts and as a measure
of precaution again^ spies from ‘Iraq. The responsi-
bility of guarding this road has been entru^ed to the
Badawin. At nightfall they smooth down the sand
so that no track is left on it, then in the morning the
governor comes and looks at the sand. If he finds
any track on it he commands the Arabs to bring the

54



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

person who made it, and they set out in pursuit and
never fail to catch him. He is then brought to the
governor, who pui^ishes him as he sees fit. The
governor at the time of my passage treated me as
a.gue^l and showed me great kindness, and allowed
all those who were with me to pass. From here we
went on to Gaza, which is the fir^l city of Syria on the
side next the Egyptian frontier.

From Gaza I travelled to the city of Abraham
[Hebron], the mosque of which is of elegant, but
sub^antial, conRru<^ion, imposing and lofty, and
built of squared Aoncs. At one angle of it there is
a ilone, one of whose -faces measures twenty-seven
spans. It is said that Solomon commanded the jinn^^
to build it. Inside it is the sacred cave containing
the graves of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, opposite
which arc three graves, which are those of their wives.
I queRioned the imdm, a man of great pietv and learn-
ing, on the authenticity of these graves, and he replied:
“ All the scholars whom I have met hold these graves
to be the very graves of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and
their wives. No one queilions this except introducers
of false doflrines; it is a tradition which has passed
from father to son for generations and admits of no
doubt.” This mosque contains also the grave of
Joseph, and somewhat to the ea^l of it lies the tomb
of Lot,®^ which is surmounted by an elegant building.
In the neighbourhood is Lot’s lake [the Dead Sea],
which is brackish and is said to cover the site of
the settlements of Lot’s people. On the way from
Hebron to Jerusalem, I visited Bethlehem, the birth-
place of Jesus. The site is covered by a large build-
ing; the Chri^lians regard it with intense veneration
and hospitably entertain all who alight at it.

We then reached Jerusalem (may God ennoble
her 1), third in excellence after the two holy shrines
of Mecca and Madina, and the place whence the
SS



SELECTIONS FROM THE

Prophet was caught up into heaven.^® Its walls were
deftroyed by the illu^rious King Saladin and his
successors, for fear le^t the Chri^ians should seize
it and fortify themselves in it. The sacred mosque
is a mo^ beautiful building, and is said to be the larged
mosque in the world. Its length from ea 4 l to welt is
put at 752, “royal” cubits®^ and its breadth at 435.
On three sides it has many entrances, but on the
south side I know of one only, which is that by which
the imam enters. The entire mosque is an open
court and unroofed, except the mosque al-Aqsa, which
has a roof of mo^t excellent workmanship, embellished
with gold and brilliant colours. Some other parts
of the mosque are roofed as well. The Dome of the
Rock is a building of extraordinary beauty, solidity,
elegance, and singularity of shape. It ^ands on an
elevation in the centre of the mosque and is reached
by a flight of marble ^eps. It has four doors. The
space round it is also paved with marble, excellently
done, and the interior likewise. Both outside and
inside the decoration is so magnificent and the work-
manship so surpassing as to defy description. The
greater part is covered with gold so that the eyes of
one who gazes on its beauties are dazzled by its bril-
liance, now glowing like a mass of light, now flashing
like lightning. In the centre of the Dome is the
blessed rock from which the Prophet ascended to
heaven, a great rock projefting about a man’s height,
and underneath it there is a cave the size of a small
room, also of a man’s height, with ^eps leading down
to it. Encircling the rock are two railings of excellent
workmanship, the one nearer the rock being artistically
con^ruded in iron,=® and the other of wood.

Among the grace-be^oWing sanSfuaries of Jeru-
salem is a building, situated on the farther side of the
valley called the valley of Jahannam [Gehenna] to
the ea^l of the town, on a high hill. This building is

56



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

said to mark the place whence Jesus ascended to
hcaven.^^ In the bottom of the same valley is a
church venerated by the Chriilians, who say that it
contains the grave of Mary. In the same place there
is another church which the Chriilians venerate and
to which they come on pilgrimage. This is the
church of which they are fusely persuaded to believe
that it contains the grave of Jesus. All who come on
pilgrimage to visit it pay a stipulated tax to the
Muslims, and suffer very unwillingly various humilia-
tions. Thereabouts also is the place of the cradle
of Jesus, “ which is visited in order to obtain blessing.

I journeyed thereafter from Jerusalem to the fortress
of Askalon, which is a total ruin. Of the great mosque,
known as the mosque of ‘Omar, nothing remains but
its walls and some marble columns of matchless
beautjr, partly landing and partly fallen. Amongst
them is a wonderful red column, of which the people
tell that the ChriAians carried it off to their country
but afterwards loft it, when it was found in its place
at Askalon. Thence I went on to the city of ar-Ram-
lah, which is also called Filaftfn [Paleftine], in the
qibla of those mosque they say three hundred of the
prophets are buried. From ar-Ramlah I went to the
town of Nibulus ([Shechemj, a city with an abundance
of trees and perennial ftreams, and one of the richeft
in Syria for olives, the oil of which is exported thence
to Cairo and Damascus. It is at Nibulus that the
carob-sweet is manufafturedand exported to Damascus
and elsewhere. It is made in this way; the carobs
are cooked and then pressed, the juice that runs out
is gathered and the sweet is manufaftured from it.
The juice itself too is exported to Cairo and Damascus.
Nibulus has also a species of melon which is called
by its name, a good and delicious fruit. Thence I
went to Ajaliin®® making in the direftion of Lddhiqiya,
and passing through the Ghawr, followed the coaft to
57



SELECTIONS FROM THE

*Akka [Acre], which is in ruins. Acre was formerly
the capital and port of the country of the Franks in
Syria, and rivalled Con^antinople itself.

I went on from here to Sur [Tyre], which is a ruin,
though there is outside it an inhabited village, mo^f
of whose population belong to the se6t called
“ Refusers.” It is this city of Tyre which has become
proverbial for impregnability, because the sea sur-
rounds it on three sides and it has two gates, one on
the landward side and one to the sea. That on the
landward side is protected by four outer walls each
with brea^works, while the sea gate Elands between
two great towers. There is no more marvellous or
more remarkable piece of masonry in the world than
this, for the sea surrounds it on three sides and on
the fourth there is a wall under which the ships pass
and come to anchor. In former times an iron chain
was stretched between the two towers to form a barrier,
so that there was no way in or out until it was lowered.
It was placed under the charge of guards and tru^-
worthy agents, and none might enter or leave without
their knowledge. Acre also had a harbour resembling
it, but it admitted only small ships. From Tyre I
went on to Sayda [Sidon], a pleasant town on the
coaft, and rich in fruit; it exports figs, raisins, and olive
oil to Cairo.

Next I went on to the town of Tabariya [Tiberias].^®
It was formerly a large and important city, of which
nothing now remains but veftiges witnessing to its
former greatness. It possesses wonderful baths with
separate eftablishments for men and women, the water
of which is very hot. At Tiberias is the famous lake
[the Sea of Galilee], about eighteen miles long and
more than nine in breadth. The town has a mosque >
known as the “ Mosque of the Prophets,” containing
the graves of Shu‘ayb [Jethro] and his daughter, the
wife of Moses, as well as those of Solomon, Judah,

58



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

and Reuben. From Tiberias we went to visit the
well into which Joseph was a large and deep well,
in the courtyard of a small mosque, and drank some
water from it. It was rain water, but the guardian
told us that there is a spring in it as well. We went
on from there to Baynit, a small town with fine markets
and a beautiful mosque. Fruit and iron are exported
from it to Egypt.

We set out from here to visit the tomb of Abu
Ya'qdb Yiisuf, who, they say, was a king in North-
weA Africa. The tomb is at a place called Karak
Nuh,'^’ and beside it is a religious house at which all
travellers arc entertained. Some say that it was the
Sultan Saladin who endowed it, others that it was the
Sultan Ndr ad-Din. The Aory goes that Abu Ya‘qiib,
after laying some time at Damascus with the Sultan,
who had been warned in a dream that Abii Ya'qdb
would bring him some advantage, left the town in
solitary Bight during a season of great coldness, and
came to a village in its neighbourhood. In this village
there was a man of humble Elation who invited him
to ilay in his house, and on his consenting, made him
soup and killed a chicken and brought it to him with
barley bread. After his meal Ab\i Ya'qiib prayed
for a blessing on his ho51. Now this man had several
children, one of them being a girl who was shortly
to be conduced to her husband. It is a custom in
that country that a girl's father gives her an outfit,
the greater part of which consists in copper utensils.
These are regarded by them with great pride and are
made the subject of special stipulations in the marriage
contraft. Abd Ya’qiib therefore said to the man,
“ Have you any copper utensils ?” “Yes ” he replied,
“ I have juft bought some for my daughter’s outfit.”
Abii Ya‘qdb told him to bring them and when he had
brought them said “Now borrow all that you can
from your neighbours.” So he did so and laid them
59



SELECTIONS FROM THE

all before him. He then lit fires round them, and
taking out a purse which he had containing an elixir,
threw some of it over the brass, and the whole array
was changed into gold. Leaving these in a locked
chamber, Abd Ya'qiib wrote to Nur ad-Din at
Damascus, telling him about them, and exhorting him
to build and endow a hospital for sick strangers and
to con^ruft religious houses on the highways. He
bade him also satisfy the owners of the copper vessels
and provide for the maintenance of the owner of the
house. The latter took the letter to the king, who
came to the village and removed the gold, after satis-
fying the owners of the vessels and the man himself.
He searched for Abii Ya‘qtib, but failing to find any
trace or news of him, returned to Damascus, where he
built the hospital which is known by his name and is
the fine^ in the world.

I came next to the city of Atrabulus [Tripoli], one
of the principal towns in Syria. It lies two miles
inland, and has only recently been built. The old
town was right on the shore; the Chri^ians held it for
a time, and when it was recovered by Sultan Baybars^
it was pulled down and this new town built. There
are some fine bath-houses in it, one of which is called
after Sindamiir, who was a former governor of the
city. Many stories are told of his severity to evil-
doers. Here is one of them. A woman complained
to him that one of the mamlfiks of his personal ^aff
had seized some milk that she was selling and had
drunk it. She had no evidence, but Sindamfir sent
for the inan. He was cut in two, and the milk came
out of his entrails. Similar Tories are told of al-
Atris at the time when he was governor, of Aydhab
under Sultan Qala’fin, and of Kebek, the Sultan of
Turkestan

From Tripoli I went by way of Hisn al-Akrad
[^Krak des Chevaliers^ now Qal'at al-Hisnl and Hims

6o



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

to Hamdh, another of the metropolitan cities of Syria.
It is surrounded by orchards and gardens, in the
middt of which there are waterwheels like revolving
globes. Thence to Ma'arra, which lies in a di^lrift
inhabited by some sort of ShiMtes, abominable people
who hate the Ten Companions and every person
whose name is ‘Ornar.*^ We went on from there to
Sarmfn, where brick soap is manufafhired and ex*
ported to Cairo and Damascus. Besides this they
manufafhire perfumed soap, for washing hands, and
colour it red and yellow. These people too arc rc-
vilers, who hate the Ten, and — an extraordinary thing
— never mention the word ten. When their brokers
are selling by auflion in the markets and come to ten,
they say “ nine and one.” One day a Turk happened
to be there, and hearing a broker call “ nine and one,”
he laid his club about his head saying ” Say ‘ ten,’ ”
whereupon quoth he “Ten with the club.” We
journeyed thence to Halab [Aleppo],^ which is the
seat of the Malik al^Umardy who is the principal
commander under the sultan of Egypt. He is a
jurist and has a reputation for fair-dealing, but he is
ftingy.

I went on from there to Antdkiya [Antioch], by
way of Tizfn, a new town founded by the Turkmens.^
Antioch was protcflcd formerly by a wall of unrivalled
solidity among the cities of Syria, but al-Malik az-
Zdhir [Baybars] pulled it down when he captured the
town.^’ It is very densely populated and possesses
beautiful buildings, with abundant trees and water.
Thence I visited the fortress of Baghrds,^ at the en-
trance to the land of Sfs [Little Armenia], that is, the
land of the Armenian infidels, and many other carries
and fortresses, several of which belong to a se6t called
Isma'ilites or Fiddwfs^ and may be entered by none
but members of the se<SI. They are the arrows of the
sultan ; by means of them he dlrikes those of his enemies



SELECTIONS FROM THE

who escape into ‘Iraq and other lands. They receive
fixed salaries, and when the sultan desires to send one
of them to assassinate one of his enemies, he pays
him his blood-money. If after carrying out his
allotted task he escapes with his life, the money is
his, but if he is killed it goes to his sons. They carry
poisoned daggers, with which they strike their viftim,
but sometimes their plans miscarry and they themselves
are killed.

From the cables of the Fidawis I went on. to the
town of Jabala, which lies on the coa^l, about a mile
inland. It contains the grave of the famous saint
Ibrahim ibn Adham, he who renounced a kingdom
and consecrated himself to God.^° All visitors to this
grave give a candle to the keeper, with the result that
many hundredweights of them are collefted. . The
majority of the people of this coastal di^lridl belong
to the sed of the Nusayris, who believe that ‘AH®^ is
a God. They do not pray, nor do they purify them-
selves, nor fa^. Al-Malik az-Zahir [Baybars] com-
pelled them to build mosques in their villages, so in
every village they put up a mosque far away from
their houses, and they neither enter them nor keep
them in repair. Often they are used for refuges for
their catde and asses. Often too a ftranger comes
to their country and he ftops at the mosque and recites
the call to prayer and then they call out “ Stop braying;
your fodder is coming to you.” There are a great
many of these people.

They tell a ftory that an unknown person arrived
in the country of this seft and gave himself out as the
Mahdi. They flocked round him, and he promised
them the possession of the land and divided Syria up
between them. He used to nominate them each to
a town and tell them to go there, giving them olive-
leaves and saying “ Take these as tokens of success,
for they are as warrants of your appointment.” When



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

any one of them came to a town, the governor sent
for him, and the man would say “ The Imdm al-Mahdi
has given me this town.” The governor would reply
“ Where is your warrant ?” and he would produce the
olive-leaves, and be punished and put in prison.
Later on he ordered them to make ready to fight with
the Muslims and to begin with the town of Jabala.
He told them to take myrtle rods instead of swords
and promised them that these would become swords
in their hands at the moment of the battle. They made
a surprise attack on Jabala while the inhabitants were
attending a Friday service in the mosque, and entered
the houses and dishonoured the women. The Muslims
came rushing out of their mosque, seized weapons, and
killed them as they pleased. When the news was
brought to Lddhiqi'ya the governor moved out with
his troops, and the news having been sent by carrier-
pigeons to Tripoli, the chief commandant joined him
with his troops. The Nusayris were pursued until
about twenty thousand of them had been killed. The
remainder fortified themselves in the hills and sent a
message to the chief commandant, undertaking to
pay him one dinar per head if he would spare them.
The news' had been sent by pigeons to the Sultan,
who replied ordering them to be put to the sword.
The chief commandant, however, represented to him
that these people were tillers of the soil for the Muslims
and that if they were killed the Muslims would suffer
in consequence, so their lives were spared.

I went next to the towa of Ladhiqiya [Latakia],
In the outskirts is a Chri^ian monastery known as
Dayr al-Fdriis, which is the larged mona^ery in Syria
and Egypt. It is inhabited by monks, and Christians
visit it from all quarters. All who Stop there, Muslims
or Christians, are entertained; their food is bread,
cheese, olives, vinegar and capers. The harbour of
Ladhiqfya is protefted by a chain between two towers,



SELECTIONS FROM THE

so that no ship can either enter or leave it until the
chain is lowered for it. It is one of the be^ harbours
in Syria. From there I went to the fortress of al-
Marqab [Belvedere], a great fortress resembling
Karak. It is built on a high hill and outside it is
a suburb where Grangers ^op. They are not allowed
to enter the cattle. It was captured from the Chri^ians
by al-Malik al-Mansdr Qala’iin, and close by it was
born his son al-Malik an-Nasir [the reigning sultan
of Egypt]. Thence I went to the mountain of
al-Aqra‘, which is the highest mountain in Syria, and
the fir^ part of the country visible from the sea. The
inhabitants of this mountain-range are Turkmens, and
it contains springs and running breams. I went on
from there to the mountains of Lubnan [Lebanon].
These are among the moil fertile mountains on earth,
with all sorts of fruits and springs of water and shady
coverts. There are always large numbers of devotees
and ascetics to be found in these mountains (the place is
noted for this) and I saw a company of anchorites there.

We came next to the town of Ba‘albek, an old town
and one of the fineil in Syria, rivalling Damascus in
its innumerable amenities. No other diilridl has such
an abundance of cherries, and many kinds of sweet-
meats are manufadured in it, as well as textiles, and
wooden vessels and spoons that cannot be equalled
elsewhere. They make a series of plates one within
the other to as many as ten in all, yet anyone looking
at it would take them to be one plate. They do the
same with spoons, and put them in a leather case.
A man can carry this in his belt, and on joining in
a meal with his friends take out what looks like one
spoon and distribute nine others from within it.
Ba albek is one day’s journey from Damascus by hard
going; caravans on leaving Ba‘ albek spend a night at a
small village called az-Zabdani and go on to Damascus
the following morning. I reached Ba'albek in the

64



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

evening and left it next morning because of my eager-
ness to get to Damascus.

I entered Damascus on Thursday 9th Ramaddn 726
[9th Augu^, 1326], and lodged at the Mdlikitc
college called ash-Shardbishfya. Damascus surpasses
all other cities in beauty, and no description, how-
ever full, can do ju^ice to its charms. Nothing,
however, can better the words of Ibn Jubayr in
describing it.®* The Cathedral Mosque, known as the
Umayyad Mosque, is the moff magnificent mosque
in the world, the finest in conilruftion and noblest in
beauty, grace and pcrfeflion; it is matchless and un-
equal!^. The person who undertook its con^lruc-
tion was the Caliph Walld I. [705-71^]. He applied
to the Roman Emperor at Constantinople ordering
him to send craftsmen to him, and the Emperor sent
him twelve thousand of them. The site of the mosque
was a church, and when the Muslims captured
Damascus, one of their commanders entered from one
side by the sword and reached as far as the middle of
the church, while the other entered peaceably from
the eaAern side and reached the middle also. So the
Muslims made the half of the church which they had
entered by force into a mosque and the half which
they had entered by peaceful agreement remained as
a church. When Walld decided to extend the mosque
over the entire church he asked the Greeks to sell him
their church for whatsoever equivalent they desired,
but they refused, so he seized it. The Chriftians used
to say that whoever dcilroyed the church would be
ftricken with madness and they told that to Walld.
But he replied “ I shall be the fir^t to be stricken
by madness in the service of God,” and seizing an
axe, he set to work to knock it down with his own
hands. The Muslims on seeing that followed his
example, and God proved false the assertion of the
Chriftians,“

65 F



SELECTIONS FROM THE

This mosque has four doors. The southern door,
called the “Door of Increase,” is approached by a
spacious passage where the dealers in second-hand
goods and other commodities have their shops.
Through it lies the way to the [former] Cavalry
House, and on the left as one emerges from it is the
coppersmiths’ gallery, a large bazaar, one of the fine^
in Damascus, extending along the south wall of the
mosque. This bazaar occupies the site of the palace
of the Caliph Mu‘awiya I.,®^ which was called al-
Khadra [The Green Palace]; the ‘Abbasids pulled it
down and a bazaar took its place. The ea^ern door,
called the Jayriin door, is the larged of the doors of
the mosque. It also has a large passage, leading out
to a large and extensive colonnade which is entered
through a quintuple gateway between six tall columns.
Along both sides of this passage are pillars, supporting
circular galleries, where the doth merchants among^
others have their shops; above these again are long
galleries in which are the shops of the jewellers and
booksellers and makers of admirable glass-ware. In
the square adjoining the fir^ door are the ^alls of
the principal notaries, in each of which there may be
five or six witnesses in attendance and a person
authorized by the qadi to perform marriage-ceremonies.
The other notaries are scattered throughout the city.
Near these ^alls is the bazaar of the ftationers, who
sell paper, pens, and ink. In the middle of the passage
there is a large round marble basin, surrounded by
a pavilion supported on marble columns but lacking
a roof. In the centre of the basin is a copper pipe
which forces out water under pressure so that it rises
into the air more than a man’s height. They call it
‘‘The Waterspout,” and it is a fine sight. To the
right as one comes out of the Jayriin door, which is
called also the “ Door of the Hours,” is an upper
gallery shaped like a large arch, within which there

66



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

are small open arches furnished with doors, to the
number of the hours of the day. These doors are
painted green on the inside and yellow on the outside,
and as each hour of the day passes the green inner
side of the door is turned to the outside, and vice
versa. They say that inside the gallery there is a
person in the room who is responsible for turning
them by hand as the hours pass.** The wc^ern door
is called the “ Door of the Foil the passage outside
it contains the shops of the candlemakers and a gallery
for the sale of fruit. The northern door is called the
“Door of the Ginfeftioncrs it too has a large
passageway, and on the right as one leaves it is a
Khdnadh^ which has a large basin of water in the centre
and lavatories supplied with running water. At each
of the four doors of the mosque is a building for
ritual ablutions, containing about a hundred rooms
abundantly supplied with running water.

One of the principal Hanbalite doctors at Damascus
was Taqi ad^Din Ibn Taymiya, a man of great ability
and wide learning, but with some kink in his brain.
The people of Damascus idolized him. He used to
preach to them from the pulpit, and one day he made
some statement that the other theologians disap-
proved; they carried the case to the sultan and m
consequence Ibn Taymiya was imprisoned for some
years. While he was m prison he wrote a com-
mentary on the Koran, which he called “ The Ocean,”
in about forty volumes. Later on his mother pre-
sented herself before the sultan and interceded for
him, so he was set at liberty, until he did the same
thing again. I was in Damascus at the time and
attended the service which he was conducing one
Friday, as he was addressing and admonishing the
people from the pulpit. In the mid^ of his discourse
he said “Verily God descends to the sky over our
world [from Heaven] in the same bodily fashion that



SELECTIONS FROM THE

I make this descent,” and stepped down one ^ep of
the pulpit. A Malikite dodlor present contradifled
him and objedled to his ^atement,®® but the common
people rose up again^ this dodlor, and beat him with
their hands and their shoes so severely that his turban
fell off and disclosed a silken skull-cap on his head.
Inveighing against him for wearing this,®'^ they haled
him before the qadi of the Hanbalites, who ordered
him to be imprisoned and afterwards had him beaten.
The other dodlors objedled to this treatment and carried
the matter before the principal amir, who wrote to the
sultan about the matter and at the same time drew
up a legal attestation againSt Ibn Taymiya for various
heretical pronouncements. This deed was sent on
to the sultan, who gave orders that Ibn Taymiya
should be imprisoned in the citadel, and there he
remained until his death.®®

One of the celebrated sanSbiaries at Damascus is
the Mosque of the Footprints (al-Aqdam), which lies
two miles south of the city, alongside the main high-
way which leads to the Hijdz, Jerusalem, and Egypt.
It is a large mosque, very blessed, richly endowed,
and very highly venerated by the Damascenes. The
footprints from which it derives its name are certain
footprints impressed upon a rock there, which are
said to be the mark of Moses’ foot. In this mosque
there is a small chamber containing a ^lone with the
following inscription “A certain pious man saw in
his sleep the Chosen One [Muhammad], who said to
him ‘ Here is the grave of my brother Moses.’ ” I
saw a remarkable instance of the veneration in which
the Damascenes hold this mosque during the great
pe^ilence, on my return journey through Damascus
^the latter part of July 1348. The viceroy Arghdn
Shah ordered a crier to proclaim through Damascus
that all the people should fa^ for three days and that
no one should cook anything eatable in the market

68



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

during the daytime.*® For mo^ of the people there
cat no food but what has been prepared in the market,®®
So the people failed for three successive days, the lail
of which was a Thursday, then they assembled in the
Great Mosque, amirs, sharifs, qddis, theologians, and
all the other classes of the people, until the place was
filled to overflowing, and there they spent the Thursday
night in prayers and litanies. After the dawn prayer
next morning they all went out together on foot, holding
Korans in their hands, and £e amirs barefooted.
The procession was joined by the entire population
of the town, men and women, small and large; the
Jews came with their Book of the Law and the Chris-
tians with their Gospel, all of them with their women
and children. The whole concourse, weeping and
supplicating and seeking the favour of God through
His Books and His Prophets, made their way to ^e
Mosque of the Footprints, and there they remained
in supplication and invocation until near midday.
They then returned to the city and held the Friday
service, and God lightened their aflliflion; for the
number of deaths in a single day at Damascus did
not attain two thousand, while in Cairo and Old Cairo
it reached the figure of twenty-four thousand a day.

The variety and expenditure of the religious endow-
ments at Damascus are beyond computation. There
are endowments in aid of persons who cannot under-
take the pilgrimage to Mecca, out of which are paid
the expenses of those who go in their flead. There
are other endowments for supplying wedding outfits
to girls whose families are unable to provide them,
and others for the freeing of prisoners. There
are endowments for travellers, out* of the revenues
of which they are given food, clothing, and the ex-
penses of conveyance to their countries. Then there
are endowments for the improvement and paving of
the Greets, because all the lanes in Damascus have
69



SELECTIONS FROM THE

pavements on either side, on which the foot passengers
walk, while those who ride use the roadway in the
centre. Besides these there are endowments for other
charitable purposes. One day as I went along a lane
in Damascus I saw a small slave who had dropped
a Chinese porcelain dish, which was broken to bits.
A number of people colleifled round him and one of
them said to him, “ Gather up the pieces and take
them to the cu^odian of the endowments for utensils.”
He did so, and the man went with him to the cu^odian,
where the slave showed the broken pieces and received
a sum sufficient to buy a similar dish. This is an
excellent inilitution, for the ma^er of the slave would
undoubtedly have beaten him, or at lea^ scolded him,
for breaking the dish, and the slave would have been
heartbroken and upset at the accident. This bene-
fadlion is indeed a mender of hearts — may God richly
reward him whose zeal for good works rose to such
heights !

The people of Damascus vie with one another in
building mosques, religious houses, colleges and
mausoleums. They have a high opinion of the North
Africans, and freely entru^ them with the care of
their moneys, wives, and children. All strangers
among^ them are handsomely treated, and care is
taken that they are not forced to any adlion that might
injure their self-respeft. When I came to Damascus
a firm friendship sprang up between the Malikite
professor Niir ad-Din Sakhawi and me, and he besought
me to breakfa^ at his house^ during the nights of
Ramadan. After I had visited him for four nights
I had a stroke of fever and absented myself. He sent
in search of me, and although I pleaded my illness in
excuse he refused to accept it. I went back to his
house and spent the night there, and when I desired
to take my leave the next morning he would not hear
of it, but said to me “ Consider my house as your

70



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

own or as your father’s or brother’s.” He then had
a doctor sent for, and gave orders that all the medicines
and dishes that the do^or prescribed were to be made
for me in his house, i itayed thus with him until
the Fail-breaking, when 1 went to the feikival prayers
and God healed me of what had befallen me. Mean-
while all the money I had for my expenses was ex-
hauiled. Ndr ad-Dfn, learning this, hired camels
for me and ^avc me travelling and other provisions,
and money in addition, saying “ It will come in for
any serious matter that may land you in difHculties
may God reward him I

The Damascenes observe an admirable order in
funeral processions. Th(w walk in front of the bier,
while reciters intone the Koran in beautiful and aife^-
ing voices, and pray over it In the Cathedral mosque,
when the reading is completed the muezzins rise and
say ” Reflcfl on your prayer for so-and-so, the pious
and learned,” describing him with good epithets, and
having prayed over him they take nim to his grave.
The Indians have a funcr^ ceremony even more
admirable than this. On the morning of the third
day after the burial they assemble m the burial-
place of the deceased, which is spread with fine cloths,
the grave being covered with magnificent hangings
and surrounded by sweet-scented flowers, roses, eglan-
tine, andjasmine, for these flowers arc perennial with
them. They bring lemon and citrus trees as well,
tying on their fruits if they have none, anc^ut up an
awning to shade the mourning party. The qddfs,
amirs and other persons of rank come and take their
seats, and after recitation of the Koran, the qddi rises
and delivers a set oration, speaking of the deceased,
and mourning his death in an elegiac ode, then com-
forting his relatives, and praying for the sultan. When
the sultan's name is mentioned the audience rise and
bow their heads towards the quarter in which the

71



SELECTIONS FROM THE

sultan is. The qadi then resumes his seat, and rose-
water is brought in and sprinkled on all the people,
beginning with the qadi. After this syrup is brought
in and served to everyone, beginning with the qddi.
Finally the betel is brought. This they hold in high
esteem, and give to their gue^s as a mark of respeft;
a gift of betel from the sultan is a greater honour than
a gift of money or robes of honour. When a man dies
his family eat no betel until the day of this ceremony,
when the qadi takes some leaves of it and gives them
to the heir of the deceased, who eats them, after which
the party disperses.

When the new moon of the month Shawwal appeared
in the same year [ist September 1326], the Hijdz
caravan left Damascus and I set off along with it.®^
At Bosra the caravans usually halt for four days so
that any who have been detained at Damascus by
business affairs may make up on them. Thence they
go to the Pool of Ziza, where they ^op for a day,
and then through al-Lajjdn to the Ca^le of Karak.
Karak, which is also called “ The Ca^le of the Raven,”
is. one of the mo^ marvellous, impregnable, and cele-
brated of fortresses. It is surrounded on all sides
by the river-bed, and has but one gate, the entrance
to which is hewn in the living rock, as also is the
approach to its vestibule. This fortress is used by
kings as a place of refuge in times of calamity, as the
sultan an-Nasir did when his mamMk Saldr seized
the supreme authority. The caravan topped for
four days at a place called ath-Thanfya outside
Karak, where preparations were made for entering
the desert. Thence we journeyed to Ma'an, which
is the la^ town in Syria, and from ‘Aqabat as-Sawdn
entered the desert, of which the saying goes : “ He
who enters it is lo^t, and he who leaves it is born.”
After a march of two days we halted at Dhat Hajj,
where there are subterranean waterbeds but no habita-

72



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

tions, and then went on to W4d{ Boldah (in which
there is no watcr)“ and to Tablik, which is the place
to which the Prophet led an expedition. The Syrian
pilgrims have a cuSiom that, on reaching the camp at
Tabiik, they take their weapons, unsheathe their
swords, and charge upon the caj^, ^riking the palms
with their swords and saying ** Thus did the Prophet
of God enter it.” The great caravan halts at Tab\ik
for four days to re^ and to water the camels and lay
in water for the terrible desert bct>vcen Tabiik and
al-‘Uld. The cuAom of the water-carriers is to camp
beside the spring, and they have tanks made of buffalo
hides, like great ci^erns, from which they water the
camels and hll the waterskins. Each amir or person
of rank has a special tank for the needs of his own
camels and personnel; the other people make private
agreements with the watercarriers to water their camels
and HU their waterskins for a fixed sum of money.

From Tabiik the caravan travels with great speed
night and day, for fear of this desert. Halfway
through is the valley of al-Ukhaydir, which might
well be the valley of Hell (may God preserve us from
it).“ One year the pilgrims suffered terribly here
from the samoom-wind; the water-supplies dried up
and the price of a single drink rose to a thousand
dinars, but both seller and buyer perished. Their
^lory is written on a rock in the valley. Five days
after leaving Tabdk they reach the well of al-Hijr,
which has an abundance of water, but not a soul
draws water there, however violent his thirst, following
the example of the Prophet, who passed it on his
expedition to Tabdk and drove on his camel, giving
orders that none should drink of its waters. Here,
in some hills of red rock, are the dwellings of Thamiid.
They are cut in the rock and have carved thresholds.
Anyone seeing them would take them to be of recent
con^lruftion. Their decayed bones are to be seen
73



SELECTIONS FROM THE

inside these houses.®^ Al-‘Ula, a large and pleasant
village with palm-gardens and water-springs, lies half
a day’s journey or less from al-Hijr.®® The pilgrims
halt there four days to provision themselves and wash
their clothes. They leave behind them here any
surplus of provisions they may have, taking with them
nothing but what is ^triftly necessary. The people
of the village are very tru^worthy. The Chri^ian
merchants of Syria may come as far as this and no
further, and they trade in provisions and other goods
with the pilgrims here. On the third day after leaving
al-‘Ula the caravan halts in the outskirts of the holy
city of Madina.

That same evening we entered the holy sanftuary
and reached the illu^rious mosque, halting in saluta-
tion at the Gate of Peace; then we prayed in the
illu^rious “ garden ” between the tomb of the Prophet
and the noble pulpit, and reverently touched the
fragment that remains of the palm-trunk again^ which
the Prophet ilood when he preached. Having paid
our meed of salutation to the lord of men from firil
to la^, the intercessor for sinners, the Prophet of
Mecca, Muhammad, as well as to his two companions
who share his grave, Abd Bakr and ‘Omar, we returned
to our camp, rejoicing at this great favour bestowed
upon us, praising God for our having reached the
former abodes and the magnificent sanftuaries of His
holy Prophet, and praying Him to grant that this
visit should not be our la^, and that we might be of
those whose pilgrimage is accepted. On this journey
our ^ay at Madina la^ed four days. We used to
spend every night in the illuftrious mosque, where the
people, after forming circles in the courtyard and
lighting large numbers of candles, would pass the
time either in reciting the Koran from volumes set
on re^^s in front of them, or in intoning litanies, or
in visiting the sandluaries of the holy tomb.

74



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

We then set out from Madfna towards Mecca, and
halted near the mosque of Dhu’I-Hulayfa, five miles
away. It was at this point that the Prophet assumed
the pilgrim garb ana obligations, and here too I
divefted myself of my tailored clothes, bathed, and
putting on the pilgrim's garment I prayed and dedi-
cated myself to the pilgrimage. Our fourth halt from
here was at Badr, where God aided His Prophet and
performed His promise.*® It is a village containing
a series of palm-gardens and a bubbling spring with
a ilream flowing from it. Our way lay thence through
a frightful desert called the Vale of Bazwd for three
days to the valley of Rdbigh, where the rainwater
forms pools which lie ^agnant for a long time. From
this point (which is juil before Juhfa) the pilgrims
from Egypt and Northwe^ Africa put on the pilgrim
garment. Three days after leaving Rdbigh we reached
the pool of Khulays, which lies in a plain and has
many palm-gardens. The Badawin of that neigh-
bourhood hold a market there, to which they bring
sheep, fruits, and condiments. Thence we travelled
through ‘Usfdn to the Bottom of Marr,®^ a fertile
valley with numerous palms and a spring supplying
a ^ream from which the di^lrift is irrigated. From
this valley fruit and vegetables are transported to
Mecca. ^ We set out at night from this blessed
valley, with hearts full of joy at reaching the goal of
our hopes, and in the morning arrived at the City of
Surety, Mecca (may God ennoble her 1), where we
immediately entered the holy sandtuary and began the
rites of pilgrimage.®*

The inhabitants of Mecca are di^linguished by many
excellent and noble aftivities and qualities, by their
beneficence to the humble and weak, and by their
kindness to strangers. When any of them makes a
feaft, he begins by giving food to the religious devotees
who are poor and without resources, inviting them
75



SELECTIONS FROM THE

firft with kindness and delicacy. The majority ol
these unfortunates are to be found by the public bake-
houses, and when anyone has his bread baked and takes
it away to his house, they follow him and he gives
each one of them some share of it, sending away none
disappointed. Even if he has but a single loaf, he
gives away a third or a half of it, cheerfully and without
any grudgingness. Another good habit of theirs is
this. The orphan children sit in the bazaar, each
with two baskets, one large and one small. When one
of the townspeople comes to the bazaar and buys
cereals, meat and vegetables, he hands them to one
of these boys, who puts the cereals in one basket and
the meat and vegetables in the other and takes them
to the man’s house, so that his meal may be prepared.
Meanwhile the man goes about his devotions and his
business. There is no in^ance of any of the boys
having ever abused their tru^ in this matter, and they
are given a fixed fee of a few coppers. The Meccans
are very elegant and clean in their dress, and mo^
of them wear white garments, which you always see
fresh and snowy. They use a great deal of perfume
and kohl and make free use of toothpicks of green
arak-wood. The Meccan women are extraordinarily
beautiful and very pious and modest. They too make
great use of perfumes to such a degree that they will
spend the night hungry in order to buy perfumes
with the price of their food. They visit the mosque
every Thursday night, wearing their fine^ apparel;
and the whole sanftuary is saturated with the smell
of their perfume. When one of these women goes
away the odour of the perfume clings to the place after
she has gone.

Among the personages who were living in religious
retirement at Mecca was a pious and ascetic doctor
who had a long-handing friendship with my father,
and used to hay with us when he came to our town of

76



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

Tangier. In the diydmc he taught at the Muzaf-
fariya college, but at night he retired to his dwelling
in the convent of RabC. This convent is one of the
fineil in Mecca; it has in its precindls a well of sweet
water which has no equal in Mecca, and its inhabitants
are all men of great piety. It is highly venerated by
the people of the Hijdz, who bring votive offerinfjs to
it, and the people of Td’if supply it with fruit. 1 heir
cudlom is that all those who possess a palm garden, or
orchard of vines, peaches or figs, give the alms-tithe
from its produce to this convent, and fetch it on their
own camels. It is two days* journey from Td'if to
Mecca. If any person fails to do this, his crop is
diminished and dcarth-dlricken in the following year.
One day the retainers of the governor of Mecca came
to this convent, led in the governor’s horses, and
watered them at the well mentioned above. After
the horses had been taken back to their diables, they
were seized with colic and threw themselves to the
ground, beating it with their heads and legs. On
he-aring of this the governor went in person to the
gate of the convent and after apologizing to the poor
recluses there, took one of them back with him. This
man rubbed the beadls* bellies with his hand, when
they expelled all the water that they had drunk, and
were cured. After that the retainers never presented
themselves at the convent except for good purposes.


77



CHAPTER II


On the 17th of November I left Mecca with the
commander of the ‘Iraq caravan, who hired for me
at his own expense the half of a camel-litter as far
as Baghdad, and took me under his protection. After
the farewell ceremony of circumambulation [of the
Ka‘ba] we moved out to the Bottom of Marr with
an innumerable ho^ of pilgrims from ‘Iraq, Khurasan,
Ears and other eastern lands, so many that the earth
surged with them like the sea and their march resembled
the movement of a high-piled cloud. Any person
who left the caravan for a moment and had no mark
to guide him to his place could not find it again
because of the multitude of people. With this
caravan there were many draught-camels for supplying
the poorer pilgrims with water, and other camels to
carry the provisions issued as alms and the medicines,
potions, and sugar required for any who fell ill. When-
ever the caravan halted food was cooked in great brass
cauldrons, and from these the needs of the poorer
pilgrims and those who had no provisions were supplied.
A number of spare camels accompanied it to carry
those who were unable to walk. All those measures
were due to the benefaClions and generosity of the
sultan [of ‘Iraq] Abfi Sa‘id. Besides this the caravan
included busy bazaars and many commodities and all
sorts of food and fruit. They used to march during
the night and light torches in front of the files of camels
and litters, so that you saw the country gleaming with
light and the darkness turned into day.

We returned through Khulays and Badr to Madina,
and were privileged to visit once more the [tomb of

78



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

the] Prophet. We stayed in Madina for six days,
and having provided ourselves there with water for
a three-nights’ journey, set out and halted on the third
night at Wddi’l-Anis, where we drew supplies of water
from underground water-beds. They dig down into
the ground for them and procure sweet running water.
On leaving Wddi’l-Ards we entered the land of Najd,
which is a level ilretch of country extending as far as
eye can see, and we inhaled its fine scented air. After
four marches we halted at a waterpoint called al-
‘Usayla, then resumed our march and halted at a
waterpoint called an-Naqira, where there are the
remains of watertanks like vadf reservoirs. Thence
we journeyed to a waterpoint known as al-Qdrdra,
which consi^s of tanks filled with rainwater. These
are some of the tanks which were con^rufted by
Zubayda, the daughter of Ja’far. Every tank, water-
basin, and well on this road between Mecca and
Baghdad is a noble monument to her memo^ — may
God give her richeA reward ! This locality is in the
centre of the di^lrift of Najd; it is spacious, with fine
healthy air, excellent soil, and a temperate climate at
all seasons of the year. We went on from aI-Q4nira
and halted at al-Hdjir, where there are watertanks
which often dry up, so that temporary wells muft be
dug in order to procure water. We journeyed on and
halted at Samira, which is a patch of low-lying country
on a plain, where there is a kind of fortified enceinte
which is inhabited. It has plenty of water in wells,
but brackish. The Badawin of that diSlrift come there
with sheep, melted butter, and milk, which they aell
to the pilgrims for pieces of coarse cotton doth. That
is the only thing they will take in exchange. We set
out again and halted at the “Hill with the Hole.”
This hill lies in a traft of desert land, and has at the
top of it a hole through which the wind whiiUes.
We went on from there to Wddi’l-Kunish, which has
79



SELECTIONS FROM THE

no water, and after a night march came in the morning
to the caftle of Fayd.^

Fayd is a large walled and fortified enceinte on a
level plain, with a suburb inhabited by Arabs, who
make a living by trading with the pilgrims. On their
journey to Mecca the pilgrims leave a portion of their
provisions here, and pick them up again on their return
journey.^ Fayd lies halfway between Mecca and
Bighddd and is twelve days’ journey from Kdfa, by
an easy road furnished with supplies of water in tanks.
The pilgrims are accustomed to enter this place
armed and in warlike array, in order to frighten the
Arabs who collect there and to cut short their greedy
designs on the caravan. We met there the two amirs
of the Arabs, Fayyadh and Hiyar, sons of the amir
Muhannd b. ‘Isa, accompanied by an innumerable
troop of Arab horsemen and foot-soldiers. They
showed great zeal for the safety of the pilgrims and their
encampments. The Arabs brought camels and sheep,
and the pilgrims bought from them what they could.

We resumed our journey through al-Ajfur, Zanid,
and other halting-places to the defile known as “ Devil’s
Pass.” We encamped below it [for the night] and
traversed it the next day. This is the only rough
and difficult dlretch on the whole road, and even it is
neither difficult nor long. Our next halt was at a
place called Wdqisa, where there is a large cadlle and
watertanks. It is inhabited by Arabs, and is the la^t
watering point on this road; from there on to Kdfa
there is no other watering place of any note except
breams deriving from the Euphrates. Many of the
people of Kdfa come out to Wdqisa to meet the
pilgrims, bringing flour, bread, dates and fruit, and
everybody exchanges greetings with- everybody else.
Our next halts were at a place called Lawza, where
there is y large tank of water; then a place called
al-Masajid [The Mosques], where there are three

8o



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTCTA

tanks; and after that at a place called Mandrat al-
qurdn [The Minaret of the Horns], which is a tower
landing in a desert locality, conspicuous for its height,
and decorated at the top with horns of gazelles, but
there arc no dwellings near it. We halted again in
a fertile valley called al-‘Udhayb, and afterwards at
al-Qddisiya, where the famous battle was fought
againdl the Persians, in which God manifcdlcd the
triumph of the Religion of Islam. There arc palm-
gardens and a watercourse from the Euphrates there,®
We went on from there and alighted in the town of
Mash-had ‘All at Najaf. It is a fine town, situated
in a wide rocky plain— one of the fincdl, mo^t populous,
and mo£l substantially built cities in ‘Irdq. It has
beautiful clean bazaars. We entered by the [outer]
Bdb al-Hadra, and found ourselves HrSf in the market
of the greengrocers, cooks, and butchers, then in the
fruit market, then the tailors* bazaar and the Qayiariya^
then the perfumers* bazaar, after which wc came to
the pnner] Bdb al-Hadra, where there is the tomb,
which they s:^ is the tomb of ‘AH.^ One goes through
the Bdb al-Hadra into a vaSt hospice, by which one
gains access to the gateway of the shrine, where there
are chamberlains, keepers of regi^ers and eunuchs.
As a visitor to the tomb approaches, one or all of them
rise to meet him according to his rank, and they halt
with him at the threshold. They then ask permission
for him to enter saying “ By your leave, O Commander
of the Faithful, this feeble creature asks permission
to enter the sublime reeling-place,” and command him
to kiss the threshold, which is of silver, as also are the
lintels. After this he enters the shrine, the floor of
which is covered with carpets of silk and other materials.
Inside it are candelabra of gold and silver, large and
small. In the centre is a square platform about a
man*s height, covered with wood completely hidden
under arti^ically carved plaques of gold fa^ened with
8i o



SELECTIONS FROM THE

silver nails. On this are three tombs, which they
declare are the graves of Adam, Noah, and ‘All.
Between the tombs are dishes of silver and gold, con-
taining rose-water, musk, and other perfumes; the
visitor dips his hand in these and anoints his face with
the perfume for a blessing. The shrine has another
doorway, also with a silver threshold and hangings,
of coloured silk, which opens into a mosque. The
inhabitants of the town are all Shi'ites, and at this
mausoleum many miracles are performed, which they
regard as substantiating its claim to be the tomb of
‘All. One of these miracles is that on the eve of the
27th Rajab® cripples from the two ‘Iraqs, Khurasan,
Persia and Anatolia, numbering about thirty or forty
in all, are brought here and placed on the holy tomb.
Those present await their arising and pass the time in
prayer, or reciting litanies, or reading the Koran or
contemplating the tomb. When the night is half or
two-thirds over or so, they all rise completely cured,
saying “There is no God but God; Muhammad is
the Prophet of God and ‘All is the Friend of God.”
This faft is widely known among them, and I heard
of it from trustworthy authorities, but I was not
adtually present on any such night. I saw however
three cripples in the GueSts’ College and asked them
about themselves, and they told me that they had'
missed the night and were waiting for it in a future
year. This town pays no taxes or dues and has no
governor, but is under the sole control of the Naqib
al-Ashraf [Keeper of the Register of the descendants
of the Prophet]. Its people are traders of great
enterprise, brave and generous and excellent company
on a journey, but they are fanatical about ‘AH. If
any of them suifers from illness in the head, hand,
foot, or other part of the body, he makes a model of
the member in gold or silver and brings it to the
sanctuary. The treasury of the sanctuary is consider-



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

able and contains innumerable riches. The Naqlb
al-Ashrdf holds a high position at the court. When
he travels he has the same retinue and ^atus as the
principal military officers, with banners and kettle-
drums. Military music is played at his gate every
evening and morning. Before the present holder of
the office it was held jointly by a number of persons,
who took turns of duty as governor.

One of these personages was the Sharif Abii Ghurra.
In his youth he was given over to devotions and ^udy,
but after his appointment as Naqib al-Ashrdf he was
overcome by the world, gave up his ascetic habits,
and admini^ered his finances corruptly. The matter
was brought before the sultan, and Abii Ghurra, on
hearing of this, went to Khurdsdn and thence made
for India. After crossing the Indus, he had his drums
beaten and his trumpets blown, and thereby terrified
the villagers, who, imagining that the Tatars had come
to raid their country, fled to the city of Uja [Uch]
and informed its governor of what they had heard.
He rode out with his troops and prepared for battle,
when the scouts whom he had sent out saw only about
ten 'horsemen and a number of men on foot and
merchants who had accompanied the Sharif, carrying
banners and kettledrums. They asked them what they
were doing and received the reply that the Sharif,
the Naqib of *Iriq, had come on a mission to the
king of India. The scouts returned with the news
to the governor, who thought that the Sharif muft
be a man of little sense to raise banners and beat
drums outside his own country. The Sharif ftayed
for some time at Uja, and every morning and evening
he had the drums beaten at the door of his house, for
that used to give him much gratification. It is said
that when the drums were beaten before him in Trdq,
as the drummer finished beating he would say to him
“ One more roll, drummer,” until these words Stuck

83



SELECTIONS FROM THE

to him as a nickname. The governor of Oja wrote
to the king of India about the Sharif and his drum-
beating, both on his journey and before his house
morning and evening, as well as flying banners. Now
the cuftom in India is that no person is entitled to
use banners and drums except by special privilege from
the king, and even then only while travelling. At
re^ no drums are beaten except before the king’s
house alone. In Egypt, Syria and ‘Iraq, on the other
hand, drums are beaten before the houses of the mili-
tary governors. The king was therefore displeased
and annoyed at the Sharif’s aftion. Now it happened
that as the Sharif approached the capital, with his
drums beating as usual, suddenly he met the sultan,
with his cortege on his way to meet the amir of Sind.
The Sharif went forward to the sultan to greet him,
and the sultan, after asking how he was and why he
had come and hearing his answers, went on to meet
the amir, and returned to the capital, without paying
the slightest attention to the Sharif or giving orders
for his lodging or anything else. He was then on
the point of setting out for Dawlat Abad, and before
going he sent the Sharif 500 dinars (which equal
125 of our Moroccan dinars) and said to the mes-
senger : “ Tell him that if he wants to go back to his
country, this is his travelling provision, and if he wants
to come with us it is for his expenses on the journey,
but if he prefers to ^ay in the capital it is for his
expenses until we return.” The Sharif was vexed at
this for he was desirous that the sultan should make
as rich presents to him as he usually did to his equals.
He chose to travel with the sultan and attached
himself to the wazir, who came to regard him with
affeftion, and so used his influence with the king that
he formed a high opinion of him, and assigned him
two villages in the di^ria of Dawlat Abad, with the
order to reside in them. For eight years the Sharif




SKETQl MAP OI PERSIA TO ILLUSERATI IHN lUTlOMS IKAM.LS




TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

ilaycd there, colle^ing the revenue of these two
villages, and amassed considerable wealth. There-
upon he wanted to leave the country but could not,
since those who are in the king’s service are not allowed
to leave without his permission, and he is much
attached to strangers and rarely gives any of them
leave. The SharTf tried to escape by the coaft road,
but was turned back; then he went to the capital and
by the wazfr’s good offices received the sultan’s per-
mission to leave India, together with a gift of 10,000
Indian dinars. The money was given him in a sack,
and he used to sleep on it, out of his love of money,
and fear leit some of it should get to any of his com-
panions. As a result of sleeping on it he developed
a pain in his side as he was juA about to ^art on his
journey, and eventually he died twenty days after
receiving the sack. He bequeathed the money to
the Sharif Hasan al-Jaidnf, who diAributed the whole
amount in alms to the Shl’ites living in Delhi. The
Indians do not sequeArate inheritances for the treasury,
and do not interfere with the property of Arangers
nor even make enquiries about it, however much it
may be. In the same way, the negroes never interfere
with the property of a white man, but it is left in
charge of the principal members of his company until
the rightful heir comes to claim it.

After our visit to the tomb of the Caliph *AH, the
caravan went on to Baghddd, but I set out for Basra,
in the company of a large troop of the Arab inhabitants
of that count^. They are exceedingly brave and it
is impossible to travel in those regions except in their
company. Our way lay along the Euphrates by the
place called al-‘Idhdr, which is a waterlogged jungle
of reeds, inhabited by Arabs noted for their predatory
habits. They are brigands and profess adhesion to
the Shi‘ite seA. They attacked a party of darwlshes
behind us and Aripped them of everything down to



SELECTIONS FROM THE

their shoes and wooden bowls. They have fortified
positions in this jungle and defend themselves in
these again^ all attacks. Three days’ march through
this di^triiS: brought us to the town of 'Wasit. Its
inhabitants are among the be^ people in ‘Iraq —
indeed, the very be^ of them without qualification.
All the ‘Iraqis who wish to learn how to recite the
Koran come here, and our caravan contained a number
of ^udents who had come for that purpose. As the
caravan ^ayed here three days, I had an opportunity
of visiting the grave of ar-Rifa‘i, which is at a village
called Umm ‘Ubayda, one day’s journey from there.
I reached the establishment at noon the next day and
found it to be an enormous mona^ery, containing
thousands of darwishes.® After the mid-afternoon
prayer drums and kettledrums were beaten and the
darwishes began to dance. After this they prayed
the sunset prayer and brought in the meal, consi^ing
of rice-bread, fish, milk and dates. After the night
prayer they began to recite their litany. A number
of loads of wood had been brought in and kindled
into a flame, and they went into the fire dancing;
some of them rolled in it and others ate it in their
mouths until they had extinguished it entirely. This
is the peculiar cu^om of the Ahmadf darwfshes. Some
of them take large snakes and bite their heads with
their teeth until they bite them clean through.

After visiting ar-Rifa‘f’s tomb I returned to Wasit,
and found that the caravan had already Parted, but
overtook them on the way, and accompanied them
to Basra. As we approached the city I had remarked
at a di^ance of some two miles from it a lofty building
resembling a fortress. I asked about it and was told
that it was the mosque of ‘AH. Basra was in former
times a city so va^ that this mosque ^ood in the
centre of the town, whereas now it is two miles outside
it. Two miles beyond it again is the old wall that

86



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

encirdcd'the town, so that It ^ands midway bct^vccn
the old wall and the present city.^ Basra is one of
the metropolitan cities of Triq, and no place on earth
excels it m quantity of palm-groves. The current
price of dates in its market is fourteen pounds to an
4r4ql dirham, which is one-third of a nuqra.* The
qddi sent me a hamper of dates that a man could
scarcely carry; I sold them and received nine dirhams,
and three of those were taken by the porter for carrying
the basket from the house to the market. The in-
habitants of Basra possess many excellent qualities;
they are affable to strangers and give them their due,
so that no dlran^cr ever feels lonely amongdl them.
They hold the hriday service in the mosque of *Alf
mentioned above, but for the rcA of the week it is
closed. I was present once at the Friday service in
this mosque and when the preacher rose to deliver
his discourse he committco many gross errors of
grammar.^ In aAonishment at this I spoke of it to
the qddf and this is what he said to me: In this town
there is not a man left who knows anything of the
science of grammar.” Here Is a lesson for those who
will rcflcdl on it — Magnified be He who changes all
things I This Basra, in whose people the mailcry of
grammar reached its height, from whose soil sprang
Its Crunk and its branches, among^ whose inhabitants
is numbered the leader whose primacy is undisputed —
the preacher in this town cannot deliver a discourse
without breaking its rules 1

At Basra I embarked in a sumbuq-, that is a small
boat, for Ubulla,'® which lies ten miles diflant. One
travels between a constant succession of orchards and
palm-groves both to right and left, with merchants
sitting in the shade of the trees selling bread, fish,
dates, milk and fruit. Ubulla was formerly a large
town, frequented by merchants from India and Fdrs,
but it fell into decay and is now a village. Here we

87



SELECTIONS FROM THE

embarked after sunset on a small ship belonging to
a man from Ubulla and in the morning rpched
‘Abbadan, a large village on a salt plain with no
cultivation. I was told that there was at ‘Abbddan
a devotee of great merit, who lived in complete soli-
tude. He used to come down to the shore once a
month and catch enough fish for his month’s pro-
visions and then disappear again. I made it my
business to seek him out, and found him praying in
a ruined mosque. When he had finished praying he
took my hand and said “ May God grant you your
desire in this world and the next.” I have indeed —
praise be to God — attained my desire in this world,
which was to travel through the earth, and I have
attained therein what none other has attained to my
knowledge. The world to come remains, but my
hope is ^rong in the mercy and clemency of God.
My companions afterwards went in search of this
devotee, but they could get no news of him. That
evening one of the darwishes belonging to the religious
house at which we had put up met him, and he gave
him a fresh fish saying Take this to the gue^ who
came today.” So the darwish said to us as he came
in “ Which of you saw the Shaykh today ?” I replied
“ I saw him,” and he said “ He says to you ‘ This is
your hospitality gift.’ ” I thanked God for that, then
the darwish cooked the fish for us and we all ate of
it. I have never ta^ed better fish. For a moment
I entertained the idea of spending the re^l of my life
in the service of this Shaykh, but my spirit, tenacious
of its purpose, dissuaded me.

We sailed thereafter for Majdl. I made it a habit
on my journey never, so far as possible, to cover a
second time any road that I had once travelled. I
was aiming to reach Baghdad, and a man at Basra
advised me to travel to the country of the Lfirs, thence
to Iraq al- Ajam and thence to ‘Irdq al-‘Arab, and I

88



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

followed his counsel. Four days later we reached
a small place on the Persian Gulf, and thence
I hired a mount from some grain-merchants. After
travelling for three nights across open country inhabited
by nomadic Kurds we reached Rimiz [Rdm-hurmuzJ,
a fine city with fruit trees and rivers, where I dlayed
only one night before continuing our journey for three
nights more across a plain inhabited by Kurds. At
the end of each dtage there was a hospice, at which
every traveller was supplied with bread, meat, and
sweetmeats. Thereafter I came to the city of Tudtar
[Shushtar] which is situated at the edge of the plain
and the beginning of the mountains. I dlayed there
sixteen days at the madrasa of the Shaykh Sharaf
ad-Din Miisd, one of the handsome^ and modi upright
of men. He preaches every Friday after the midday
service, and when I heard him, all the preachers whom
I had heard previously in the Hijiz, Syria and Egypt
sank in my eslimation, nor have I ever met his equal.
One day I was present with him at a gathering of
notables, theologians and darwlshes in an orchard on
the river-bank. After he had served them all with
food, he delivered a discourse with solemnity and
dignity. When he finished, bits of paper were thrown
to him from all sides, for it is a cudlom of the Persians
to jot down questions on scraps of paper and throw
them to the preacher, who answers them. The
shaykh collefted them all and began to answer them
one after the other in the modi remarkable and elegant
manner.

From Tudlar we travelled three nights through
lofty mountains, halting at a hospice at each dlation,
and came to the town or Idhaj, also called Mdl al-Ami'r,
the capital of the sultan Atibeg (which is a title
common to all the rulers of that country}.^ I wished
to see the sultan, but that was not easiW come by, as
he goes out only on Fridays because or his addition
89



SELECTIONS FROM THE

to wine. Some days later the sultan sent me an
invitation to visit him. I went with the messenger
to the gate called the Cypress Grate, and we mounted
a long staircase, finally reaching a room, which was
unfurnished because they were in mourning for the
sultan’s son. The sultan was sitting on a cushion,
with two covered goblets in front of him, one of gold
and the other of silver. A green rug was spread for
me near him and I sat down on this. No one else
was in the room but his chamberlain and one of his
boon-companions. The sultan asked me about niyself
and my country, the sultan of Egypt, and the Hijaz,
and I answered all his questions. At this juncture
a noted do£lor of the law came in, and as the sultan
ilarted praising him I began to see that he was
intoxicated. Afterwards he said to me in Arabic,
which he spoke well, “ Speak.” I said to him “ If
you will li^en to me, I say to you ‘ You are a son
of a sultan noted for piety and uprightness, and there
is nothing to be brought again^ you as a ruler but
this,’ ” and I pointed to the goblets. He was over-
come with confusion at what I said, and sat silent.
I wished to go, but he bade me sit down and said to
me, “To meet with men like you is a mercy.” Then
I saw him reeling and on the point of falling asleep,
so I withdrew. I could not find my sandals, but the
dodfor I have mentioned went up and found them in
the room and brought them to me. His kindness
ashamed me and I made my excuses, but thereupon he
kissed my sandals and put them on his head saying “ God
bless you. What you said to the sultan none could say
but you. I hope this will make an impression on him.”

A few days later I left Idhaj, and the sultan sent
me a number of dinars [as a farewell gift] with a like
sum for my companions. For ten days we continued
to travel in the territories of this sultan amiddl high
mountains, halting every night at a madrasa, where

90



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

each traveller was supplied with food for himself and
forage for his beail. Some of the madrasas arc in
desolate localities, but all their requirements are trans-
ported to them. One-third of the revenues of the
Aatc is devoted to the maintenance of these hospices
and madrasas. We travelled on across a well-watered
plain belonging to the province of the city of Isfahln,
passing througn the towns of Ushturkin and Finiain.
On reaching the latter place we found its inhabiunts
outside the town escorting a funeral. They had
torches lit behind and in front of the bier, and they
followed it up with fifes and singers, singing all sorts
of merry songs. We were amazed at their conduA.
The next day our way lay through orchards and
ftreams and fine villages, with very many pigeon
towers, and in the afternoon we reached Isfahin or
Ispahdn, in Trig al-‘Ajam. Isfahin is one of the
largeil and faireit of cities, but the greater part of it
is ndw in ruins, as a result of the feud between Sunnis
and Shi'ites, which is ftill raging there. It is rich
in fruits, among its produfU being apricots of un-
equalled quality with sweet almonds in their kernels,
quinces whose sweetness and size cannot be paralleled,
splendid grapes, and wonderful melons. Its people
are goodlooking, with clear while skins tingea with
red, exceedingly brave, generous, and always trying
to outdo one another in procuring luxurious viands.
Many curious Tories are told of this laA trait in them.
The members of each trade form corporations, as
also do the leading men who arc not engaged in trade,
and the young unmarried men; these corporations
then engage in mutual rivalry, inviting one another
to banquets, in the preparations for which they display
all their resources. I was told that one corporation
invited another and cooked its viands with lighted
candles, then the guefls returned the invitation and
cooked their viands with silk.

9«



SELECTIONS FROM THE

We then set out from Isfahan on purpose to visit
the Shaykh Majd ad-Din at Shiraz, which is ten days’
journey from there. After six days’ travelling we
reached Yazdikhwd^, outside of which there is a
convent where travellers dlay. It has an iron gate
and is extremely well fortified; inside it are shops at
which the travellers can buy all that they need. Here
they make the cheese called Yazdikhwadli, which is
unequalled for goodness; each cheese weighs from
two to four ounces. Thence we travelled across a
dlretch of open country inhabited by Turks, and
reached Shiraz, a densely populated town, well built
and admirably planned. Each trade has its own
bazaar. Its inhabitants are handsome and clean in
their dress. In the whole Eadt there is no city that
approaches Damascus in beauty of bazaars, orchards
and rivers, and in the handsome figures of its inhabi-
tants, but Shiraz. It is on a plain surrounded by
orchards on all sides and intersefted by/ivers, one of
which is the river known as Rukn Abad,^® whose
water is sweet, very cold in summer and warm in
winter. The people of Shiraz are pious and upright,
especially the women, who have a Grange cu^om.
Every Monday, Thursday, and Friday they meet in
the principal mosque to li^en to the preacher, one or
two thousand of them, carrying fans with which they
fan themselves on account of the great heat. I have
never seen in any land so great an assembly of
women.

On entering Shiraz I had but one desire, which
was to seek out the illu^rious Shaykh Majd ad-Din
Isma‘il, the marvel of the age. As I reached his
dwelling he was going out to the afternoon prayer;
I saluted him and he embraced me and took my hand
until he came to his prayer mat, when he signed me
to pray beside him. After this, the notables of the
town came forward to salute him, as is their cu^om

92



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

morning and evening, then he asked me about my
jotirney and the lands I had visited, and gave orders
to lodge me in- his madrasa. The Shaykh Majd
ad-Dln is held in the highest e^leem by the king
of Trdq, for reasons which the following dlory wiU
show. The pate] king of Trdq, Sultan Muhammad
Khuddbanda,'* had as a companion, while he was yet
an infidel, a Shi'ite theologian, and when the sultan
embraced Isldm together with the Tatars, he showed
the greatedl respeft for this man, who persuaded him
to establish the Shi'ite faith throughout his dominions.
At Baghddd, Shirdz, and Isfahdn the population pre-
vented the execution of the order, whereupon the king
ordered the qddls of these three towns to be brought.
The firdl of them to be brought was the qddf Majd
ad-Dfn of Shlrdz. The sultan was then at a place
called Qardbdgh,“ which was his summer residence,
and when the qddl arrived, he ordered him to be
thrown to the do^s which he had there. These are
enormous dogs with chains on their necks, trained to
eat men. when anyone is brought to be delivered
to the dogs, he is placed at liberty and without chains
in a wide plain; the dogs are then loosed on him and
he flees, but finds no refuge; they overtake him and
tear him to pieces and eat his flesh. But when the
dogs were loosed on the qadl Majd ad-Dln, they
would not attack him but wagged their tails before
him in the friendlie^l manner. The sultan, on hearing
of this, showed the greater reverence and respeft to
him, and _ renounced the doctrines of the Shi'ites.
He made va^l presents to the qddl, including a hundred
of the villages of Jamkdn, which is the be^l di^lrift
m Shlrdz. I met the qddl again on my return from
India in 1347. He was then too weak to walk, but
he recognized me and rose to embrace me. I visited
him one day and found the sultan of Shfrdz sitting in
front of him, holding his own ear. This is the height
93



SELECTIONS FROM THE

of good manners among^ them, and all the people
do so when they sit in the presence of the king.

The sultan of Shiraz at the time of my visit was
Abii Ishdq,^® one of the be^ of sultans, handsome
and well-condufted, of generous charadler, humble,
but powerful and the 'ruler of a great kingdom. He
has an army of more than fifty thousand men, Turks
and Persians, but he does not tru^ the people of
Shiraz. He will not take them into his service, and
allows none of them to carry arms, because they are
very brave and apt to rise againil their rulers. He
made himself ma^er of Shiraz, as well as of Fdrs and
Isfahan, after the death of Sultan Abii Sa‘id [in I335]>
when every amir seized what he possessed. At one
time Sultan Abii Ishaq desired to build a palace
like the Aywan Kisra,^'^ and ordered the inhabitants
of Shiraz to undertake the digging of its foundations.
They set to work on this, each corporation of artisans
rivalling the other, and carried their rivalry to such
lengths that they made baskets of leather to carry the
earth and covered them with embroidered silk. They
did the same with the donkey panniers. Some of
them made tools of silver, and lit numerous candles.
When they went to dig they put on their be^l garments,
with girdles of silk, and the sultan watched their work
from a balcony. When the foundations were dug the
inhabitants were freed from service, and paid artisans
took their place. Several thousands of them were
colledled for this work, and I heard from the governor
of the town that the greater part of its taxes were spent
on it. Abii Ishaq wished to be compared to the king
of India for the magnificence of his gifts, but “ How
distant are the Pleiads from the clod!” The largest
gift of Abii Ishaq that I ever heard tell of was that
he gave an ambassador from the king of Herat seventy
thousand’ dinars, whereas the king of India never
ceases to give many times 'more than that to an in-

94



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

numerable number of persons. One instance may be
cited.

The amir Bakht one day felt indisposed at the
capital of the king of India, who went to visit him.
As the king entered he wished to rise, but the king
swore that he mu^ not come down from his bed.
A divan was brought on which the sultan sat down.
He then called for gold and a balance, and when
these were brought he ordered the sick man to sit
on one of the trays. The amir said, O mailer of
the world, had I known that you would do this, I
should have put on many clothes.” The sultan
replied, “Put on now all the clothes that you have.”
So he put on the clothes that he wore in the cold
weather, which were padded with cotton-wool, and
sat on one of the trays of the balance. The other
was filled with gold until it tipped down, when the
king said “ Take this, and give it in alms for your
recovery,” and left him.

Shlrdz contains many sanftuaries which are visited
and venerated by its inhabitants. Among them is
the tomb of the imdm ‘AbdalUh ibn Khafif, who is
known there simply as “ The Shaykh.” He occupies
a high place among the saints, and the following ilory
is told of him. One day he went to the mountain
of Sarandlb [Adam’s Peak] in the island of Ceylon
accompanied by about thirty darwlshes. They were
overcome by hunger on the way, in an uninhabited
locality, and loft their bearings. They asked the
shaykh to allow them to seize one of the small elephants,
of which there arc a very large number in that place,
and which are transported thence to the king of India.
The shaykh forbade them, but their hunger got the
better or them and they disobeyed him and, seizing
a small elephant, killed and ate it. The shaykh
however refused to eat it. That night, as they slept,
the elephants gathered from all quarters and came

95



SELECTIONS FROM THE

upon them, smelling each one of them and killing
him until they had made an end of them all. They
smelled the sh^kh too but offered no violence to him;
one of them lifted him with its trunk, put him on its
back, and brought him to the inhabited di^rift.
When the people of that part saw him, they marvelled
at him and came to out meet him and hear his ^oiy.
As it came near them, the elephant lifted him with its
trunk and placed him on the ground in full view of
them.

I visited this island of Ceylon. Its people ^ill live
in idolatry [Buddhism], yet they show respefl for
Muslim darwfshes, lodge them in their houses, and
give them to eat, and they live in their houses amid^
their wives and children. This is contrary to the
usage of the other Indian idolaters [Brahmans and
Hindus], who never make friends with Muslims, and
never give them to eat or to drink out of their vessels,
although at the same time they neither aft nor speak
offensively to them. We were compelled to have
some flesh cooked for us by some of them, and they
would bring it in their pots and sit at a diftance from
us. They would also serve us with rice, which is
their principal food, on banana leaves, and then go
away, and what we left over was eaten by dogs and birds.
If any small child, who had not reached the age of
reason, ate any of it, they would beat him and make
him eat cow dung, this being, as they say, the purifica-
tion for that aft.

Among the sanftuaries outside Shfraz is the grave
of the pious shaykh known as as-Sa‘df,^® who was the
greateft poet of his time in the Persian language, and
sonietimes introduced Arabic verses into his com-
positions. There is a fine hospice which he built
in this place having a beautiful garden within it, close
by the source of the great river known as Rukn Abad.
The Shaykh [Sa‘df] had conftrufted some small cifterns

96



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

in marble (here to wash clothes In. The citizens of
Shiriz go out to visit his tomb, and they cat from his
table cat food prepared at the convent] and wash
their dothes in the river. I did the same thing there
•~may God have mercy upon him!

I left Shirdz to visit the tomb of the pious shaykh
Ab\^ Ishiq al>Kizardn( at Kizan^n, which lies two
days* journey [wc^] from Shiriz. This shaykh is
held in high honour by the inhabitants of India and
China. Travellers on the Sea of China, when the
wind turns againR them and they fear pirates, usually
make vows to Abd Ishiq, each one setting down in
writii^ what he has vowed. When they reach safety
the omeers of the convent go on board the ship, receive
the Ii£l, and take from each person the amount of his
vow. There is not a ship coming from India or China
but has thousands of dinars in it [vowed to the saint].
Any mendicant who comes to beg alms of the shaykn
is given an order, sealed with the snaykh*s seal flampcd
fn red wax, to this cfTe^l: ** Let any person who nas
made a vow to the Shaykh Abd Ishici give thereof
to so>and>so so much,’* specifying a inousand or a
hundred, or more or less. When the mendicant finds
anyone who has made a vow, he takes from him the
sum named and writes a receipt for the amount on
the back of the order.

From Kdzan^n we went by way of Zayddn to
Huwayza, and thence by a five days* march through
waterless desert to Kdfa.'® Though it was once the
abode of the Companions of the Prophet and of scholars
and theologians, and the capital of 'All, the Commander
of the Faithful, Kdfa has now fallen into ruins, as
a result of the attacks which it has suifered from the
nomad Arab brigands in the neighbourhood. The
town is unwalled. Its principal mosque is a magni*
ficent building with seven naves supported by great
pillars of immense height, made or carved Aones
97 »



SELECTIONS FROM THE

placed one on top of the other, the inter^ices being
filled with molten lead. We resumed our journey and
halted for the night at Bi’r Mallaha [“ Salt Well ”],
which is a pretty town lying among^ palm gardens.
I encamped outside it, and would not enter the place,
because the inhabitants are fanatical Shi'ites.

Next morning we went on and alighted at the city
of Hilla, which is a large town lying along the we^ern
bank of the Euphrates, with fine markets where both
natural produfts and manufadfured goods may be
had. At this place there is a great bridge fa^ened
upon a continuous row of boats from bank to bank,
the boats being held in place both fore and aft by
iron chains attached on either bank to a huge wooden
beam made fa^l ashore. The inhabitants of Hilla
are all Shi‘ites of the “ Twelvers ” seft, but they are
divided into two factions, known as the “ Kurds ”
and the “ Party of the Two Mosques,” between whom
there is con^ant factional ^rife and fighting. Near
the principal market in this town there is a mosque,
the door of which is covered with a silk curtain. They
call this the Sanctuary of the Ma^er of the Age.^
Every evening before sunset, a hundred of the towns-
men, following their cu^om, go with arms and drawn
swords to the governor of the city and receive from
him a saddled and bridled horse or mule. With this
they go in procession, with drums beating and
trumpets and bugles blowing, fifty of them in front
of it and fifty behind, while others walk to right and
left, to the Sandluary of the Ma^er of the Age. They
halt at the door and call out “ In the Name of God,
O Master of the Age, in the Name of God, come forth!
Corruption is abroad- and inju^ice is rife! This is
the hour for thy advent, that by thee God may discover
the true from the false.” They continue to call out
thus, sounding their drums and bugles and trumpets,
until the hour of sunset prayer, for they hold that

98



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

Muhammad, the son of aI«Hasan al- Askar/, entered
this mosque and disappeared from sight in it, and that
he will emerge from it, for he, in their view, is the
“ Expefted Imim.”

We travelled thence to the town of Karbald, the
shrine of al-Husayn, the son of *AH.** The sur-
roundings of the tomb and the ceremonies of visitation
resemble those of the tomb of *AH at Najaf. In this
town too the inhabitants form two fa^ions between
whom there is conilant hghtlng, although they are all
Shi'ites and descended from the same family, and as
a result of their feuds the town is in ruins.

Thence we travelled to Baghdid, the Abode of
Peace and Capital of Islim.^ Here there are two
bridges like that at Hllla, on which the people
promenade night and day, both men and women,
^e town has eleven cathedral mosques, eight on the
right bank and three on the left, together with very
many other mosaucs and madrasas, only the latter are
all in ruins. The baths at Baghdid are numerous
and excellently conflru£lcd, moR of them being
painted with pitch, which has the appearance of black
marble. This pitch is brought from a spring between
Kdfa and Basra, from which it flows continually. It
gathers at the sides of the spring like clay and is
shovelled up and brought to Baghdid. Each eilab-
lishment has a large number of private bathrooms,
every one of which has also a wash'^oasin in the corner,
with two taps supplying hot and cold water. Every
bather is given three towels, one to wear round his
waiR when he goes in, another to wear round his walR
when he comes out, and the third to dry himself with.
In no town other than Baghdid have I seen all this
elaborate arrangement, though some other towns
approach it in this respeft." The weAern part of
Baghdid was the earlicR to be built, but it is now for the
moA part in ruins. In spite of that there remain in
99



SELECTIONS FROM THE

it ^ill thirteen quarters, each like a city in itself and
possessing two or three baths. The hospital (mari^tan)
is a va^ ruined edifice, of which only ve^iges remain.
The eaftern part has an abundance of bazaars, the
larged of which is called the Tuesday bazaar. On
this side there are no fruit trees, but all the fruit is
brought from the weftern side, where there are orchards
and gardens.

My arrival at Baghddd coincided with a visit of the
sultan of the two ‘Iraqs and of Khurasan, the illus-
trious Abii Sa‘ld Bahadur Khdn,^"^ son of Sultan
Muhammad Khudabanda whose conversion we re-
lated above. He was an excellent and generous
king. He was ^ill a boy when he succeeded his
father, and the power was seized by the principal
amir, Jiiban, who left him nothing of sovereignty but
the name. This went on until one day his father's
wives complained to him of the insolence of Jfibdn’s
son Dimashq Khwaja, and the sultan had him arreted
and put to death. Jiibdn was then in Khurdsdn with
the army of the Tatars. They agreed to fight the
sultan, and marched againdl him, but when the two
forces met, the Tatars deserted to their sultan and
Jiibdn was left without support. He fled to the desert
of Siji^dn [Sidlan], and afterwards took refuge with
the king of Herdt, who betrayed him a few days later,
killed him and his youngedl son and sent their heads
to the sultan. When Abid Sa‘fd had become sole
master, he desired to marry Jfibdn's daughter, who
was called Baghddd Khdtiin, and was one of the mo^
beautiful of women. She was married to Shaykh
Hasan, the same who became mailer of the kingdom
after the death of Abii Sa‘fd, and who was his cousin
by his father’s si^er. Shaykh Hasan divorced her
on Abu Sa id’s order, and she becanie his favourite
wife. Among the Turks and the Tatars their wives
hold a high position; when they issue an order they



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

say in it “ By order of the Sultan and the Khdtdns.”
Each khdtun possesses several towns and didtrifts
and vadl revenues, and when they travel with the sultan
they have a separate camp. After this had gone on
for some time the king married a woman called
Dilshdd, of whom he was very fond.“ He neglected
Baghddd Khdtdn, who became Jealous and poisoned
him with a kerchief. On his death his line became
extinff, and the amirs seized the provinces for them-
selves. When they learned that it was Baghddd
Khdtdn who had poisoned him, they decided to put
her to death. A Greek slave, called Khwdja Lu’lu’,
who was one of the principal amirs, came to her while
she was in her bath and beat her to death with his club.
Her body lay there for some days, covered only with
a piece of sacking.

I left Baghddd with the mahalla^ of Sultan Ab\i
Sa*fd, on purpose to see the way in which the king’s
marches are condu^led, and travelled with it for ten
days, thereafter accompanying one of the amirs to the
town of Tabriz.” Wc reached the town after ten
days’ travelling, and encamped outside it in a place
called ash-Shdm. Here there is a fine hospice, where
travellers are supplied with food, consisting of bread,
meat, rice cooked in butter, and sweetmeats. The
next morning 1 entered the town and wc came to a
great bazaar, called the Ghdzdn bazaar, one of the
finedt bazaars I have seen the world over. Every
trade is grouped separately in it. I passed through
the jewellers’ bazaar, and my eyes were dazzled by
the varieties of precious dlones that I beheld. They
were displayed by beautiful slaves wearing rich gar-
ments with a wai^l-sash of silk, who 5lood in front
of the merchants, exhibiting the jewels to the wives
of the Turks, while the women were buying them in
large quantities and trying to outdo one another. As
a result of all this I witnessed a riot — may God preserve



SELECTIONS FROM THE

us from such ! We went on into the ambergris and
musk market, and witnessed another riot like it or
worse.

We spent only one night at Tabriz. Next day the
amir received an order from the sultan to rejoin him,
so I returned along with hiin, without having seen any
of the learned men there. On reaching the camp the
amir told the sultan about me and introduced me
into his presence. The sultan asked me about my
country, and gave me a robe and a horse. The amir
told him that I was intending to go to the Hijdz,
whereupon he gave orders for me to be supplied with
provisions and to travel with the cortege of the com-
mander of the pilgrim caravan, and wrote in^ruftions
to that eifefl: to the governor of Baghdad. I returned
therefore to Baghddd and received in full what the
sultan had ordered. As more than two months
remained before the period when the pilgrim caravan
was to ser out, I thought it a good plan to make a
journey to Mosul and Diyar Bakr to see those di^rifts,
and then return to Baghdad when the Hijdz caravan
was due to ^tart.

Leaving Baghddd we reached a Elation on the
Dujayl canal, which is derived from the Tigris and
waters a large traft of villages, and two days later
stopped at a large village called Harba. From there
we travelled to a place on the Tigris near a fort called
al-Ma‘shdq, opposite which on the eastern bank, is
the town of Surra-man-ra’a or Sdmarrd. This town
is a total ruin and only a very small part of it remains.
It has an equable climate and is exceedingly beautiful
in spite of its disasters and the ruins of its noble
buildings.^^® One day further on we reached Takn't,
a large ^ city with fine markets and many mosques,
whose inhabitants are di^inguished by their good
qualities. Two marches from there brought us to
a village called al-‘Aqr, from which there is a con-



TRAVELS OF I UN UATTOTA

(muous ilrip of vtlUgci and cuUlvai:on {o Moiul.
Wc came next to ^tne black land in whicli there are
uclU of pitch, like the one already mentioned between
Kiifa and Uaara, and two iU^c% on Uom these wcJIj
wc reached al-Mawiil [Mosul].

Mosul ii an ancient and prosperou* city, whose
fortress, known a» al-l fadbV [** 'I*hc I lumpback **], i»
famous for its strength. Next to it are the au!tan*3
palaces. These arc Separated from the town by a
long and broad Arcct, running from the top to the
Ijottom of the town. Round the town run two strong
walla, with cIose*set towers. So thick is the w*ali that
there arc ebambera inside it one next the other all the
way round. I have neser seen city walla like it except
at Delhi. OuLtidc (he town ia a large suburb, con-
taining mo‘.r|[uca, baths, hoilclriea and markets. It
hai a cathedral mosque on the bank of the 'Ilgfia,
round which (here arc lattice windowa of iron, and
adjoining it are platforms overlooking the river,
exceedingly bcautiuil and well conRru^cd. In front
of the mosque there ia a hospital, and (here are two
other cathedral mosques inside the (own. The
Qav'sariya of Mosul ia a fine building with iron gates.**

From Mosul wc journeved to Jaalrat ibn *Omar,
a large (own surrounded by the river, which ia the
rciicn why it is called Jazfrah psland]. 'Hie greater
part of it is in ruins, lu inhabitants are men of
excellent charaflcr and very kind to Arangcra. The
day that wc Aayed (here wc saw Mount /fidf, which
is mentioned in (he Uook of God [the Koran] as that
on which Noah's vessel came to rcA. Two Aages
from Jazirat ibn *Omar wc reached the town of
Nasfbfn, an ancient town of moderate size, for the moA
part in ruins, lying In a wide and fcrtiic plain. In
this town rose-water is manufaAurcd which is un-
equalled for perfume and sweetness. Round it there
runs like a bracelet a river which Hows from sources
103



SELECTIONS FROM THE

in a mountain close by- One branch enters the town,
flows amid^ its Greets and dwellings, cuts through the
court of the principal mosque, and empties into two
basins. The town has a hospital and two madrasas.

Thereafter we travelled to the town of Sinjdr,^®
which is built at the foot of a mountain. Its in-
habitants are Kurds, and are brave and generous.
We went on next to the town of Dara, a large, ancient
and gli^ening town, with an imposing fortress,®^ but
now in ruins and totally uninhabited. Outside it
there is an inhabited village in which we topped.
We journeyed on from there and reached the town of
Maridin, a great city at the foot of a hill, one of the
mo^ beautiful, striking and sub^antially built cities
in the lands of Islam. Here they manufadlure the
woollen fabrics known by its name. At Maridin
there is a fortress of exceptional height, situated on
the hilltop. The sultan of Maridin at the time of
my ^ay was al-Malik as-Sdlih.®^ There is no one in
‘Iraq, Syria or Egypt who is more openhanded than
he, and poets and darwishes come to visit him and
receive munificent gifts.

I then Parted to make my way back to Baghdad.
On reaching Mosul I found its pilgrim caravan out-
side the city setting out for Baghdad and joined them.
When we arrived at Baghdad I found the pilgrims
preparing for the journey, so I went to visit the governor
and asked him for the things which the sultan had
ordered for me. He assigned me the half of a camel-
litter and provisions and water for four persons,
writing out an order to that effedl, then sent for the
leader of the caravan and commended me to him. I
had already made the acquaintance of the latter, but
our friendship was ^rengthened and I remained under
his protedfion and favoured by his bounty, for he gave
me even more than had been ordered for me. As we
left Kiifa .1 fell ill of a diarrhoea and had to be dis-

104



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

mounted from the camel many times a day. The
commander of the caravan used to make enquiries
for my condition and give inAruftions that I should
be looked after. My illness continued until 1 reached
Mecca, the Sanfluary of God (may He exalt her
honour and greatness 1 ). I made the circuit of the
Sacred Edifice [the Ka*aba] on arrival, but I was so
weak that I had to carry out the prescribed cere-
monies seated, and I made the circuit and the ritual
visitation of Safi and Marwa riding on the amir’s
horse." When we camped at Mind I began to feel
relief and to recover from my malady. At the end
of the Pilgrimage I remained at Mecca all that year,
giving myself up entirely to pious exercises and leading
a moll agreeable eridlence. After the next Pilgrimage
[of 132^ I spent another year there, and yet another
after that.



CHAPTER III


After the Pilgrimage at the close of the year 1330
I set out from Mecca, making for Yemen. I arrived
at Judda [Jedda], an ancient town on the sea-coa^,
which is said to have been built by the Persians. A
Grange thing happened to- me here. A blind man,
whom I did not know and who did not know me,
called me by name, and taking my hand said “ Where
is the ring ?” Now, as I left Mecca, a religious
mendicant had met me and asked me for alms, and
as I had nothing with me at the time, I had given
him my ring. I told the blind man this, and he said
“ Go back and look for it, for there are names written
on it which contain a great secret.” I was greatly
astonished at him and at his knowledge of this — God
knows who he was. At the Friday service at Judda,
the muezzin comes and counts the number of the
inhabitants of the town present. If they amount to
forty the preacher holds the Friday service, but if
they are fewer he prays the midday prayer four times,
taking no account of the Strangers present, however
many they may be.

We embarked here on a boat which they called a
jalba. The Sharif Mansdr embarked on another
and desired me to accompany him, but I refused. He
had a number of camels in his jalba and that frightened
me, as I had never travelled on sea before. For two
days we sailed with a favouring wind, then it changed
and drove us out of our course. The waves came
overboard into our midSt and the passengers fell
grievously sick. These terrors continued until we

106



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

emerged at a roadstead called Ra s DawA ir^ between
Aydhdb and SawAkin. Wc landed here and found
on the shore a reed hut shaped like a mosque, inside
which were oAlrich egg-shells filled with water. We
drank from these and cooked food, A party of Bejds
came to us, so we hired camels from them and travelled
with them through a country in which there are many
gazelles. The Bejds do not cat them so they are tame
and do not run away from men. After two days’
travelling we reached the island of SawAkin fSuakinj.
It is a large island lying about six miles off the coail,
and has neither water nor cereal crops nor trees.
Water is brought to it in boats, and it has large reser-
voirs for colle&ng rainwater. The flesh of oAlriches,
gazelles and wild asses is to be had in it, and it has
many goats together with milk and butter, which is
exported to Mecca. Their cereal is jurjur^ a kind of
coarse grained millet, which is also exported to Mecca.
The sultan of Sawikin when I was there was the
Sharif Zayd, the son of the amir of Mecca.

We took ship at SawAkin for Yemen. No sailing
is done on this sea at night because of the number of
rocks in it. At nightfall they land and embark again
at sunrise. The captain of the ship Alands conAlantly
at the prow to warn the Aleersman of rocks. Six days
after leaving SawAkin we reached the town of Hali,^
a large and populous town inhabited by two Arab
tribes. The sultan is a man of excellent charaAIer,
a man of letters and a poet. I had accompanied him
from Mecca to Judda, and when I reached his city
he treated me generously and made me his guest for
several days. I embarked in a ship of his and reached
the township of Sarja, which is inhabited by Yemenite
merchants.® They are generous and open-handed,
supply food to travellers and assiAl pilgrims, trans-
porting them in their ships and providing for them
from their own funds. We Alayed at Sarja only one
107



SELECTIONS FROM THE

night as their gue^s, then sailed on to the road^ead
of al-Ahwab and thence went up to Zabid.^

Zabid is a hundred and twenty miles from San‘a,
and is after San ‘a the larged and wealthier town in
Yemen. It lies amid^ luxuriant gardens with many
breams and fruits, such as bananas and the like. It
is in the interior, not on the coa^, and is one of the
capital cities of the country. The town is large and
populous, with palm-groves, orchards, and running
streams — in faft, the pleasanter and mor beautiful
town in Yemen. Its inhabitants are charming in
their manners, upright, and handsome, and the women
especially are exceedingly beautiful. The people of
this town hold the famous [junketings called] suhut
an-nakhl in this wise. They go out to the palm-
groves every Saturday during the season of the colour-
ing and ripening of the dates.® Not a soul remains
in the town, whether of the townsfolk or of the visitors.
The musicians go out [to entertain them], and the
shopkeepers go out selling fruits and sweetmeats.
The women go in litters on camels. For all we have
said of their exceeding beauty they are virtuous and
possessed of excellent qualities. They show a pre-
dileftion for foreigners, and do not refuse to marry
them, as the women in our country do. When a
woman’s husband wishes to travel she goes out with
him and bids him farewell, and if they have a child,
it is she who takes care of it and supplies its wants
until the father returns. While he is absent she
demands nothing from him for maintenance or clothes
or anything else, and while he ^ays with her she is
content with very little for upkeep and clothing. But
the women never leave their own towns, and none of
them would consent to do so, however much she were
offered.

We went on from there to the town of Ta‘izz, the
capital of the king of Yemen, and one of the fine^

io8



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

and largcft towns in that country.” Its people arc
overbearing* insolent* and rude* as is generally the
ease in towns where kings reside. Ta'izz is made up
of three quarters; the firil is the residence of the king
and his court* the second* called ‘Udayna* is the
military flation* and the third* called al-lvlahdlib*^ is
inhabited by the commonalty, and contains the prin-
cipal market. The sultan of Yemen is Niir ad-Dln
‘AH of the house of Rasdl. He uses an elaborate
ceremonial in his audiences and progresses. The
fourth day after our arrival was a Thursday* on whieh
day the king holds a public audience. The qddl
presented me to him and I saluted him. The way in
which one salutes is to touch the ground with the
index-finger* then lift it to the head and say “ May
God prolong thy Majefly.” I did as the qddl had
don^ and the king* having ordered me to sit in front
of him* queAioned me about my country and the other
lands and princes 1 had seen. The wazir was present*
and the king ordered him to treat me honourably and
arrange for my lodging.’ After flaying there for
some days as his gueft* I set out for the town of San'd,
which was the former capital* a populous town built
of brick and plaSler* with a temperate climate and
^od water. A flrange thing about the rain in India*
Yemen* and Abyssinia is that it falls only in the hot
weather* and moflly every afternoon during that
season* so travellers always make hafle about noon
to avoid being caught by the rain* and the townsfolk
retire indoors* for their rains are heavy downpours.
The whole town of San'd is paved* so that when the
rain falls it washes and cleans all the flreets.

I travelled thence to ‘Aden* the port of Yemen*
on the coafl of the ocean. It is surrounded by moun-
tains and can be approached from one side only; it has
no crops* trees* or water* but has reservoirs in which
rainwater is collefted. The Arabs often cut off the
109



SELECTIONS FROM THE

inhabitants from their supply of drinking-water until
they buy them off with money and pieces of cloth.
It is an exceedingly hot place. It is the port of the
Indians, and to it come large vessels from Kinbdyat
[Cambay], Kawlam [Quilon], Cdlicdt, and many other
Malabar ports. There are Indian merchants living
there, as well as Egyptian merchants. Its inhabitants
are all either merchants, porters, or fishermen. Some
of the merchants are immensely rich, so rich that
sometimes a single merchant is sole owner of a large
ship with all it contains, and this is a subjedf of o^enta-
tion and rivalry among^ them. In spite of that they
are pious, humble, upright, and generous in charadfer,
treat strangers well, give liberally to devotees, and pay
in full the tithes due to God.

I took ship at ‘Aden, and after four days at sea
reached Zayla‘ [Zeila], the town of the Berberah, who
are a negro people. Their land is a desert extending
for two months’ journey from Zayla‘ to Maqdashaw.
Zayla‘ is a large city with a great bazaar, but it is the
dirtiest, moil abominable, and moil ilinking town in
the world. The reason for the ilench is the quantity
of its fish and the blood of the camels that they slaughter
in the ilreets. When we got there, we chose to spend
the night at sea, in spite of its extreme roughness,
rather than in the town, because of its filth.

On leaving Zayla‘ we sailed for fifteen days and came
to Maqdashaw [Mogdishu], which is an enormous
town. Its inhabitants are merchants and have many
camels, of which they slaughter hundreds eVery day
[for food]. When a vessel reaches the port, it is met
by sumbuqSy which are small boats, in each of which
are a number of young men, each carrying a covered
dish containing food. He presents this to ono of the
merchants on the ship saying “ This is my gue^,” and
all the others do the same. Each merchant on dis-
embarking goes only to the house of the young man

no



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

who is his hoft, except those who have made frequent
journeys to the town and know its people well; these
live where, they please. The hoft then sells his goods
for him and buys for him, and if anyone buys anything
from him at too low a price or sells to him in the
absence of his ho^, the sale is regarded by them as
invalid. This praftice is of great advantage to them.
When these young men came on board our vessel,
one of them approached me. My companions said
“This man is not a merchant, but a theologian, “
whereupon the young man called out to his friends
“ This IS the qddi's guest.” Amon^ them was one
of the qddi’s men, who went to tdl him of this, so
he came down to the beach with a number of dludents,
and sent one of them to me. When I disembarked
with my party, I saluted him and his party, and he
said “ In the name of God, let us go and salute the
Shaykh." Thereupon I said “ And who is this

Shaykh ?” He answered “ The sultan,” for they call
the sultan * the Shaykh.’ 1 said to him “ When I
have settled down I shall go to him,” and he replied
“ It is the cudlom that whenever a theologian, or sharlf,
or man of religion comes here, he mudl see the sultan
before taking his lodging.” So I went to him as
they asked. The sultan, whose name is Abd Bakr,
is of Berberah origin, and he talks in the Maqdishi
language, though he knows Arabic. When we
reached the palace and news of my arrival was sent
in, a eunuch came out with a plate containing betel
leaves and areca nuts. He gave me ten leaves and
a few nuts, the same to the qddl, and the re^l to my
companions and the qidl’s students, and then said
“ Our mailer commands that he be lodged in the
students’ house.” Later on the same eunuch brought
food from the * Shaykh’s * palace. With him came
one of the wazlrs, whose duty it was to look after the
gueils, and who said “ Our mailer greets you and bids
III



SELECTIONS FROM THE

you welcome.” We ^ayed there three days, food
being brought to us three times a day, and on the
fourth, a Friday, the qadi and one of the wazirs brought
me a set of garments. We then went to the mosque
and prayed behind the [sultan’s] screen.® When the
‘ Shaykh ’ came out I greeted him and he bade me
welcome. He put on his sandals, ordering the qadi
and myself to do the same, and set out for his palace
on foot. All the other people walked barefooted.
Over his head were carried four canopies of coloured
silk, each surmounted by a golden bird. After the
palace ceremonies were over, all those present saluted
and retired.

I embarked at Maqdashaw for the Sawahil country,
with the objeft of visiting the town of Kulwa [Kilwa,
Quiloa] in the land of the Zanj.® We came to Mam-
basa [Mombasa], a large island two days’ journey by
sea from the Sawahil country.^® It possesses no
territory on the mainland. They have fruit trees on
the island, but no cereals, which have to be brought
to them from the Sawahil. Their food consifts chiefly
of bananas and fish. The inhabitants are pious,
honourable, and upright, and they have well-built
wooden mosques. We ^ayed one night in this island,
and then pursued our journey to Kulwa, which is a
large town on the coa^. The majority of its inhabi-
tants are Zanj, jet-black in colour, and with tattoo-
marks on their faces. I was told by a merchant that
the town of Sufala lies a fortnight’s journey [south]
from Kulwa, and that gold duft is brought to Sufala
from Ydfi in the country of the Limis, which is a
month’s journey diftant from it.^^ Kulwd is a very
fine and sub^antially built town, and all its buildings
are of wood. Its inhabitants are con^antly engaged
in military expeditions, for their country is contiguous
to the heathen Zanj. The sultan at the time of my
visit was Abu’l-Muzaffar Hasan, who was noted for

II2



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

his gifts and generosity. He used to devote the fifth
part of the booty made on his expeditions to pious
and charitable purposes, as is prescrioed in the Koran, “
and I have seen him give the clothes of? his back to
a mendicant who asked him for them. When this
liberal and virtuous sultan died, he was succeeded by
his brother Diwdd, who was at the opposite pole from
him in this respe^b. Whenever a petitioner came to
him, he would say ** He who gave is dead, and left
nothing behind him to be given.” Visitors would
^ay at his court for months on end, and finally he
would make them some small gift, so that at laA
pe(^le gave up going to his gate.

From Kulwd we sailed to Dhafdri phofar], at the
extremity of Yemen. Thoroughbred horses arc ex-
ported from here to India, the passage taking a month
with a favouring wind. Dhafdri is a monthl’s journey
from 'Aden across the desert, and is situated in a
desolate locality without villages or dependencies. Its
market is one of the dirtied in the world and the moil
pcAered by flies because of the quantity of fruit and
fish sold there. Mofl of the fish arc of the kind
called sardines, which arc extremely fat in that country,
A curious fa^ is that these sardines arc the sole food
of their beails and flocks, a thing which I have seen
nowhere else. MoR of the sellers [in the market]
are female slaves, who wear black garments. The
inhabitants cultivate millet and irrigate it from very
deep wells, the water from which is raised in a large
bucket drawn up by a number of ropes attached to
the wai^ls of slaves. Their principal food is rice,
imported from India. Its population consiils of
merchants who live entirely on trade. When a vessel
arrives they take the ma^cr, captain and writer in
procession to the sultan’s palace and entertain the
entire ship’s company for three days in order to gain
the goodwill of the shipma^ers. Another curious

1x3 I



SELECTIONS FROM THE

thing is that its people closely resemble the people of
Northwe^ Africa in their cuiloms. In the neighbour-
hood of the town there are orchards with many banana-
trees. The bananas are of immense size; one which
was weighed in my presence scaled twelve ounces and
was pleasant to the ta^e and very sweet. They grow
also betel-trees and coco-palms, which are found only
in India and the town of Dhafari.^® Since we have
mentioned these trees, we shall describe them and
their properties here.

Betel-trees are grown like vines on cane trellises or
else trained up coco-palms. They have no fruit and
are grown only for their leaves. The Indians have
a high opinion of betel, and if a man visits a friend
and the latter gives him five leaves of it, you would
think he had given him the world, especially if he is
a prince or notable. A gift of betel is a far greater
honour than a gift of gold and silver. It is used in
this way. Fir^ one takes areca-nuts, which are like
nutmegs, crushes them into small bits and chews them.
Then the betel leaves are taken, a little chalk is put
on them, and they are chewed with the areca-nuts.
They sweeten the breath and aid dige^ion, prevent
the disagreeable effedls of drinking water on an empty
^omach, and ilimulate the faculties.

The coco-palm is one of the ^range^ of trees, and
looks exadlly like a date-palm. The nut resembles
a man’s head, for it has marks like eyes and a mouth,
and the contents, when it is green, are like the brain.
It has fibre like hair, out of which they make ropes,
which they use in^ead of nails to bind their ships
together and also as cables. Among^ its properties
are that it ^rengthens the body, fattens, and adds
redness to the face. If it is cut open when it is green
it gives a liquid deliciously sweet and fresh. After
drinking this one takes a piece of the rind as a spoon
and scoops out the pulp inside the nut. This taftes

I14



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

like an egg that has been broiled but not quite cooked*
and is nourishing. I lived on it for a year and a half
when I was in the Maldivc islands. One of its pccu*
liarities is that oil, milk and honey arc extra^cd from
it. The honey is made in this fashion. They cut
a Ralk on which the fruit grows, leaving two fingers*
length, and on this they tic a small bowl, into which
the sap drips. If this has been done in the morning,
a servant climbs un again in the evening with two
bowls, one filled witn water. He pours into the other
the sap that has cohered, then washes the Aalk, cuts
off a small piece, and tics on another bowl. The same
thing is repeated next morning until a good deal of
the sap has been collcAed, when it is cooked until
it thicKcns. It then makes an excellent honey, and
the merchants of India, Yemen, and China buy it and
take it to their own countries, where they manufaflure
sweetmeats from it. 'fhe milk is made by Aceping the
contents of the nut in water, which takes on the colour
and toAe of milk and is used along with food. To
make the oil, the ripe nuts arc peeled and the contents
dried in the sun, then cooked in cauldrons and the oil
cxtraAcd. They use it for lighting and dip bread
in it, and the women put it on their hair.

We left Dhafiri for ‘Omin in a small ship belonging
to a man from Masfra. On the second day of our
journey we disembarked at the roadAcad of Hdsik,*^
which is inhabited by Arab fishermen. Here they
have a great quantity of frankincense trees. They
have thin leaves out of which drips, when they arc
slashed, sap like milk. This turns into a gum, which
is the frankincense. The people living in this port
arc dependent on fishing for their food, and the fish
they catch is the lukhaittf which is like a dogfish.
They slice these fish up, dry them in the sun and use
them for food, and build their houses with the fish
bones, using camel skins for roofs.

”5



SELECTIONS FROM THE

Six days later we reached the Island of Birds, which
is uninhabited. We ca^ anchor and went on shore,
and found it full of birds like blackbirds, only bigger.
The sailors brought some of their eggs, cooked and
ate them, then caught a number of the birds which
they cooked without previously slitting their throats.^®
My food during the voyage consi^ed of dried dates
and fish, for they used to fish every morning and even-
ing. The fish they caught were cut up into pieces
and broiled, and every person on board received a
portion, no preference being shown to anyone, not
even to the ma^er. We celebrated the Pilgrimage
Festival at sea, being ^ormtossed all that day from
sunrise until sunrise the next day, and in danger of
foundering. A ship in front of us was sunk, and only
one man escaped by swimming after great efforts.
We called next at the island of Masfra, a large island
whose inhabitants live entirely on fish,^® but we did
not land as the road^ead is at some di^ance from the
shore. Besides I had taken a dislike to these people
after seeing them eat birds without slitting their
throats.

We sailed for a day and a night from Masfra and,
reached the road^ead of a large village called Sfir,
from which we could see the town of Qalhat, situated
on the slope of a hill apparently close at hand.’^'’^ As
we had anchored ju^ after midday, I desired to walk
to Qalhat and spend the night there, for I had taken
a dislike to the company on the ship. On enquiry,
I was told that I should get there in the mid-afternoon,
so I hired one of the sailors as a guide. An Indian
named Khidr, who had been one of my fellow-pas-
sengers, came with me, and the re^ of my party were
left on board with my goods to rejoin me the next
day. I took with me some of my clothes, giving
them to the guide to carry to spare myself fatigue
and myself carried a lance. Now the guide wished



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

to ^teal the clothes, so he led us to an inlet of the sea
and set about crossing it with the clothes. I said
to him “ You cross over alone and leave the clothes;
if we can cross we shall, and if not we shall look for
a ford higher up.” He drew back then, and after-
wards we saw some men swimming across, so we
were convinced that he had wanted to drown us and
get away with the clothes. Though I made a show
of vivacity I was on my guard and kept brandishing
the lance, so that the guide became frightened of me.
We then came on a waterless plain and suffered greatly
from thirst, but God sent us a horseman with a com-
pany of men who gave us to drink, and wc went on,
thinking that the town was close at hand, while
aftually we were separated from it by nullahs in which
we walked for miles. In the evening the guide wished
to lead us towards the shore, where there is no road,
for the coaA is rocky, hoping that we should get iiuck
among the rocks and he would make away with the
clothes, but 1 said that we should take no road but
the one that we were on. When night fell, as I was
afraid of being molested on the road and did not
know exadlly how far we ^lill were from the town, I
decided that we should go aside from the road and
sleep. Although I was tired out I pretended to be
full of vigour, and put the clothes under my garments
and grasped my lance in my hand. My companion
was worn out, and both he and the guide slept, but
I flayed awake and every time the guide moved I
spoke to him to show him that I was awake. In the
morning I sent the guide to fetch us some water and
my companion took the clothes. We had ^lill some
ravines and nullahs to cross, but the guide brought
us water and eventually wc reached Qdhdt in a ^ate
of extreme fatigue. My feet were so swollen inside
my shoes that the blood was almost Parting from
under the nails. Then, as a final touch to our mis-
117



SELECTIONS FROM THE

fortunes, the gatekeeper insisted on taking me to be
interrogated by the governor of the town. The
governor, however, was an excellent man and very
kind, and he put me up. I stayed with him for six
days, during which I was unable to walk because of
the soreness of my feet. The town of Qalhat lies
on the shore; it has fine bazaars and an exceedingly
beautiful mosque, the wails of which are decorated
with Qashani tilework, and which occupies a lofty
situation overlooking the town and the harbour. I
ate fish there of a sort which I have found in no other
country. I preferred it to any kind of flesh and used
to eat nothing else. They broil it on the leaves of
trees and serve it with rice, which is brought to them
by sea from India. The inhabitants are traders and
live [entirely] on what comes to them from the Indian
Ocean. Whenever a vessel arrives at their town, they
show the greater joy.

We then set out for the country of ‘Oman and arrived
there after six days’ travelling.^® It is a fertile land,
with breams, trees, orchards, palm gardens, and fruit
trees of various kinds. Its capital, the town of Nazwa,
lies at the foot of a mountain and has fine bazaars and
splendid clean mosques. Its inhabitants make a habit
of eating meals in the courts of the mosques, every
person bringing what he has, and all sitting down to
the meal together, and travellers join in with them.
They are very warlike and brave, always fighting
between themselves. The sultan of ‘Oman is an
Arab of the tribe of Azd, and is called Abd Muham-
mad, which is the title given to every sultan who
governs ‘Oman.^® The towns on the coa^t are for the
mo^ part under the government of Hormuz.

I travelled next to the country of Hormuz. Hormuz
is a town on the coa^, called also Mdghi^an, and in
the sea facing it and nine miles from shore is New
Hormuz, which is an island.^® The town on it is

ii8



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

called Jarawn. It is a large and fine city, with busy
markets, as it is the port nrom which the wares from
India and Sind arc despatched to the 'Irdqs, Fdrs and
Khurdsdn. The island is saline, and the inhabitants
live on fish and dates exported to them from Basra.
They say in their tongue KhurmJ wamdhl luti pddi~
ikdhi^ which means ** Dates and fish are a roval dish.”
Water is a valuable commodity in this island. They
have wells and artificial reservoirs to coIIefV rainwater
at some diRance from the town. The inhabitants go
there with waterskins, which they fill and carry on
their backs to the shore, load them on boats and bring
them to the town. A flrange thing I saw there was
a fish's head at the gate of the cathedral mosque as
large as a hillock and with eyes like doors, and you
would see people entering byonc eye and coming out
^ the other. The sultan of Hormuz is Qutb ad-Dln
Tahamtan, a moSi generous and humble ruler, who
makes a habit of visiting every theologian or pious
man or sharlf who comes to his town and of paying
to each his due. We found him engaged in a war
with his nephews, who were in revolt. We ^ayed
there sixteen days, and when we wished to leave 1
said to one of my companions ” How can we go away
without seeing this sultan ?” So we went to the
house of the wazir, who took me by the hand and went
with me to the palace. I saw there an old man wearing
skimpy and dirty garments with a turban on his head
and a kerchief as a girdle. The wazfr saluted him
and I did the same, not knowing that he was the king,
and then I began to converse with a person I knew
who was ^landing beside him. When the wazfr
enlightened me I was covered with confusion and made
mv excuses. The king rose and went into the palace,
followed by the generals and minivers and when 1
entered with the wazfr we found him sitting on his
throne with the same shabby clothes on. He asked
II9



SELECTIONS FROM THE

me about myself and my journey and the kings I had
seen, then, after food had been served, he rose and I
said farewell to him and went away.

We set out from Hormuz to visit a saintly man in
the town of Khunjubal, and after crossing the ^rait,
hired mounts from the Turkmens who live in that
country. No travelling can be done there except in
their company, because of their bravery and knowledge
of the roads. In these parts there is a desert four
days’ journey in extent, which is the haunt of Arab
brigands, and in which the deadly samdm blows in
June and July. All who are overtaken by it perish,
and I was told that when a man has fallen a vidlim
to this wind and his friends attempt to wash his body
[for burial], all his limbs fall apart.^^ All along the
road there are graves of persons who have succumbed
there to this wind. We used to travel by night, and
halt from sunrise until late afternoon in the shade of
the trees. This desert was the scene of the exploits,
of the famous brigand Jamal al-Ldk, who had under
him a band of Arab and Persian horsemen. He used
to build hospices and entertain travellers with the
money that he gained by robbery, and it is said that
he used to claim that he never employed violence
except againdt those who did not pay the tithes on
their property. No king could do anything against
him, but afterwards he repented and gave, himself up
to ascetic pra<51:ices, and his grave is now a place of
pilgrimage. After traversing these deserts we reached
Kawra^tan, a small town with running streams and
orchards and extremely hot.^ From there we marched
through another desert like the former for three days
and reached the town of Lar,^® a large town with
perennial breams and orchards and fine bazaars. We
lodged in a convent inhabited by a group of darwishes
who have the following cu^om. They assemble in
the convent every afternoon and then go round the

120



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

houses in the town; at each house they arc given one
or two loaves and from these they supply the needs
of travellers. The householders arc used to this
prafticc and make provision for the extra loaves, in
order to assiA the darwfshcs in their di^ributlon of
food. There is a Turkmen sultan in the town of Ldr,
who sent us a hospitality gift,®^ but we did not visit
or see him.

We went on to the town of Khunjub41,“ the resi-
dence of the Shaykh Abii Bulaf, whom we had come
to visit. We lodged in his hermitage and he treated
me. kindly and sent me food and fruit by one of his
sons. From there we journeyed to the town of Qays,
which is also called Slrdf." The people of Slrdf arc
Persians of noble dlock, and amongdl them there is
a tribe of Arabs, who dive for pearls. The pearl
.fisheries are situated between Sfrdf and Bahrayn in
a calm bay like a wide river. During the months of
April and May a large number of boats come to this
place with divers and merchants from Firs, Bahrayn
and Qathlf. Before diving the diver puts on his face
a sort of tortoiseshell mask and a tortoiseshell clip on
his nose, then he- ties a rope round his waiit and dives.
They differ in their endurance under water, some of
them being able to Aay under for an hour or two
hours or less.” When he reaches the bottom of the
sea he finds the shells there ^uck in the sand between
small Aones, and pulls then out by hand or cuts them
loose with a knife which he has for the purpose, and
puts them in a leather bag slung tound his neck.
When his breath becomes rc^rifted he pulls the rope,
and the man holding the rope on the shore feels the
movement and pulls him up into the boat. The bag
is taken from him and the shells arc opened. Inside
them are found pieces of flesh which are cut out with
a knife, and when they come into contact with the air
solidify and turn into pearls. These are then collefted,
X2X



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

large and small together; the sultan takes his fifth and
the remainder are bought by the merchants who are
there in the boats. Mo^ of them are the creditors
of the divers, and they take the pearls in quittance of
their debt or so much of it as is their due.

From Siraf we travelled to the town of Bahrayn, a
fine large town with orchards, trees and breams.
Water is easy to get at there; all one has to do is to
scoop the ground with one’s hands It is very hot
and sandy, and the sand often encroaches on some of
its settlements. From Bahrayn we went to the town
of al-Quthayf [Qathif], a fine large town inhabited by
Arab tribes who are out-and-out Shi'ites and openly
proclaim it, fearing nobody. Next we journeyed to
the town of Hajar, which is now called al-Hasa.^®
It has become the subjeft of a proverb “ Carrying dates
to Hajar,” because there are more palms there than
in any other di^ri6f, and they even feed their bea^s
with the dates. We travelled thence to the town of
Yamama,®° in company with the governor of which I
went on to Mecca to perform the pilgrimage. This
was in the year 1332, the same year that al-Malik
an-Nasir, the sultan of Egypt, made his la^t pilgrimage.
He made munificent gifts to the inhabitants of the
twin shrines [Mecca and Madina] and to the devotees
living there, and on the same journey he put to death
by poisoning the amir Ahmad, who, it is said, was
his own son, and his principal amir Bektimur the cup-
bearer, on being warned that they were' plotting to
assassinate him and seize the throne.


122







CHAPTER IV


After the pilgrimage I went to Judda, intending to
take ship to Yemen and India, but that plan fell
throuch and I could get no one to join me. I flayed
at Judda about forty days. There was a ship there
going to Qusayr [Kosair], and I went on board to
see what £Iate it was in, but 1 was not satisfied. This
was an aft of providence, for the ship sailed and foun-
dered in the open sea, and very few escaped. After-
wards I took ship for Aydhdb, but we were driven
to a roadftcad called Ra^s Dawd’ir [p. 107J, from
which we made our way with some Bcjds through
the desert to Aydhdb. Thence we travelled to Ediu
and down the Nile to Cairo, where 1 ftayed for a few
days, then set out for Svria and passed for the second
time through Gaza, Hebron, Jerusalem, Ramlah, Acre,
Tripoli, and Jabala to Lddhiofya.

At lidhiqfya we embarked on a large galley belong-
ing to the Genoese, the maftcr of which was called
Martalmfn, and set out for the country of the Turks
known as Bildd ar-Rum [Anatolia], because it was in
ancient times their land.' Later on it was conquered
by the Muslims, but there are ftill large numbers of
ChriAians there under the government of the Turkmen
Muslims. We were ten nights at sea, and the Chris-
tian treated us kindly and took no passage money
from us. On the tenth day we reached ‘Aldyd, where
the province begins. .This country is one of the beft
in the world; in it God has united the good features
dispersed throughout other lands. Its people are the
moA comely of men, the clcaneA in their dress, the
123



SELECTIONS FROM THE

mo^ exquisite in their food, and the kindlie^l folk in
creation. Wherever we flopped in this land, whether
at a hospice or a private house, our neighbours both
men and women (these do not veil themselves) came
to ask after us. When we left them they bade us
farewell as though they were our relatives and our own
folk, and you would see the women weeping. They
bake bread only once a week, and the men used to bring
us gifts of warm bread on the day it was baked, along
with delicious viands, saying “ The women have sent
this to you and beg your prayers.” All the inhabitants
are orthodox Sunnis; there are no seftarians or heretics
among^ them, but they eat hashish [Indian hemp],
and think no harm of it.

The city of ‘Alaya is a large town on the seacoa^.^
It is inhabited by Turkmens, and is visited by the
merchants of Cairo, Alexandria, and Syria. The
diftrift is well-wooded, and wood is exported from
there to Alexandria and Damietta, whence it is carried
to the other cities of Egypt. There is a magnificent
and formidable citadel, built by Sultan ‘Ala ad-Dm,
at the upper end of the town. The qadi of the town
rode out with me to meet the king of ‘Alaya, who is
Yfisuf Bek, son of Qaraman, bek meaning king in their
language. He lives at a diftance of ten miles from
the city. We found him sitting by himself on the
top of a hillock by the shore, with the amirs and wazirs
below him, and the troops on his right and left. He
hp his hair dyed black. I saluted him and answered
his que^ions regarding my visit to his town, and after
my withdrawal he sent me a present of money.

From ‘Alaya I went to Antaliya [Adalia], a mo^
beautiful city.® It covers an immense area, and
though of valt bulk is one of the mo^ attractive towns
to be seen anywhere, besides being exceedingly popu-
lous and well laid out. Each seCtion of the inhabitants
lives in a separate quarter. The Chri^ian merchants

124



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

live in a quarter of the town known as the Mfni [the
Port], and are surrounded by a wall, the gates of
which are shut upon them from without at night and
during the Friday service/ The Greeks, who were
its former inhabitants, live by themselves in another
quarter, the Jews in another, and the king and his
court and mamluks in another, each of these quarters
being walled off likewise. The re^t of the Muslims
live in the main city. Round the whole town and all
the quarters mentioned there is another great wall.
The town contains many orchards and produces fine
fruits, including an admirable kind of apricot, called
by them Qamar ad-D/n, which has a sweet almond
in its kernel. This fruit is dried and exported to
Egypt, where it is regarded as a great luxury.

We Aayed here at the college mosque of the town,
the principal of which was Shaykh Shihdb ad-Dln
al-Hamawl. Now in all the lands inhabited by the
Turkmens in Anatolia, in every diftrift, town, and
village, there are to be found members of the organi-
zation known as the Akhlya or Young Brotherhood.
Nowhere in the world will you find men so eager to
welcome strangers, so prompt to serve food and to
satisfy the wants of others, and so ready to suppress
injuflice and to kill [tyrannical] agents of police and
the miscreants who join with them. A Young
Brother, or akhi in their language, is one who is
chosen by all the members of his trade [guild], or
by other young unmarried men, or those who live in
ascetic retreat, to be their leader. This organization
is known also as the Futuvoa^ or Order of Youth.
The leader builds a'hospice and furnishes it with rugs,
lamps, and other necessary appliances. The members
of his community work during the day to gain their
livelihood, and bring him what they have earned in
the late afternoon. With this they buy fruit, food,
and the other things which the hospice requires for

IZ5



SELECTIONS FROM THE

their use. If a traveller comes to the town that day
they lodge him in their hospice; these provisions serve
for his entertainment as their gue^l, and he ^ays with
them until he goes away. If there are no travellers
they themselves, assemble to partake of the food, and
having eaten it they sing and dance. On the morrow
they return to their occupations and bring their earn-
ings to their leader in the late afternoon. The
members are called jitydn (youths), and their leader,
as we have said, is the akhi^

The day after our arrival at Antaliya one of these
youths came to Shaykh Shihab ad-Din al-Hamawi
and spoke to him in Turkish, which I did not under-
hand at that time. He was wearing old clothes and
had a felt bonnet on his head. The shaykh said to
me “ Do you know what he is saying “ No ”
said I “ I do not know.” He answered “ He is in-
viting you and your company to eat a meal with him.”
I was ahonished but I said “Very well,” and when
the man had gone I said to the shaykh “ He is a poor
man, and is not able to entertain us, and we do not
like to be a burden pn him.” The shaykh burh out
laughing and said “ He is one of the shaykhs of the
Young Brotherhood. He is a cobbler, and a man
of generous disposition. His companions, about two
hundred men belonging to diiferent trades, have made
him their leader and have built a hospice to entertain
their gue^s. All that they earn by day 'they spend
at night.”

After I had prayed the sunset prayer the same man
came back for us and took us to the hospice. We
found [ourselves in] a fine building, carpeted with
beautiful Turkish rugs and lit by a large number of
chandeliers of ‘Iraqi glass. A number of young men
^ood in rows in the hall, wearing long mantles and
boots, and each had a knife about two cubits long
attached to a girdle around his waift. On their heads

126



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

were white woollen bonnets, and attached to the peak
of these bonnets was a piece of Sluff a cubit long and
two fingers in breadth. When they took their scats,
every man removed his bonnet and set it down in
front of him, and kept on his head another ornamental
bonnet of silk or other material. In the centre of
their hall was a sort of platform placed there for
visitors. When we took our places, they served up
a great banquet followed by fruits and sweetmeats,
after which they began to sing and to dance. We
were filled with admiration and were greatly ailonished
at their openhandedness and generosity. We took
leave of them at the close of the night and left them
in their hospice.

The sultan of Antdliya, Khidr Bek, son of Ydnus
Bek, was ill when we reached the town, but we visited
him on his sick*bcd. He spoke to us very kindly,
and when we took leave of him, sent us a gift of
money.

We travelled on to the town of Burdiir [Buldur],
a small place with many orchards and Yearns, and a
Strong fortress on a hilltop. We put up as the gucAs
of the preacher there. The brotherhood held a
meeting and wished us to ilay with them, but he would
not hear of it, so they prepared a banquet for us in
a garden belonging to one of them and conducted us
to the place. It was marvellous to see the joy and
gladness with which they received us, though they
were ignorant of our language and we of theirs, and
there was no one to interpret between us. We flayed
with them one day and then took our leave.

From Burddr we went on to Sabarta [Isparta], and
then to Akrfdfir [Egirdir], a great and populous town
with fine bazaars. There is a lake with sweet water
here on which boats go in two days to Aqshahr and
Baqshshr and other towns and villages.® The sultan
of Akrfdfir is one of the principal rulers in this country.

127



SELECTIONS FROM THE

He is a man of upright conduft and attends the after-
noon prayer at the cathedral mosque every day.
While we were there his son died and after his burial
the sultan and the indents went out to his grave for
three days. I went out with them the second day
and the sultan, seeing me walking, sent me a horse
with his apologies. On reaching the madrasa I sent
back the horse, but he returned it saying “ I gave it
as a gift, not as a loan.” He sent me also a robe and
some money.

We left there for the town of Qul Hisar [“ Lake
Fortress ”], a small town completely surrounded by
reed-grown water.”^ The only way to it is by a sort
of bridge between the rushes and the water, admitting'’
only one horseman at a time. The town, which is
on a hill in the mid^fc of the lake, is impregnable.
The sultan, who is the brother of the sultan of
Akn'ddr, was absent when we arrived, but after we
had ^ayed there some days he came back and treated
us kindly, supplying us with horses and provisions.
He sent some horsemen to escort us to the town of
Ladhiq [Denizli], as the country was infe^ed by a
troop of brigands called Jarmiyan [Kermian] who
possess a town called Kdtahiya. Ladhiq is a mo^t
important town, with seven cathedral mosques. In it
are manufaflured matchless cotton fabrics with gold
embroidered edges, which have a very long life on
account of the excellence of the cotton and of the
spinning. Mo^ of the workers are Greek women,
for there are many Greeks here, who are subjedl: to
the Muslims and pay a poll tax to the sultan. The
di^inftive mark of the Greeks is their tall peaked
hats, red or white; their women wear capacious
turbans. As we entered the town we passed through
a bazaar. Some men got down from their booths
and took our horses’ bridles, then some others objected
to their aftion and the altercation went on so long

128



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

that some of them drew knives. We of course did
not know what they were saying and were afraid of
them, thinking they were those brigands and that
this was their town. At length God sent us a man
who knew Arabic, and he explained that they were
members of two branches of the “ Young Brother-
hood,” each of whom wanted us to lodge with them.
We were amazed at their generosity. It was decided
finally that they should caA lots, and that we should
lodge firit with the winner. This being done the
prior of the hr^ hospice, Brother Sindn, conducted us
to the bath and himself looked after me; afterwards
they served up a great banouct with sweetmeats and
many fruits. Some verses of the Koran were then read
and after that they began to chant their litany and
to dance. The next day wc had an audience of the
sultan, who is one of the principal rulers in Anatolia,
and on our return were met by Brother Tdmdn, the
prior of the other hospice, who entertained us even
better than their friends had done, and sprinkled us
with rose water when wc came out of the bath.

Wc flayed at Lddhiq for some time, in view of the
dangers of the road; then, as a caravan was ready to
set out, we travelled with them for a day and part
of the next night and reached the caiUe of Tawas
[Davas]. We spent the night outside it and next
morning, on coming to the gate, we were interrogated
from the top of the wall. The commander then came
out with his troops, and after they had explored the
neighbourhood for fear of the robbers, their animals
were driven out. This is their constant praftice.
From there we went on to Mughla and thence to
Mflds, one of the finest and moft important towns in
the country. We lodged in a convent of one of the
Young Brotherhood, who outdid by far all that our
previous hoils had done in the way of generosity,
hospitality, taking us to the bath, and other praise-
129 ' K



SELECTIONS FROM THE

worthy a6Is. The sultan of IMilas is an excellent
ruler, and keeps company with theologians. He gave
us gifts and supplied us with horses and provisions. ^

After receiving the sultan’s gift we left for the city
of Qiiniya [Konia]. It is a large town with fine
buildings, and has many breams and fruit-gardens.
The Greets are exceedingly broad, and the bazaars
admirably planned, with each craft in a bazaar of its
own. It is said that this city was built by Alexander.
It is now in the territories of Sultan Badr ad-Din ibn
Qaraman, whom we shall mention presently, but it
has sometimes been captured by the king of ‘Iraq,
as it lies close to his territories in this country. We
^ayed there at the hospice of the qadi, who is called
Ibn Qalam Shah, and is a member of the Futuwa.
His hospice is very large indeed, and he has a great
many disciples. They trace their affiliation to the
Futuwa back to the Caliph ‘All, and the di^in6tive
garment of the order in their case is the trousers,®
ju^ as the Sdfis wear the patched robe. This qadi
showed us even greater consideration and hospitdity
than our former benefaftors, and sent his son with us
in his place to the bath.

In this town is the mausoleum of the pious shaykh
Jalal ad-Din [ar-Rdmi], known as Mawldnd [“ Our
Ma^er ”]. He was held in high e^eem, and there
is a brotherhood in Anatolia who claim spiritual
affiliation with him and are called after him the
Jaldliya? The ^ory goes that Jaldl ad-Din was in
early life a theologian and a professor. One day a
sweetmeat seller came into the college-mosque with
a tray of sweetmeats on his head, and, having given
him a piece went out again. The shaykh left his
lesson to follow him and disappeared for some years.
Then^ he came back, but with a disordered mind,
speaking nothing but Persian verses which no one
could underhand. His disciples followed him and

130



TRAVELS OF' IBN BATTUTA

wrote down his produftions, which they coUefted into
a book called The Mathnawi. This book is greatly
revered by the people of this country; they meditate
on it, teach it, and read it in their religious houses
on Thursday nights. From Qiiniya we travelled to
Ldranda [Karaman], the capital of the sultan of
Qaramin. I met this sultan outside the town as he
was coming back from hunting, and on my dismounting
to him, he dismounted also. It is the custom of the
kings of this country to dismount if a visitor dismounts
to them. This action on his part pleases them and
they show him greater honour; if on the other hand he
greets them while on horseback they are displeased
and the visitor forfeits their goodwill in consequence.
This happened to me once with one of these kings.
After I had greeted the sultan we rode back to the
town together, and he showed me the greateft
hospitality.

We then entered the territories of the king of Trig,
visiting Aqsara [AkseraiJ, where they make shcep^s
wool carpets which are cavorted as far as India, China,
and the lands of the Turks, and journeyed thence
through Nakda [Nigda] to Qaysirlya, which is one of
the largest towns in the country. In this town resides
one of the Viceroy’s khdtdns, who is related to the
king of Trdq, and like all the sultan’s relatives has
the title of ^ghd^ which means Great. We visited
her and she treated us courteously, ordering a meal
to be served for us, and when we withdrew sent us
a horse with saddle and bridle and a sum of money.
At all these towns we lodged in a convent belonging
to the Young Brotherhood. It is the cu^Iom in this
country that in towns that are not the residence of
a sultan one of the Young Brothers afts as governor,
exercising the same authority and appearing m public
with the same retinue as a king. We travelled on
to Slwas, the largest town in the country and residence

131



SELECTIONS FROM THE

of the king of ‘Irdq’s viceroy, ‘Ala ad-Din Artana.
We were met near the town by a party belonging to
the “ Young Brother ” Ahmad, and a litde later by
a party of the “ Young Brother ” Chelebi, who invited
us to ^ay with them, but we were already pledged
to the former. Our ho^s showed the utmo^ joy on
our arrival at their convent, and treated us with the
mo^ perfeft hospitality. We visited the amir ‘Aid
ad-Din Artana who, speaking in excellent Arabic,
asked me about the countries I had visited and their
sovereigns, and afterwards sent us gifts. When we
left Siwas he wrote to his lieutenants in the towns to
give us hospitality and to supply us with provisions.
We journeyed thence to Amdsiya, a large and beautiful
town with broad Greets, Kumish [Giimush Khanah],
a populous town which is visited by merchants from
‘Irdq and Syria and has silver mines, Arzanjdn, where
Armenians form the greater part of the population,
and Arz ar-Riim. This is a va^l town but is mo^y
in ruins as the result of a civil war between two Turk-
men tribes. We lodged there at the convent of the
“ Young Brother ” Tdmdn, who was said to be more
than a hundred and thirty years old. I saw him
going about on foot supported by a ^taff, with his
facvdties unimpaired and assiduous in praying at the
^ated times. All these towns belong to the king of
‘Irdq.

We went on to the town of Birgi^° where we had
been told there was a di^inguished professor called
Muhyi ad-Din. On reaching the madrasa we found
him ju^ arriving, mounted on a lively mule and wearing
ample garments with gold embroidery, with his slaves
and servants on either side of him and preceded by
the indents. He gave us a kindly welcome and
invited me to visit him after the sunset prayer. I
found him in a reception hall in his garden, which
had a ^ream of water flowing through a white marble

132



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

basin with a rim of enamelled tiles. He was occupying
a raised seat covered with embroidered cloths, having
a number of his students and slaves ^landing on either
side- of him, and when I saw him I took him for a
king. He rose to greet me and made me sit next
him on the dais, after which we were served with food
and returned to the madrasa. The sultan of Birgi
was then at his summer quarters on a mountain close
by and on receiving news of me from the professor
sent for me. When I arrived with the professor he
sent his two sons to ask how we were, and sent me
a tent of the kind they call Khargdh^ It consifts of
wooden laths put together like a dome and covered
with pieces of felt; the upper part is opened to admit
the light and air and can be closed when required.
Next day the sultan sent for us and asked me about
the countries I had visited, then after food had been
served we retired. This went on for several days, the
sultan inviting us daily to join him at his meal, and
one afternoon visiting us himself, on account of the
respeff which the Turks show for theologians. At
length we both became weary of laying on this
mountain, so the professor sent a message to the
sultan that I wished to continue my Journey, and
received a reply that we should accompany the sultan
to his palace in the city on the following day. Next
day he sent an excellent horse and descended with us
to the city. On reaching the palace we climbed a
Jong flight of ^airs with him and came to a fine audience
hall with a basin of water in the centre and a bronxe
lion at each corner of it spouting water from its mouth.
Round the hall were daises covered with carpets, on
one of which was the sultan’s cushion. When we
reached this place, the sultan removed his cushion
and sat down beside us on the carpets. The Koran-
readers, who always attend the sultan’s audiences,
sat below the dais. After syrup and biscuits had been

133



SELECTIONS FROM THE

served I spoke thanking the sultan warmly and praising
the professor, which pleased the sultan a great deal.

As we were sitting there, he said to me “ Have you
ever seen a ^lone that has fallen from the sky I
replied “ No, nor ever heard of one.” “ Well,” he
said, “a ^tone fell from the sky outside this town,”
and thereupon called for it to be brought. A great
black ^one was brought, very hard and with a glitter
in it, I reckon its weight was about a hundredweight.
The sultan sent for ^one breakers, and four of them
came and ^ruck it all together four times over with
iron hammers, but made no impression on it. I was
amazed, and he ordered it to be taken back to its place.
We ^ayed altogether fourteen days with this sultan.
Every night he sent us food, fruit, sweetmeats and
candles, and gave me in addition a hundred pieces of
gold, a thousand dirhems, a complete set of garments
and a Greek slave called Michael, as well as sending
a robe and a gift of money to each of my companions.
All this we owed to the professor Muhyi ad-Di'n —
may God reward him with good !

We went on through the town of Tira, which is in
the territories of this sultan, to Aya Suliiq [Ephesus],
a large and ancient town venerated by the Greeks. It
possesses a large church built of finely hewn ftones
each measuring ten or more cubits in length. The
cathedral mosque, which was formerly a church greatly
venerated by the Greeks, is one of the moft beautiful
in the world. I bought a Greek slave girl here for
forty dinars. Thence we went to Yazmir [Smyrna],
a large town on the coa^, moflly in ruins. The
governor ‘Omar, a son of the sultan of Aydin, came
to the convent to visit me and sent me a large hospi-
tality-gift. Afterwards he gave me a young Greek
slave named Nicolas. He was a generous and pious
prince^ and con^antly engaged in war with the
Christians. He had galleys, with which he used to

134



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

make raids on the environs of Conilontinople the
Great, taking prisoners and booty and after spending
it ali in largesse he would make another raid. Eventu-
ally the Greeks, under the pressure of his attacks,
appealed to the Pope, who ordered the ChriAians of
Genoa and France to make an attack on him. They
did so, and the Pope sent an army from Rome, which
captured the port and the city in a night atuck. The
amir ‘Omar went down from the citadel and fought
them, but he died a martyrs death together with a
number of his troops. The ChriAians established
themselves in the city, but could not capture the
citadel on account of its Arcncth.’^

We travelled thence to Maghnisip [Magnesia,
now Manisa] where we prayed the FcAival Prayer [of
the Pilgrimage] in the company of Sultan Sardkhin.
Here my slave, on taking my horses to water along
with a slave belonging to one of my companions,
attempted to escape. The sultan sent in pursuit of
them, but as ever)*onc was occupied with the fcAival,
they were not found. They made for a town on the
coaA named Fdja belonging to the infidels, who
send a gift to the sultan every year, in return for which
he is content to leave them alone because of the
Arength of their city. Next day at noon some Turks
brought them back with the horses. The fugitives
had passed them the evening before, and becoming
suspicious, they had oucAioned them until they con-
fessed their design or escaping. We went on next
to Barghama which is in rums but has a Arong
fortress on the summit of a hill. Here we hired a
guide and travelled among high and rugged moun-
tains to the town of Balfkasrl. The sultan, whose
name is Dumdr Khdn, is a worthless person. It
was his father who built this town, and during the
son’s reign it attraAcd a vaA population of knaves,
for Like king, like people.” I visited him and he
>35



SELECTIONS FROM THE

sent me a silk robe. In this town I bought a Greek
slave girl called Marguerite.

We journeyed next to Bursd [Brusa], a great city
with fine bazaars and broad Greets, surrounded by
orchards and running springs. Outside it are two
thermal establishments, one for men and the other
for women, to which patients come from the moSl
distant parts. They lodge there for three days at
a hospice which was built by one of the Turkmen
kings. In this town I met the pious Shaykh ‘Abdullah
the Egyptian, a traveller, who went all round the
world, except that he never visited China, Ceylon,
the WeSt, or Spain or the Negrolands, so that in visit-
ing those countries I have surpassed him. The sultan
of Bursa is Orkhan Bek, son of ‘Othman Chfik. He
is the greatest of the Turkmen kings and the richeSl
in wealth, lands, and military forces, and possesses
nearly a hundred fortresses which he is continually
visiting for inspeftion and putting to rights. He
fights with the infidels and besieges them. It was
his father who captured Bursa from the Greeks, and
it is said that he besieged Yazni'k [Nicaea] for about
twenty years, but died before it was taken. His son
Orkhan besieged it twelve years before capturing it,
and it was there that I saw him.^® Yaznik lies in
a lake and can be reached only by one road like a
bridge admitting only a single horseman at a time.
It is in ruins and uninhabited except for a few men
in the Sultan’s service. It is defended by four walls
with a moat between each pair, and is entered over
wooden drawbridges. Inside there are orchards and
houses and fields, and drinking water is obtained from
wells. I ^ayed in this town forty days owing to the
illness of one of my horses, but growing impatient
at the delay I left it and went on with three of my
companions and a slave girl and two slave boys. W^e
had no one with us who could speak Turkish well

136



TRAVELS OF IHN B ATT OTA

enough to interpret for us, for the interpreter we had
left us at YazniL After leaving this town we crossed
a {»rcat river called Saoarf [Sangarius] by a ferp^.
This consiAcd of four Learns bound together with
ropes, on which the passengers arc placed, together
with their saddles and baggage; it is pulled across bv
men on the further bank, and the horses swim behind.
The same night we reached Kdwiya [Gheiva] and
lodged with one of the Brotherhood. As he neither
unoerrtood Arabic nor we Turkish, he sent for a
theologian, who spoke to us in Persian, and not
understanding us when we spoke Arabic, excused
himself to the brother saying hhdn *arabl kuhnd
*arahl fluto mlddnamy which means
“ These men speak ancient Arabic and I know only
modern Arabic." He said this only to shield himself
from disgrace, for they thought he knew Arabic, when
in realiw he did not know it. But this turned out
to be ot service to us, for the brother, thinking that
things were really as he had said, showed us the
greatedl consideration saying ** These men muil be
honourably treated, since they speak the ancient
Arabic tongue, which was the tongue of the Prophet
and his Companions." I did not understand ju£t
then what the theologian had said, but the sound of
his words ftuck in my memory and when I learned
the Persian language, I found out their meaning.

We spent that night at the hospice, and the Brother
sent a guide with us to Yanija [Tarakli], which is
a fine large town. We Parted to look for the akhi's
hospice, and found one of those crazy darwfshes, so
I said to him “ Is this the akhfs hospice ?” He
replied na'am [" Yes and I felt so pleased at having
found someone who knew Arabic. But when I
tciled him further the cat was out of the bag, for
na^am was the only word of Arabic he knew. We
put up at the hospice, and one of the Audents brought
*37



SELECTIONS FROM THE

food to us. The akhi himself was away, but we
became very friendly with this ^udent. Though he
knew no Arabic, he was very kind to us, and spoke
to the governor of the town, who gave me one of his
mounted men to take us to Kaynuk [Kevnik]. Kaynuk
is a small town in the territiries of Sultan Orkhan Bek,
inhabited by infidel [Christian] Greeks under Muslim
protedllon. There is only one household of Muslims
in the place, and that belongs to the governors of the
Greeks, so we put up at the house of an old infidel
woman. This was in the season of snow and rain.
She treated us well,^"^ and we spent that night in her
house. Now this town has no trees or vineyards; the
only thing cultivated there is saffron, and the old
woman brought us a great quantity of it, thinking
that we were merchants and would buy it from her.

When we mounted our horses in the morning, the
horseman whom the member of the Brotherhood had
sent with us from Kayndk came to us and provided
us with another horseman to guide us to the town of
Muturni. The road was obliterated by a heavy fall
of snow the previous night, so our guide went on
ahead of us and we followed his tracks. About mid-
day we came to a village of Turkmens, who brought
us food, of which we ate. The horsenjan spoke to
them and one of them went on with us. He led us
over difficult and mountainous country, and a river
channel which we crossed more than thirty times.
When we got clear of this the guide asked us for
some money, but we said “ When we reach the town
we shall give you plenty.” He was not satisfied or
else did not understand, for he took a bow belonging
to one of our party and went off a little way, then
returned and gave the bow back. I then gave him
a little money and he took it and decamped, leaving
us with no idea which way to go and with no road
visible to us. About sunset we came to a hill on

138



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

which we could make out the track by a quantity of
Clones on it. I was afraid that both I and my com-
panions might perish, as I expelled more snow to
fall and the place was uninhabited; if we dismounted
we were doomed and if we went on we did not know
the road. I had a good horse however, so I said to
myself “ If I reach safety perhaps I may contrive to
save my companions,” and commending them to God,
I set off. At length in the late evening I came to
some houses and said “ O God, grant they may be
inhabited.” I found that they were inhabited, and
God of his goodness led me to a religious house
belonging to some darwi'shes. When they heard me
speaking at the door, one of them came out; he was
a man whon; I knew, and I advised him to go out
with the darwfshes to deliver my companions. They
did so and set out with me, and so we all reached the
convent In safety, praise be to God Moft High for
our safety 1 Each darwfsh brought us what food he
could and our digress was removed.

We set out next morning and reached Muturnf
[Mudurlu], where we fell in with a pilgrim who knew
Arabic. We besought him to travel with us to
Qa^lamiiniya, which is ten days’ journey from there;
I gave him an Egyptian robe of mine and some money
for current expenses, which he left with his family,
and assigned him a mount, promising him a good
reward. He turned out to be a wealthy man, but of
base charafter. We used to give him money for our
expenses, and he would take the bread that was left
over and buy spices, herbs and salt with it, and appro-
priate the money for these. I was told too that he
used to ileal part of the money that we gave him for
our expenses. We put up with him because of our
difficulties in not knowing Turkish, but things went
so far that we used to say to him in the evenings
“ Well, Hajjf, how much have you ilolen today ?”

139



SELECTIONS FROM THE

He would reply “ So much ” and we would laugh and
make the be^ of it. We came next to the town of
Biali, where we ^ayed at a convent of the Young
Brotherhood. What an excellent body of men these
are, how nobleminded, how unselfish and full of
compassion for the Granger, how kindly and affec-
tionate they are to him, how warm their welcome to
him ! A Granger coming to them is made to feel
as though he were meeting the deare^ of his own
folk. Next morning we travelled on to Garadi Biilf,
a large and fine town situated on a plain, with spacious
Greets and bazaars, but one of the colde^ towns in
the world. It is composed of several different quarters,
each inhabited by different communities, none of
which mixes with any of the others. . The sultan,
who is one of the less important rulers in this country,
is a fine-looking and upright man, but not liberal.
He came to visit us at the religious house and ^ayed
for an hour, asking me about my travels, and after-
wards sent me a saddled horse and a robe.

We went on through a small town named Burlii^
to Qa^amdniya, a very large and fine town, in which
goods are plentiful, and prices cheaper than I have-
ever seen elsewhere. We ^ayed in the convent of
a very deaf shaykh and I saw an a^onishing thing in
connexion with him. One of his students used to
write with his finger in the air or on the ground and
he would underhand and reply. Sometimes long
Tories were told him in this way. We remained here
about forty days. The sultan of Qa^Iamfiniya is the
illu^rious Sulayman Padshah, a man over seventy
years of age with a fine face and long beard, a lately
and venerable figure. I visited him in his reception
hall and he made me sit beside him and asked me
about my travels. He then commanded me to be
lodged near him, and. gave me on the same day a fine
white horse and a robe, besides assigning me money

140



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

for my expenses and forage. Later on he gave me
an assignation of wheat and barley from a village
half a day’s journey from the town, but I could not
find anyone to buy it because of the cheapness of
provisions, so I gave it to the pilgrim who was in our
company. It is a cuflom of this sultan’s to take his
seat in the audience chamber every afternoon; food is
served and the doors arc opened and no one, whether
townsman or nomad, stranger or traveller, is prevented
from partaking.

From QaAamdniya we travelled to Sanub [Sinope],
a populous town combining ^rength with beauty. It
is surrounded by sea except on the ea5V, where there
is only one gate which no one is allowed to enter
without permission from the governor, Ibrahim Bek,
who is a son of Sulaymdn Pddshdh. Outside the town
there are eleven villages inhabited by Greek in6dcls.
The cathedral mosque at Sandb is a mo^ beautiful
building, conflruded by Sultan Parwdnah. He was
succeeded by his son Ghdzl Chelebi, at whose death
the town was seized by Sultan Sulaymdn. Ghdzi
Chelebf was a brave and audacious man, with a
peculiar capacity for swimming under water. He used
to sail out with his war vessels to fight the Greeks,
and when the fleets met and everyone was occupied
with the fighting he would dive under the water
carrying an iron tool with which he pierced the
enemy’s ships, and they knew nothing about it until
all at once they sank.

We flayed at Sandb about forty days waiting for
the weather to became favourable for sailing to the
town of Qiram.^® Then we hired a vessel belonging
to the Greeks and waited another eleven days for a
favourable wind. At length we set sail, but after
travelling for three nights, we were beset in mid-sea
by a terrible tempedl. The dlorm raged with un-
paralleled fury, then the wind changed and drove us
141



SELECTIONS FROM THE

back nearly to Sanub. The weather cleared and we
set out again, and after another temped like the
former, we at length saw the hills on the land. We
made for a harbour called Karsh [Kerch], intending
to enter it, but some people on the hill made signs
to us not to enter, and fearing that there were enemy
vessels in the port, we turned back along the coa^.
As we approached the land I said to the ma^er of the
ship “ I want to descend here,” so he put me ashore.
The place was in the Qipchaq desert which is green
and verdant, but flat and treeless. There is no fire-
wood so they make fires of dung, and you will see
even the higher* of them picking it up and putting
it in the skirts of their garments. The only method
of travelling in this desert is in waggons; it extends
for six months’ journey, of which three are in the
territories of Sultan Muhammad Uzbeg.^^ The day
after our arrival one of the merchants in our company
hired some waggons from the Qipchaqs who inhabit
this desert, and who are Chriftians, and we came to
Kafa, a large town extending along the sea-coaft,
inhabited by Chriftians, moftly Genoese, whose
governor is called Damdir [Demetrio].^®

We ftayed at Kafa in the mosque of the Muslims.
An hour after our arrival we heard bells ringing on
all sides. As I had never heard bells before,^® I was
alarmed and bade my companions ascend the minaret
and read the Koran and issue the call to prayer. They
did so, when suddenly a man entered wearing armour
and weapons and greeted us. He told us that he was
the qadi of the Muslims there, and said “ When I
heard the reading and the call to prayer, I feared for
your safety and came as you see.” Then he went
away, but no evil befel us. The next day the governor
came to us and entertained us to a meal, then we went
round the city and found it provided with fine bazaars.
All the inhabitants are infidels. W^e went down to

142



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

the port and saw a magniHcent harbour with about
two hundred vessels in it, ships of war and trading
vessels, small and large, for it is one of the mo^ notable
harbours in the world.

We hired a waggon and travelled to the town
of Qiram, which forms part of the territories of
Sultan Uzbeg Khdn and has a governor called Tuluk-
tumiir. On hearing of our arrival the governor sent
the imdm to me with a horse; he himself was ill, but
we visited him and he treated us honourably and gave
us gifts. He was on the point of setting out for the
town of Sard, the capital of the Khdn, so I prepared
to travel along with him and hired waggons for that
purpose. These waggons have four large wheels and
are drawn by two or more horses, or by oxen or camels,
according to their weight. The driver rides on one
of the horses and carries a whip or wooden goad.
On the waggon is put a light tent made of wooden
laths bound with dlrips of hide and covered with felt
or bIanket<loth, ana it has grilled windows so that
the person inside can see without being seen. One
can do anything one likes inside, sleep, eat, read or
write, during the march. The waggons conveying
the baggage and provisions are covered with a similar
tent which is locked.

We set out with the amir Tuluktumdr and his
brother and two sons. At every halt the Turks loose
their horses, oxen and camels, and drive them out to
pasture at liberty,^ night or day, without shepherds or
guardians. This is due to the severity of their laws
against theft. Any person found in possession of a
stolen horse is obliged to reilore it with nine others;
if he cannot do this, his sons are taken instead, and if
he has no sons he is slaughtered like a sheep. They
do not eat bread nor any solid food, but prepare a
soup with a kind of millet, and any meat they may
have is cut into small pieces and cooked in this soup.

*43



SELECTIONS FROM THE

Everyone is given his share in a plate with curdled
milk, and they drink it, afterwards drinking curdled
mare’s milk, which they call qumizz. They have also
a fermented drink prepared from the same grain,
which they [beer] and regard as lawful tp

drink. It is white in colour; I tabled it once and found
it bitter, so I left it alone. They regard the eating
of sweetmeats as a disgrace. One day during
Ramaddn I presented Sultan Uzbeg with a plate of
sweetmeats which one of my companions had made,
but he did no more than touch them with his finger
and then place it in his mouth.

Eighteen stations after leaving Qiram we came to
a great expanse of water which took us a whole day
to ford.^ The crossing becomes very muddy and
difficult when many bea^s and waggons have crossed,
so the amir, thinking of my comfort, sent me on ahead
with one of his suite and wrote a letter for me to the
governor of Azaq urging him to treat me honourably.
We crossed a second sheet of water, which required
half a day to ford, and on the third day from there,
reached Azaq [Azov], which is on the sea coa^. It
is a wellbuilt town, visited by the Genoese and other
merchants. The governor, on receiving the amir
Tuluktumdr’s letter, came out to meet me, along with
the qadi and the indents, and sent out food. After
greeting him, we dismounted and ate, then went on
to the town, outside which we camped. Two days
later the amir arrived, and was met with great cere-
mony. A banquet was prepared for him in a specially
prepared tent of coloured silk, and when he dismounted
pieces of silk were laid down for him to walk on.
Out of his generosity he made me precede him, in
order that the governor should see the high e^eem
in which he held me, and made me sit on a great
chair which had been placed for him, himself sitting
beside me, while his two sons and his brother and

144



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

nephews remained landing rcspe£lfully. After the
banquet was over a robe was presented to the amir
and to each member of hts family and to me, then the
amir and his brother were presented with ten horses,
his two sons with six, and 1 too with one.

The horses in this country arc very numerous and
the price of them is negligible. A good one coAs
about a dinar of our money. The livelihood of the
people depends on them, and they are as numerous
as sneep in our country, or even more so. A single
Turk will possess thousands of horses. They arc ex-
ported to India in droves of six thousand or so, each
merchant possessing one or two hundred of them or less
or more. For each fifty they hire a keeper, who looks
after their paAura^e. He rides on one of them, carry-
ing a long ^ick with a rope attached to it, and when
he wishes to catch any horse he gets opposite it on the
horse which he is riding, throws the rope over its
neck and draws it towards him, mounts it and sets
the other free to paAure. On reaching Sind the
horses are fed with forage, because the vegetation of
Sind will not take the place of barley, and the greater
part of them die or are Aolen. The owners pay a
duty of seven silver dinars on entering Sind and a
further duty at Multdn. Formerly they were taxed
a quarter of the value of their imports, but Sultan
Muhammad abolished this tax and ordered that
Muslim merchants should pay the legal tithc*^ and
infidel merchants a tenth. Nevertheless the mer-
chants make a handsome profit, for the leadl that a
horse fetches is a hundred dinars (that is twenty-five
dinars in Moroccan money) and it often sells for twice
or three times that amount. A good horse sells for
five hundred or more. The Indians do not buy them
as racehorses, for in battle they wear coats of mail
and cover their horses with armour; what they prize
in a horse is its dlrength and length of pace. Their

145 t



SELECTIONS FROM THE

racehorses are brought from Yemen, "Oman and Fars,
and they coif from a thousand to four thousand dinars
each.

From Azaq I went on to Majar, travelling behind
the amir Tuluktumdr. It is one of the fine^ of the
Turkish cities, and is situated on a great river.^^ In
the bazaar of this city I met a Jew, who greeted me
in Arabic and told me that he had come from Spain.
He said that he had come overland, through Con-
stantinople the Great, Anatolia and the land of the
Circassians [Transcaucasia], and that the journey had
taken four months. The travelling merchants, who
know about these matters, assured me of the truth of
his Statement.

A remarkable thing which I saw in this country
was the respeSt shown to women by the Turks, for
they hold a more dignified position than the men.
The fir^ time that I saw a princess was when, on
leaving Qira'm, I saw the wife of the amir in her
waggon. The entire waggon was covered with rich
blue woollen cloth, and the windows and doors of the
tent were open. With the princess were four maidens,
exquisitely beautiful and richly dressed, and behind
her were a number of waggons with maidens belonging
to her suite. When she came near the amir’s camp
she alighted with about thirty of the maidens who
carried her train. On her garments there were loops,
of which each maiden took one, and lifted her train
clear of the ground on all sides, and she, walked in
this ^lately manner. When she reached the ami'r he
rose before her and greeted her and sat her beside
him, with the maidens standing round her. Skins of
qumizz were brought and she, pouring some into a
cup, knelt before him and gave it to him, afterwards
pouring out a cup for his brother. Then the amir
poured out a cup for her and food was brought in and
she ate with him. He then gave her a robe and she

146



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

withdrew. I saw also the wives of the merchants and
commonalty. One of them will sit in a waggon which
is being drawn by horses, attended by three or four
maidens to carry her train, and on her head she wears
a conical headdress incru^lcd with pearls and sur-
mounted by peacock feathers. The windows of the
tent are open and her face is visible, for the Turkish
women do not veil themselves. Sometimes a woman
will be accompanied by her husband and anyone
seeing him would take him for one of her servants;
he has no garment other than a sheep’s wool cloak
and a high cap to match.

We then prepared for the journey to the sultan’s
camp, which was four days* march from MAjar in a
place called Blshdagh, which means “ Five moun-
tains.”^ In these mountains there is a hot spring
in which the Turks bathe, claiming that it prevents
illness. We arrived at the camp on the firA day of
Ramaddn and found that it was moving to the neigh-
bourhood from which we had juR come, so we returned
thither. I set up my tent on a hill there, fixing a
standard in the grouna in front of it, and drew up the
horses and waggons behind. Thereupon the mahalla
approached (the name they give to it is the ordu)
and we saw a va^l town on the move with all its
inhabitants, containing mosques and bazaars, the
smoke from the kitchens rising in the air (for they
cook while on the march), and horse-drawn waggons
transporting them. On reaching the encampment
they took the tents off the waggons and set them upon
the ground, for they were very light, and they did
the same with the mosques and shops. The sultan *s
khdtdns passed by us, each separately with her own
retinue. The fourth of them, as she passed, saw the
tent on top of the hill with the ^andard in front of
it, which is the mark of a new arrival, and sent pages
and maidens to greet me and convey her salutations,

147



SELECTIONS FROM THE

herself halting to wait for them. I sent her a gift
by one of my companions and the chamberlain of the
ami'r Tuluktumdr. She accepted it as a blessing and
gave orders that I should be taken under her pro-
te6lion, then went on. Afterwards the sultan arrived
and camped with his mahalla separately.

The illu^rious Sultan Muhammad Uzbeg Khan
is the ruler of a va^t kingdom and a mo^ powerful
sovereign, viftor over the enemies of God, the people
of Con^antinople the Great, and diligent in warring
again^ them. He is one of the seven mighty kings
of the world, to wit: our master the Commander of
the Faithful, may God strengthen his might and
magnify his vidtory ! [the sultan of Morocco], the
sultan of Egypt and Syria, the sultan of the Two
Traqs, this Sultan Czbeg, the sultan of TurkiStan
and the lands beyond the Oxus, the sultan of India,
and the sultan of China. The day after my arrival I
visited him in the afternoon at a ceremonial audience;
a great banquet was prepared and we broke our faSf in
his presence. These Turks do not follow the cuStom of
assigning a lodging to visitors and giving them money
for their expenses, but they send him sheep and horses
for slaughtering and skins of qumizz^ which is their
form of benefaftion. Every Friday, after the midday
prayer, the sultan holds an audience in a pavilion
called the Golden Pavilion, which is richly decorated.
In the centre there is a wooden throne covered with
silver-gilt plates, the legs being of pure silver set
with jewels at the top. The sultan sits on the throne,
having on his right the khatiin Taytughli with the
khatiin Kebek on her right, and on his left the khatun
Bayaliin with the khatdn XJrduja on her left. Below
the throne ^land the sultan’s sons, the elder on the
right and the younger on the left, and his daughter
sits in front of him. He rises to meet each khatdn
as she arrives and takes her by the hand until she

148



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

mounts to the throne. All this takes place in view
of the whole people, without any screening.

On the morrow of my interview with the sultan I
visited the principal khdtun Taytughlf, who is the
queen and the mother of the sultanas two sons. She
was sitting in the mid^ of ten aged women, who
appeared to be servants of hers, and had in front of
her about fifty young maidens with gold and silver
salvers filled with cherries which they were cleaning.
The khdtiin also had a golden tray filled with cherries
in front of her and was cleaning them. She ordered
qujnizz to be brought and with her own hand poured
out a cupful and gave it to me, which is the highedl
of honours in their edlimation. I had never drunk
qumizz before, but there was nothing for me but to
accept it. 1 tabled it, but found it disagreeable and
passed it on to one of my companions. The following
day we visited the second khdn^n Kebek and found
her sitting on a divan reading the holy Koran. She
also served me with qumizz. The third khitdn
Bayaldn is the daughter of the Emperor of Con-
ilantinople the Great.^ On visiting her we found
her sitting on a throne set with jewels, with about
a hundred maidens, Greek, Turkish and Nubian,
^landing or sitting in front of her. Behind her were
eunuchs and in front of her Greek chamberlains.
•She asked how we were and about our journey and
the di^ance of our native lands, and wept, in pity and
compassion, wiping her face with a handkerchief that
lay before her. She ordered food to be served and we
ate in her presence, and when we desired to leave she
said “ Do not sever relations with us, but come often
to us and inform us of your needs.” She showed
great kindness to us and after we had gone sent us
food, a great quantity of bread, butter, sheep, money,
a magnificent robe and thirteen horses, three good
ones and ten of the ordinary sort. It was with this
149



SELECTIONS FROM THE

khatiin that I made my journey to Constantinople
the Great, as we shall relate hereafter. The fourth
khatun is one of the beSl, moSt amiable and sympa-
thetic of princesses. We visited her and she showed
us a kindness and generosity that cannot be surpassed.
By the sultan’s daughter however we were treated
with a generosity and kindness that no other khatdn
showed us; she loaded us with surpassing favours,
may God reward her !

I had heard of the city of Bulghar^ and desired to
visit it, in order to see for myself what they tell of the
extreme shortness of the night there and also the
shortness of the day in the opposite season. It was
ten nights’ journey from the sultan’s camp, so I
requeued that he would give me a guide to take me
to it, and he did so. We reached it in the month
of Ramadan, and when we had breakfa^ed after the
sunset prayer we had juil sufficient time for the night
prayers before dawn. I ^ayed there three days. I
had intended to visit the Land of Darkness,^® which
is reached from Bulghar after a journey of forty days,
but I renounced the projeft in view of the difficulty
of the journey and the small profit to be got out of it.
The only way of reaching it is to travel on sledges
drawn by dogs, for the desert being covered with ice,
neither man nor bea^ can walk on it without slipping,
whereas the dogs have claws that grip the ice. The
journey is made only by rich merchants who have
a hundred sledges or thereabouts, loaded with food,
drink, and firewood, for there are neither trees, Clones
nor habitation in it. The guide in this country is the
dog which has made the journey many times, arid the
value of one of these reaches a thousand dinars. The
sledge is tied to its neck and three other dogs are
yoked with it; it is the leader, the other dogs following
it with the sledges, and where it ^ops they ftop.
Its owner never beats or chides it, and when food is

150



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

made the dogs arc served firR before the men; other-
wise the [leading] dog is angered and escapes, leaving
its owner to perish. When the travellers have com-
pleted forty Aages they alight at the Darkness. Each
one of them leaves the goods he has brought there
and they return to their usual camping-ground. Next
day they go back to seek their goods, and hnd opposite
them skins of sable, minever, and ermine. If the
merchant is satisfied with the exchange he takes them,
but if not he leaves them. The inhabitants then add
more skins, but sometimes they take away their goods
and leave the merchant's. This is their method of
commerce. Those who go there do not know whom
they arc trading with or whether they be jinn or men,
for they never see anyone.

I returned from Bulghdr with the amfr whom the
sultan had sent to accompany me, and found the
makalla at Bfshdagh on the 28th of Ramaddn, When
the ceremonies of the FcRIval [at the close of the month
of faRing] were over we set out with the sultan and
the makalla and came to the town of Hdjj Tarkhdn
[ARrakhan]. It is one of the fincdl of cities, with
great bazaars, and is built on the river Itil [Volga],
which is one of the great rivers of the world. In the
winter it freezes over and the people travel on it in
sledges; sometimes caravans cross it towards the end
of winter and are drowned. On reaching this town
the khdtdn Bayalun requeued the sultan to permit
her to visit her father, the king of the Greeks, that she
might give birth to her child at her home and return
again to him. He gave her permission and then I too
asked him to allow me to go in her company to see
ConRantinople the Great. He demurred, fearing for
my safety, but I said, “ I shall go under your patronage
and proteftion and I shall have nothing to fear from
anyone,” Thereupon he gave me permission and we
bade him farewell. He presented me with 1,500 dinars,



SELECTIONS FROM THE

a robe, and a large number of horses, and each khatdn
gave me ingots of silver. The sultan’s daughter gave
me more than they did, along with a robe and a horse,
so I found myself in possession of a considerable
quantity of horses, garments, and furs of sable and
minever.

We. set out on the tenth of Shawwal in the company
of the khatdn Bayaldn and under her protection. The
sultan escorted her one Clage, then returned, he and
the queen and the heir to the throne ; the other khatiins
accompanied her for a second Clage and then returned.
The amir Baydara with five thousand troops travelled
with her, and her own troops numbered about five
hundred horsemen, two hundred of whom were her
attendant slaves and Greeks, and the remainder Turks.
She had with her also about two hundred maidens,
moCt of whom were Greeks, and about four hundred
carts and about two thousand draught and riding
horses, as well as three hundred oxen and two hundred
camels. She had also ten Greek youths and the same
number of Indians, whose leader-in-chief was called
Sunbul the Indian; the leader of the Greeks was a
man of conspicuous bravery called Michael, but the
Turks gave him the name of Lu’lu’ [Pearl]. She left
mo^ of her maidens and her baggage at the sultan’s
camp, since she had set out only to pay a visit. We
made for Ukak,^ a medium-sized town, with fine
buildings, plentifully supplied with natural produCls,
and extremely cold. A day’s march from this town
are the mountains of the Russians. These are Chris-
tians, red-haired and blue-eyed, with ugly faces and
treacherous. In their country are silver mines and
thence are brought the ingots of silver with which
selling and buying is done in this land. The weight
of each of these ingots is five ounces.

After ten nights’ travelling from this town we
arrived at the town of Surdaq, which is on the sea

152



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

coail of the Qipchaq desert, and possesses one of the
bigge^ and fine^ of harbours.^ Outside it there are
orchards and springs, and it is inhabited by Turks
and a number of GrcelM under their dominion. These
Greeks are artisans and mo^ of their houses are made
of wood. This town was formerly a big one, but
mo^ of it was laid in ruins as the result of a quarrel
which broke out between the Greeks and the Turks,
At fir^ the Greeks had the upper hand, but the Turks
on receiving assiftance from their fellow-countrymen
killed the Greeks remorselessly and expelled moft of
them. Some of them ^ill remain there as subje(5ls
of the Turks. At every halting place in this land
the khduin received hospitality-gifts of horses, sheep,
cattle, millet, qumizZi and the milk of cows and sheep.
In these countries travelling is done in the forenoon
and in the evening. Every governor escorted the
khdtf^n with his troops right to the frontier of his
territories, to show her honour, not through fear for
her safety, for these lands are quite safe. We came
next to the town known by the name of Bdbd Saluiq,*®
who, they say, was an ecdlatic my^lic, though dlories
are told of a^ons by him which are condemned by
the law. This is the ladl town in Turkish territory.
From here to the beginning of Greek territory it
is a Journey of eighteen days through uninhabited
desert, for eight days of which there is no water, so
a dlock of water is laid in and carried in large and small
skins on the waggons. As it was in the cold weather
that we passed through we did not need much water,
and everything went well with us, praise be to God I
At the end of this march we reached the fortress of
Mahtiih', at the frontier of the territories of the Greeks.^®
The Greeks had heard that this khdtun was returning
to her country, and there came to this fortress to meet
her the Greek Kifdli®^ Nicolas, with a large army and
a large hospitality-gift, accompanied by the princesses
*53



SELECTIONS FROM THE

and nurses from the palace of her father, the king
of Conflantinople. From MahtuH to Con^antinople
is a journey of twenty-two days, sixteen to the canal,
and six thence to Con^antinople. From this fortress
one travels on horses and mules only, and the waggons
are left behind there on account of the rough ground
and the mountains. Kifali had brought many mules,
six of which the khatiin sent to me. She also com-
mended to the care of the governor of the fortress
those of my companions and of my slaves whom I
had left behind with the waggons and baggage, and
he assigned them a house. The commander Baydara
returned with his troops, and none travelled on with
the khatun but her own people. She left her mosque
behind at the fort and the practice of calling to prayer
was abolished. As part of her hospitality-gifts she
was given intoxicating liquors, which she drank, and
swine, and I was told by one of her suite that she ate
them. No one remained with her who prayed except
one Turk, who used to pray with us. Sentiments
formerly hidden were revealed because of our entry
into the land of the infidels, but the khatdn charged
the amir Kifali to treat us honourably, and on one
occasion he beat one of his guards because he had
laughed at our prayer.

Thereafter we reached the fortress of Maslama ibn
‘Abd al-Malik, which is at the foot of a mountain
beside a swift-running river called Iffcafili. Nothing
is left of this fortress except its ruins, but outside it
is a large village. Thence we journeyed for two days
and reached the canal, on the bank of which there is
a large village. We found a rising tide on the canal
and waited till the ebb set in before fording it, its
breadth being about two miles. We then went four
miles through sand and reached the second canal, and
forded it, its breadth being about three miles. Then
we went about two miles through flones and sand

^54



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

and reached the third canal when the tide had begun
to rise, so we had some trouble to ford it, its breadth
being one mile. The breadth of the entire canal
therefore, counting both water channels and dry
Aretches, is twelve miles. In the rainy season it is
filled entirely with water and cannot be forded except
in boats. On the bank of this third canal is the town
of Fanika, small but beautiful and ilrongly fortified.
Its churches and houses are beautiful; it is .traversed
by Yearns and surrounded by orchards, and in it
grapes, pears, apples and quinces are preserved from
one year to the next. Wc flayed in this town three
nights, the khdtun being lodged in one of her father’s
caiUes there.

Then her i3rother, whose name was Kifdll Qards,
arrived with five thousand hotscmcrii fully accoutred
in armour. When they prepared to meet the princess,
her^ brother, dressed in white, rode a grey horse,
having over his head a parasol ornamented with jewels.
On his right hand he had five princes and the same
number on his left hand, all dressed in white also, and
with parasols embroidered in gold over their heads.
In front of him were a hundred foot soldiers and a
hundred horsemen, who wore long coats of mail over
themselves and their horses, each one of them leading
a saddled and armoured horse carrying the arms of
a horseman, consisting of a jewelled helmet, a breaSt-
plate, a bow, and a sword, and each man had in his
hand a lance with a pennant at its head. MoSl of
these lances were covered with plaques of gold and
Sliver. These led horses are the riding horses of
the sultan’s son. His horsemen were divided into
squadrons, two hundred horsemen in each squadron.
Over them was a commander, who had in front of
him ten of the horsemen, fully accoutred in armour,
each leading a horse, and behind him ten coloured
standards, carried by ten of the horsemen, and ten

155



SELECTIONS FROM THE

kettledrums slung over the shoulders of ten of the
horsemen, with whom were six others sounding
trumpets and bugles and fifes. The khatdn rode
out with her guards, maidens, slave boys and servants,
these numbering about five hundred, all wearing
silken garments, embroidered with gold and encru^ed
with precious ^ones. She herself was wearing a
garment of gold brocade, encru^ed with jewels, with
a crown .set with precious ^ones on her head, and her
horse was covered with a saddle-cloth of silk em-
broidered in gold. On its legs were bracelets of gold
and round its neck necklaces set with precious atones,
and her saddle frame was covered with gold orna-
mented with jewels. Their meeting took place in a
flat piece of ground about a mile di^ant from the
town. Her brother dismounted to her, because he
was younger than her, and kissed her ^irrup and she
kissed his head. The commanders and princes also
dismounted and they all kissed her ^irrup, after
which she set out with her brother.

On the next day we reached a large city on the sea-
coa^l, whose name I have forgotten, well furnished
with breams and trees, and encamped in its outskirts.
The heir to the throne, the brother of the khdtfin,
arrived with a great array and a ^rong army of ten
thousand mailed horsemen. He wore a crown on his
head, and had at his right hand about twenty princes
and a similar number on his left. His horsemen
were arranged exaftly as his brother’s, but with greater
pomp and larger numbers. His si^er met him in
a dress similar to the one she wore on the former
occasion, and both dismounted together. A silken
tent was brought and they both went into it, so I do
not know how they greeted each other. We encamped
at a di^ance of ten miles from Con^antinople, and on
the following day the population, men, women and
children, came out riding or on foot, in their riche^

156



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

apparel. At dawn the drums, trumpets and fifes
were sounded; the troops mounted, and the Emperor
with his wife, the mother of this khdtdn, came out,
accompanied by the high officials of Aatc and the
courtiers. Over the king’s head there was a canopy,
carried by a number of horsemen and men on foot,
who had in their hands long Slaves, each surmounted
by something resembling a oall of leather, with which
they hoifted the canopy. In the centre of this canopy
was a sort of pavilion which was supported by horse-
men on Slaves. When the Emperor approached, the
troops became entangled with one another and there
was much duA. I was unable to make my way
amongdl them, so I kept with the khdtdn’s baggage
and party, fearing for my life. I was told that when
the princess approached her parents she dismounted
and kissed the ground before them, and then kissed
the two hoofs of their horses, the principal members
of her party doing the same.

Our entry into Constantinople the Great was made
about noon or a little later, and they rang their bells
undl the very skies shook with the mingling of their
sounds. When we reached the fir^l gate of the king’s
palace we found there about a hundred men, with an
ofiiceron a,pIatform, and I heard them saying Sarakinu,
SarakinUf which means Muslims. They would not
let us enter, and when those who were with the khdtdn
said that we belonged to their party, they answered
“ They cannot enter except by permission,” so we
flayed at the gate. One of the khdtdn’s party sent
a messenger to tell her of this while she was dlill with
her father. 'She told him about us and he gave orders
that we should enter, and assigned us a house near
the khdtdn’s house. He wrote also on our behalf
an order that we should not be ob^lrufted wheresoever
we went in the city, and this order was proclaimed
in the bazaars. We dlayed indoors three days, re-
157



SELECTIONS FROM THE

ceiving from the khatiin gifts of flour, bread, sheep,
chickens, butter, fruit, fish, money and beds, and on
the fourth day we had audience of the sultan.

The Emperor of Con^antinople is called Takfdr,
son of the Emperor Jirjis [George].®^ His father,
the Emperor George, was ^ill alive, but had become
an ascetic and monk, devoting himself to religious
exercises in the churches, and had resigned the sove-
reignty to his son. We shall speak of him later. On
the fourth day after our arrival in Con^antinople, the
khatiin sent the slave Sunbul the Indian to me, and
he took my hand and led me into the palace. We
passed through four gateways, each of which had
archways in which were footsoldiers with their
weapons, their officer being on a carpeted platform.
When we reached the fifth gateway the slave Sunbul
left me, and going inside returned with four Greek
youths, who searched me to see that I had no knife
on my person. The officer said to me: “ This, is a
cu^lom of theirs ; every person who enters the king's
presence, be he noble or private citizen, foreigner
or native, mu^ be searched.” The same pradiice is
observed also in India. After they had searched me
the man in charge of the gate rose and took me by
the hand and opened the gate. Four of the men sur-
rounded me, two of them holding my sleeves and two
behind me, and brought me into a large hall, the walls
of which were of mosaic work, in which there were
pi6lures of creatures, both animate and inanimate.
In the centre there was a ^ream of water, with trees
on either side of it, and men were ^landing to right
and left, silent, not one of them speaking. In the
midil of the hall three men were landing, to whom
those four men delivered me. These took hold of
my garments as the others had done, and on a signal
from another man led me forward.^® One of them
was a Jew, and he said to me in Arabic “ Do not be

158



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

afraid; this is their cuflom that they use with one who
enters. I am the interpreter, and I come from Syria.”
So 1 asked him how 1 should salute the Emperor and he
told me to say Ai~iaUm alaykum» After this I reached
a great pavilion, where the Emperor was seated on
his throne, with his wife, the mother of the khdidn,
before him. At the foot of the throne were the khdtdn
and her brothers, to the right of it six men and to the
left of it four, and behind it four, every one of them
armed. The Emperor signed to me, before I had
saluted and reached him, to sit down for a moment,
in order that my apprehension might be calmed.
After doing so I approached him and saluted him, and
he signed to me to sit down, but I did not do so. He
quedlioncd me about Jerusalem, the Sacred Rock, the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre, the cradle of Jesus,
and .Bethlehem, and aoout the cit)^ of Abraham
[Hebron], then about Damascus, Cairo, Trdq, and
Anatolia, and I answered all his que^ions about these,
the Jew interpreting between us. He was pleased
with my replies and said to his sons ” Treat this man
with honour and ensure his safety.” Then he bellowed
upon me a robe of honour and assigned me a horse
with saddle and bridle, and an umbrella of the kind
which the king has carried above his head, that being
a sign of proteftion. I requeued him to designate
someone to ride in the city with me every day, that I
might see its -marvellous and rare sights and tell of
them in my own country, and he appointed a man as I
had asked. They have a cuitom that anyone who wears
the king’s robe ot honour and rides his horse is paraded
round with trumpets, fifes and drums, so that the
^ople may see him. They do this mo^ly with the
Turks who come from the territories of Sultan Dzbeg,
so that the people may not mole^l them, and I was
paraded in this fashion through the bazaars.

The city is enormous in size, and in two parts

159



SELECTIONS FROM THE

separated by a great river [the Golden Horn], in
which there is a rising and ebbing tide. In former
times there was a ^one bridge over it, but it fell into
ruins and the crossing is now made in boats. The
part of the city on the ea^ern bank of the river is
called I^ambdl, and contains the residence of the
Emperor, the nobles and the re^l of the population.
Its bazaars and Greets are spacious and paved with
flagstones; each bazaar has gates which are closed
upon it at night, and the majority of the artisans and
sellers in them are women. The city lies at the foot
of a hill which projefts about nine miles into the sea,
its breadth being the same or greater. On the top
of the hill there is a small citadel and the Emperor’s
palace. Round this hill runs the city-wall, which is
very Strong and cannot be taken by assault from the
sea front. Within its circuit there are about thirteen
inhabited villages. The principal church is in the
midst of this part of the city. The second part, on
the western bank of the river, is called Galata, and is
reserved to the Frankish Chri^ians who dwell there.
They are of different kinds, including Genoese,
Venetians, Romans and people of France; they are
subjeSl: to the authority of the king of Constantinople,
who sets over them one of their own number of whom
they approve, and him they call the Comes. They
are bound to pay a tax every year to the king of Con-
stantinople, but often they revolt againSt him and he
makes war on them until the Pope makes peace
between them. They are all men of commerce and
their harbour is one of the larged in the world; I saw
there about a hundred galleys and other large ships,
and the small ships were too many to be counted.
The bazaars in this part of the town are good but
filthy, and a small and very dirty river runs through
them. Their churches too are filthy and mean.

Of the great church I can only describe the exterior,

i6o



TRAVELS OF I li N BATTOTA

for 1 did not sec its interior. It is called by them
Ayi Sdityi [St. Sophia]i and the ^ory goes that it
was built by Asaph, the son of Berechiah, who was
Solomon's cousin. It is one of the greatei^ churches
of the Greeks, and is encircled by a wall so that it
looks as if it were a (own. U has thirteen gates and
a sacred enclosure, which is about a mile long and
closed by a great gate. No one is prevented from
entering this enclosure, and indeed I went into it
with the king's father; it resembles an audience-hall
paved with marble, and is traversed by a Aream which
issues from the church. Outside the gate of this
hall arc platforms and shops, moHly of wood, where
their judges and the recorders of their bureaux sit.
At the gate of the church there arc porticoes where
the keepers sit who sweep its paths, light its lamps
and dose Its gates. They allow none to enter it until
he proilrates himself to the huge cross there, which
they claim to be a rcHc of the wood upon which the
pseudo-Jesus was crucified.** This is over the gate
of the church, set in a golden ease whose height is
about ten cubits, across which a similar golden case
is placed to form a cross. This gale is covered with
plaques of silver and gold and its two rings arc of
pure gold. 1 was told that the number of monks and
pricAs in this church runs into thousands, and that
some of them arc descendants of the apo^llcs, and
that inside it is another church exclusively for women,
containing more than a thousand virgins and a ^ill
greater number of aged women who devote them-
selves to religious pradiccs. It is the custom of the
king, the nobles and the reft of the people to come
every morning to visit this church. The Pope comes
to visit it once a year. When he is four days* journey
from the town the king goes out to meet him, and
dismounts before him and when he enters the ci^
walks on foot in front of him. During his ftay in
l6l M



SELECTIONS FROM THE

Constantinople the king comes to salute him every
morning and evening.

A monastery is the ChriSlian equivalent of a religious
house or convent among the Muslims, and there are
a great many such mona^eries at Con^antinople.
Among them is the mona^ery which King George
built outside I^ambul and opposite Galata, and two
mona^eries outside the principal church, to the right
as one enters it. These two monasteries are inside
a garden traversed by a ^ream of water; one of them
is for men and the other for women. In each there
is a church and they are surrounded by the cells of
men and women who have devoted themselves to
religious exercises. Each monastery possesses pious
endowments for the clothing and maintenance of the
devotees. Inside every monastery there is a small
convent designed for the ascetic retreat of the king
who built it, for moSt of these kings, on reaching the
age of sixty or seventy, build a monailery and put
on garments of hair, inve^ing their sons with the
sovereignty and occupying themselves with religious
exercises for the re^ of their lives. They display
great magnificence in building these mona^eries, and
con^lruft them of marble and mosaic-work. I entered
a monastery with the Greek whom the king had given
me as a guide. Inside it was a church containing
about five hundred virgins wearing hair-garments;
their heads were shaved and covered with felt bonnets.
They were exceedingly beautiful and showed the traces
of their au^erities. A youth sitting on a pulpit was
reading the gospel to them in the mo^ beautiful
voice I have ever heard; round him were eight other
youths on pulpits with their prie^, and when the fir^
youth had finished reading another began. The
Greek said to me “ These girls are kings’ daughters
who have given themselves to the service of this church,
and likewise the boys who are reading fare kings’



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

sons].” I entered with him also into churches in
which there were the daughters of minivers, governors,
and the principal men of the city, and others where there
were aged women and widows, and others where there
were monks, each church containing a hundred men
or so. Mo^ of the population of the city are monks,
ascetics, and prices, and its churches are not to be
counted for multitude.^ The inhabitants of the city,
soldiers and civilians, small and great, carry over their
heads huge parasols, both in winter and summer, and
the women wear large turbans.

I was out one day with my Greek guide, when we
met the former king George who had become a monk.
He was walking on foot, wearing haircloth garments
and a bonnet of felt, and he had a long white beard
and a fine face, which bore traces of his aufterities.
Behind and before him was a body of monks, and he
had a AafF in his hand and a rosary on his neck. When
the Greek saw him he dismounted and said to me
** Dismount, for this is the king’s father.” When my
guide saluted him the king asked him about me, then
topped and sent for me; He took my hand and said
to the Greek (who knew the Arabic tongue) “Say
to this Saracen (meaning Muslim) * I clasp the hand
which has entered Jerusalem and the foot which has
walked within the Dome of the Rock and the great
church of the Holy Sepulchre and Bethlehem,* ” and
he laid his hand upon my feet and passed it over his
face. 1 was ailonished at their good opinion of one
who, though not of their religion, had entered these
places. Then he took my hand and as I walked
with him asked me about Jerusalem and the Chrillians
who were there, and questioned me at length. I
entered with him the sacred enclosure of the church
which we have described above. When he approached
the principal gate, a party of priefts and monks came
out to salute him, for he is one of their chief men in
163



SELECTIONS FROM THE

mona^icism, and on seeing them he let go my hand.
I said to him “ I should like to enter the church with
you.” Then he said to the interpreter, “ Say to him
‘ He who enters it mu^h needs prostrate himself before
the great cross, for this is a rule which the ancients
laid down and which cannot be contravened.’ ” ' So I
left him and he entered alone and I did not see him
again. After leaving the king I entered the bazaar
of the scribes, where I was noticed by the judge, who
sent one of his assi^ants to ask the Greek about me.
On learning that I was a Muslim sciiolar he sent for
me and I went up to him. He was an old man with
a fine face and hair, wearing the black garments of
a monk, and had about ten scribes in front of hirn
writing. He rose to meet me, his companions rising
also, and said “ You are the king’s gue^ and we are
bound to honour you.” He then asked me about
Jerusalem, Syria, and Egypt, and spoke with me for
a . long time. A great crowd gathered round him,
and he said “ You mu^ come to my house that I may
entertain you.” After that I went away, but I did not
see him again.

When it became clear to the Turks who were in
the khatfin’s company that she professed her father’s
religion and wished to ^ay with him, they asked her
for leave to return to their country. She made them
rich presents and sent them an amir called Sariija
with five hundred horsemen to escort them to their
country. She sent for me, and gave me three hundred
of their gold dinars, called barhara.^ which are not
good money,^® and a thousand Venetian silver pieces,
together with some robes and pieces of cloth and two
horses, which were a gift from her father, and com-
mended me to Sarfija. I bade her farewell and left,
having spent a month and six days in their town. On
reaching the frontier, where we had left our party
and waggons we picked them up and returned through



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

the desert. San^ja came with us to B&bd Saltiaq,
where he Aayed as a gucR for three days, and then
went back to his lanu. This w^as in the depths of
winter and I used to wear three fur coats and two
pairs of trousers, one lined, and on my feet 1 had
woollen bools, with a pair of linendined boots on top
of these and a pair of horse skin boots lined with
bearskin on top of these again. I performed my
ablutions with not water close to the fire, but every
drop of water froac on the infant. When I washed
my face the water ran down my beard and froze, and
when I shook it oft it was a sort of snow that fell from
it. Water dripping from the nose froze on the
mouAachc. I was unable to mount my horse for the
quantity of clothes I was wearing and my companions
had to help me into the saddle.

On reaching Hdji Tarkhdn [AArakhan], where we
had parted from Sultan Ozbeg, we found that he had
moved and was living In the capital of his kingdom.
We travelled on the river Itil [Volga] and the neigh-
bouring waters, which were frozen over, and used to
break a piece of the ice whenever we needed water,
and put It in a cauldron till it melted, when we used
it for drinking and cooking. On the fourth day we
reached the city of Sard, which is the capital of the
sultan.*’ We visited him, and after we had answered
his qucdlions about our journey and the king of the
Greeks and his city he gave orders for our maintenance
and lodging. Sard is one of the fincdl of towns, of
immense extent and crammed with inhabitants, with
fine bazaars and wide directs. We rode out one day
with one of the principal men of the town, intending
to make a circuit of the place and find out its size.
We were living at one end of it and we set out in the
morning, and it was after midday when we reached
the other. One day we walked across the breadth of
the town, and the double journey, going and returning,



travels of IBN BATTUTA

took half a day, this

houses, with no ruins und. no orcn 't’Uo

SedraTand a large number of other n>osques The

inhabitants belong to divers 5 the

Mongols, who are the inhabitants ''"'J ‘ “

country and are in part Muslims, As [OsseWsJ, wn
are Muslims, and Qipchaqs

and Greeks, who are all Chriftians. Ea | P
lives in a separate quarter with its
Merchants and grangers from raq, ^P ’
and elsewhere, live in a quarter surrounded b) a wall,

in order to prote£l their property.


166



CHAl>TER V


Fkom Sxri t &ct out for Khwin£m» which i» separated
from the capital by a desert extending for forty days'
inarch. It U Impassable for horses on account of
the scarcity of fodder and the waggons arc drawn
only bv camels. Ten days after leaving Sar.i we
reached SarichOk, which means ** Little Sari,** a town
on the bank of a great and swift-dowing river called
UIdsd [Ural]/ which is crossed by a bridge of boats
like the bridge at Ihghdid. Here we hired camels
to take the place of the horses that had drawn our
vraggon hitherto, and sold the horses at the rate of
four silver dinars per head or leas, on account of their
exhauAson and (he cheapness of horses in this town.
From this point we nude a rapid march for thirty
days, halting only for two hours each day, one in the
forenoon and one at sunset, to cook and drink millet
broth. They hxvc with (hem dried preserved meat
which they put on top of (his, and pour sour milk
over the whole. Each person cats and sleeps in his
waggon while it is on the move. Travellers make
this journey with the utmoA speed, because of the
scarcity of herbage. The greater number of camels
which cross the desert perish and the remainder arc
of no use until the following year, when they are
fattened up again. Water is obtained from rain-pools
or shallow wells at known points separated by two or
three days' march.

After crossing this desert we reached Khwdrizm,
which is the largcA, grcatcA, moA beautiful and moA
important city of the Turks.* It shakes under the
weight of its population, whose movements lend it
167



SELECTIONS FROM THE

the semblance of a billowy sea. One day as I was
riding in the bazaar I became ^luck in the crowd,
unable to go either forward or backward. I did not
know what to do and only with great difficulty made
my way back. The city is in the dominions of Sultan
Uzbeg, who is represented by a powerful amir called
Qutlddumdr. I have never seen anywhere in the
world more excellent people than the Khwarizmians,
or more generous or more friendly to strangers. They
have a praiseworthy cu^om in regard to the prayer-
services which I have not seen elsewhere. Each
muezzin goes round the houses adjoining his mosque
warning them to attend the service, and any person
who absents himself from the communal prayers is
beaten by the qddi in the presence of the people.
In each mosque there is a whip hung up for this
purpose. The culprit is fined in addition five dinars,
which are spent on the purposes of tl\e mosque or in
charity. They say that this cu^om is one which they
have had from ancient times. Outside the city flows
the river Jayhfin [Oxus], one of the four rivers of
Paradise, which freezes over for five months in the
cold season like the Itil [Volga]. In' the summer it
is navigable for ships as far as Tirmidh [Termez],
the journey down stream taking ten days. On reach-
ing Khwarizm I encamped in the outskirts, and the
qadi, being informed of my arrival, came out to greet
me with a company of his followers. When we met
he said to me “ This town is densely populated, and
you will have difficulty in entering it in the daytime,
so my assi^ant will come to conduft you in towards
the end of the night.” We followed this sugge^ion
and were lodged in a new academy, in which no one
was living as yet. After the Friday service I went
with the qadi to his house, which was near the mosque,
and was taken into a magnificent apartment. It was
furnished with rich carpets and the walls were hung

i68



TRAVELS OF IHN BATTUTA

with dotht and In it there were a number of niches
each containing veucls of silvcr'gilt and 'Iriqt gloss.
This is 0 cuAom followed by the people of this country.

1 went with the qidt also to visit the amir Qut-
iudumtlr and found him reclining on a silk carpet
with his feel covered, as he was suffering from gout,
a malady very common among the lurks. Ife
qucAioned me about his sovereign, and the kh.itun
Bapliin and her father and the city of Conflantinoplc.
Then tables were brought in with roasted fowls,
cranes, young pigeons, bread baked with butter,
biscuits, and sweetmeats, which were followed by
other tables with fruit, pomcgrimtes prcpired for the
table, some of them served sn vessels of gold and silver
with golden spoons, and others in vessels of glass with
wooden spoons,* and wonderful melons. On our
return to the academy, the amir sent us rice, Hour,
sheep, butter, spices and loads of wood. The use of
charcoal is unknown in all these countries, as also in
India and Persia. In China they make fires with
Aoncs which burn like charcoal, and when they arc
burned to ashes they knead these with w-atcr, dry them
in the sun, and use them for cooking a^ain until they
are entirely consumed. One of the habits of the amir
is this. Every day (he qidl goes to his audicncc<hali
with his jurisconsults and senbes and sits on a chair
placed for him, opposite one of the principal amirs,
who is attended by eight other great amirs and shaykhs
of the Turks. ITic inhabiunu bring up their eases
for trial, and those which come under the sacred Law
arc decided by the qidi, and the others by these amirs.
Their judgments arc sound and equitable, because
they arc free from suspicion of partiality and do not
accept bribes. One Eriday, alter the service, the
qidi said to me “ The amir gave inflruftions that you
should be given five hundred dirhams and that for
another five hundred dirhams a banquet should be
169



SELECTIONS FROM THE

prepared in your honour, to which the shaykhs,
doftors and principal men were to be invited. I said
to him ‘ You are preparing a banquet at which the
gue^s will only eat one or two mouthfuls. If you
were to give him all the money it would be more
useful to him.’ He said that he would do so and has
ordered the full thousand to be given to .you.” I
received the-sum (which is equivalent to three hundred
Moroccan dinars) in a purse borne by a page. The
same day I had bought a black horse for thirty-five
silver dinars and ridden it to the mosque, and it was
out of that thousand and no other that I paid its price.
Thereafter I became possessed of so many horses
that I dare not mention their number le^ some sceptic
may accuse me of lying, and things continued to go
better with me all the time until I reached India. I
had many horses, but I preferred this black horse and
picketed it in front of all the others. It remained
with me for three years, and when it died my affairs
took a turn for the worse.

On my journey to Khwarizm I had been accom-
panied by a merchant from Karbala, a sharff called
‘All. I commissioned him to buy me some garments
and other things, and he bought me a robe for ten
dinars, but charged up only eight dinars against me
and paid the other two out of his own pocket. I was
in total ignorance of what he had done until it came
to my ears in a roundabout way. Not only that, but
he had lent me some money and when I received the
amir’s gift and repaid him what I owed, I wished to
inake him a present over and above in return for his
kindnesses, but he refused it and refused also my
sugge^ion to present it to a slave boy of his. He was
the mo^ open-handed ‘Iraqi whom I have ever met.
He decided to travel with me to India, but afterwards
a party from his native town arrived at Khwdrizm on
their way to China, and fearing le^l they should accuse

170



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

him to his fellow-townsmen of going to India to beg,
he set out with them. I heard later on, when 1 was
in India, that when he reached Almaliq, which is on
the frontiers of Turki^lin and China,* he flayed there
and sent a slave boy on with all his goods. The slave
boy was a long time in returning and meanwhile a
merchant from his native town arrived and put up
with him in the same caravanseray. The sharif asked
him to lend him some money until his boy should
arrive, but the merchant would not do so, and, not
content with his vile condu^f in failing to succour
the sharif, he tried to put up the ^cc of his lodging
in the caravanseray against him. The sharif heard of
this, and was so tmset that he went into his room and
cut his throat. He was found with a spark of life
ilill in him; they suspefted a slave whom he had of
murdering him, but he said to them “ Do not wrong
him, it was I who did this to myself,” and expired the
same day — may God forgive him I
When I made ready to leave Khwdrizm I hired
camels and bought a camel-litter. The servants rode
some of the horses and we put rugs on the re^l because
of the cold. We entered the desert which is between
KhwArizm and Bukhdrd, an eighteen days’ journey
through sands, with no settlements on the way except
the small town of Kdt,® which we reached after four
days’ march. We encamped outside it, by a lake
which was frozen over and on which the boys were
playing and sliding. The qddi came out to greet us,
followed an hour later by the governor and his suite,
who pressed us to ^lay and gave a banquet in our
honour. In this desert there is a journey of six nights
without water, after which we reached the town of
Wabkana [Wafkend], Thence we travelled for a
whole day through a continuous series of orchards,
breams, trees and buildings, and reached the city of
Bukhdrd. This city was formerly the capital of the

171



SELECTIONS FROM THE

lands beyond the Oxus. It was de^royed by the
accursed Tinki'z [Chingiz] the Tatar, the ance^or of
the kings of ‘Iraq, and all but a few of its mosques,
academies, and bazaars are now lying in ruins. Its
inhabitants are looked down upon and their evidence
[in legal cases] is not accepted in Khwdrizm and else^-
where, because of their reputation for fanaticism,
falsehood and denial of the truth. There is not one
of its inhabitants today who possesses any theological
learning or makes any attempt to acquire it.® We
lodged at a hospice in a suburb of Bukhara called
Fath Abad. The shaykh entertained me at his house
and invited the principal men of the town. We
spent a mo^ delightful night there; the Koran-readers
recited in pleasing voices, and the preacher delivered
an address, and then they sang melodiously in Turkish
and Persian.

From Bukhara we set out for the camp of the pious
Sultan Tarmashinn, and passed by Nakhshab [Qarshi],
a small city surrounded by gardens and water channels.
On the following afternoon we reached the sultan’s
camp. A merchant lent us a tent in which we spent
the night, and next day, as the sultan was away hunt-
ing, I visited his representative, the ami'r Taqbugha,
who lodged me near his mosque and gave me a Turkish
tent of the kind we have already described. That
night one of my slave girls gave birth to a child. I
was told at fir^ that it was a boy but afterwards I
found out that it was a girl. She was born under a
lucky ^ar, and from that time on I experienced
everything to give me joy and satisfa6lion. She died
^o months after my arrival in India, as will be related
in the sequel.

The Sultan of Turki^an, Tarmashin'n, is a powerful
sovereign, possessing a large army and a vaft kingdom,
and upright in his government. His territories lie
between four of the great kings of the world, the kings

172



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

of China, India, and ‘Irdq and King Uzbeg, all of
whom send him gifts and show him honour/ His
two brothers who preceded him were both infidels.
One day, after I had prayed the dawn-prayer in the
mosque, according to my cuflom, I was told that the
sultan was present. When he rose from his prayer-
carpet I went forward to salute him and he welcomed
me in Turkish. As he returned on foot to his audience
hall the people came forward to him with their com-
plaints and he topped to li^en to each petitioner,
small. or great, male or female. Thereafter he sent
for me, and I found him in a tent seated on a chair
covered with gold-embroidered silk. The tent was
lined with silken cloth of gold, and a crown, set with
jewels and precious ftones, was suspended over the
sultan’s head at a cubit’s height. The principal amirs
were sitting on chairs to right and left of him and in
front of him were princes holding fly-whisks. He
interrogated me about my journeys, his chancellor
ailing as interpreter. We used to attend the prayer-
services with him (this was during a period of intense
and perishing cold weather) and he never failed to
attend the dawn and evening prayers with the con-
gregation. One day when I was present at the after-
noon prayer, one of his pages came in with a prayer-
mat and spread it in the place where the sultan usually
prayed, saying to the imdm ** Our mafler desires you
to delay the prayer for a moment while he performs
his ablutions.” The imdm said in Persian “ Is prayer
for God or Tarmashlrln ?” and ordered the muezzin
to recite the second call. The sultan arrived when
the service was half over, and made the remaining
two proflrations at the end of the ranks, in the place
where the shoes are left near the door of the mosque.
He then performed the proflrations that he had missed,
and went up laughing to the imdm to shake his hand,
and sitting down in his place said to me “ When you

173



SELECTIONS FROM THE

return to your country tell how a Persian mendicant
a6led thus with the sultan of the Turks.”, This shaykh
used to preach every Friday, exhorting the sultan to
a^l righteously and forbidding him in the harshe^
terms to a.6t corruptly and tyrannically, and the sultan
would sit silent before him and weep. He would
never accept gifts from the sultan nor eat at his table,
nor wear the robes presented to him; he was a virtuous
servant of God.

When I decided to continue my journey after a
^ay of fifty-four days with the sultan, he gave me
seven hundred silver dinars and a sable coat worth a
hundred dinars, which I had asked of him on account
of the cold, as well as two horses and two camels.
After taking leave of him I journeyed to Samarqand,
which is one of the larged and mo^ perfedlly beautiful
cities in the world. It is built on the bank of a river
where the inhabitants promenade after the afternoon
prayer. There were formerly great palaces along the
bank, but mo^ of them are in ruins, as also is much
of the city itself, and it has no walls or gates. Outside
the city is the grave of Qutham ibn al-‘ Abbas, who
met a martyr’s death at the conque^ of Samarqand.®
The inhabitants go out to visit it every Sunday and
Thursday night and the Tatars also visit it, bringing
large votive offerings of cattle, sheep and money,
which are used for the maintenance of travellers and
of the guardians of the hospice.

We set out from Samarqand and reached Tirmidh
[Termez], a large town with fine buildings and bazaars
and traversed by canals. It abounds in grapes and
quinces of an exquisite flavour, as well as in flesh-
meats and milk. The inhabitants wash their heads
in the bath with milk instead of fuller’s earth; the
proprietor of every bath-house has large jars filled
with milk, and each man as he enters takes a cupful
to wash his head. It makes the hair fresh and glossy.

174



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

The Indians put oU of sesame on their heads and after-
wards wash their hair with fuller’s earth. This
refreshes the body and makes the hair glossy and
long) and that is the reason why the Indians and those
who live in their country have long beards. The old
town of Tirmldh was built on the bank of the Oxus,
and when it was laid in ruins b^ Tinklz [Chingiz]
this new town was built two miles from the river.
Before reaching the city I fell in with its governor
'Ali al-MuIk Khuddwand Zddah> who sent on an
order for our entertainment as gucils, and provisions
were brought to us every day during our ^lay
there.

We crossed the river Oxus into the land of Khurdsln
and after a day and a halPs march through a sandy
uninhabited w^e reached Balkh. It is an utter ruin
ud uninhabited, but anyone seeing it would think
it inhabited on account of the solidity of its conftruc-
tion. The accursed Tinklz dcdlroyed this city and
demolished about a third of its mosque on account of
a treasure which he was told lay under one of its
columns. He pulled down a third of them and found
nothing and left the rc^ as it was. After leaving
Bdkh we travelled for seven days through the moun-
tains of Qiihi^Idn, in which there arc numerous in-
habited villages with running streams and leafy trees,
moAly fig-trees, and many hospices inhabited by
devotees. Thereafter we reached the city of Herdt,
which is the larged^ inhabited city in Khurdsdn. There
are four large cities in this province, two of them,
Herdt and Naysdbiir [Nfshdpdr] inhabited, and two,
Balkh and Merv, in mins.

The sultan of Herdt is the illustrious Husayn, son
of the sultan Ghiydth ad-Dln al-Ghiirl, a man of
notorious bravery and viftorious by the Divine Favour
on two fields of battle.® A pious ascetic of great
merit, called Nizdm ad-Dfn Mawldna, spent his youth

*75



SELECTIONS FROM THE

at Herat. He was beloved by the people, who would
come to hear his sermons and exhortations, and who
made a compa<5l with him to repress evildoing. The
preacher Malik Warna, who was a cousin of the
king’s, was also a party to this compadt. Whenever
they learned of any evil adfion, even on the part of
the king, they took means to repress it. It is said
that they found out one day that an unlawful adl was
being committed in King Husayn’s palace, and they
assembled to put a dtop to it. The king fortified
himself again^ them within the palace, but they
assembled to the number of six thousand men at the
gate. In fear of them he sent for Nizam ad-Din
and the chief men of the town. He had been drinking
wine and there and then inside his ca^e they applied
to him the punishment prescribed by law and left
him.^° Later on Nizam ad-Din was killed by a
Turkish amir whom he had offended. After this had
happened King Husayn sent his cousin Malik Warna,
who had been associated with Nizam ad-Din in his
reforming adlivities, as ambassador to the king of
Siji^an, and when he arrived there, ordered him to
^ay there in Siji^an and not to return to him. Malik
Warna went on to India, where I met him as I was
leaving Sind. He was an excellent man with a liking
for authority, hunting, falcons, horses, slaves, servants,
and rich and kingly robes. Now India is no place
for a man of this charadler. In his case the king of
India appointed him governor of a small town, and he
was assassinated there by a man from Herat who was
living in India. It is said that the king of India was
the inftigator of his assassin at the in^ance of King
Husayn, and it was for this reason that King Husayn
acknowledged the king of India as his suzerain after
the death of Malik Warna.

From Herat we journeyed to the town of Jam,
which is of middling size in a fertile di^rift.^^ Mo^

176



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

of the trees arc mulberries, and there is a great deal
of silk there. This town derives its name from the
saint and ascetic Ahmad al-Jdm, to whose descendants
it now belongs (for it is independent of the sultan)
and who possess great wealth. We went next to
Tiis, which is one of the largest cities in Khurdsdn,
and thence to Mashhad ar-Ridd [Meshhed], which is
also a large town with abundant fruit-trees, dlreams,
and mills.^ The noble mausoleum is surmounted
by a great dome of elegant condlruftion, the walls
being decorated with coloured tiles. Opposite the
tomb [of the Imdm] is the tomb of Caliph Hdnin
ar-Rashfd, which is surmounted by a platform bearing
chandeliers. When a Shi*itc enters to visit it he kicks
the tomb of ar-Rashld with his foot, and pronounces
a blessing on ar-Ridd.

Thence we journeyed through Sarakhs to Zdwa,
the town of the pious shaykh Qutb ad-Dfn Haydar,”
who has given his name to the Haydarf congregation
of darwlshes. These arc the darwfshes who place
iron rings in their hands and ears and other parts of
their bodies. We travelled from there to Naysdbiir,
one of the four capitals of Khurdsdn. It is given the
name of “ Little Damascus ” because of its beauty and
the quantity of its fruit-trees, orchards and dlrcams.
They manufacture here garments of silk and velvet,
which are exported to India. I stayed at the convent
of the learned shaykh Qutb ad-Dln an-Naysdbdrl, who
showed me great hospitality, and I was witness to
^some adlonishing miracles performed by him. I had
bought in this town a young Turkish slave, and the
shaykh, seeing him with me, said “ This boy is no
good to you. Sell him.” I did as he said and sold
him next day to a merchant, then bade the shaykh
farewell and left. When I ilopped at Bidldm, one of
^y friends wrote to me from Naysdbiir and told me
that the slave had killed a Turkish boy and had been
177 N



SELECTIONS FROM THE

put to death for it. This is an evident miracle to the
credit of the shaykh.

From Naysabdr I travelled to the town of Bi^am/^
and thence to Qundds and Baghlan,^ which are villages
inhabited by shaykhs and pious persons. At Qundds
we encamped by a stream, where there was a hospice
belonging to an Egyptian shaykh called Shir-i Siyah,
which means “ The Black Lion.” We were hospitably
received by the governor of that country, a man from
Mosul, who lives in a large garden there. We ^ayed
outside this village about forty days to pa^ure our
camels and horses, for there is excellent pa^urage
there and perfeft security, owing to the ^ri6l measures
of the amir, who enforces the Turkish laws regarding
horse-dealing which we have already mentioned
[p. 143]. After we had been daying there ten days
we missed three of our horses, but they were redored
to us by the Tatars a fortnight later, through fear of
the application of these laws to themselves.

Another reason for our halt was fear of the snow,
for on the road there is a mountain called Hindiikdsh,
which means “ Slayer of Indians,” because the slave
boys and girls who are brought from India die there
in large numbers as a result of the extreme cold and
the quantity of snow. The passage extends for a
whole day’s march.^® We dayed until the warm
weather had definitely set in, and crossed this moun-
tain by a continuous march from before dawn to
sunset. We kept spreading felt cloths in front of
the camels for them to tread on so that they should
not sink in the snow. On setting out from Baghlan
we journeyed to a place called Andar [Andarab]. In
former times there was a town here whose traces have
disappeared, and we halted at a large village where
there is a hospice belonging to an excellent man
named Muhammad al-Mahrawi. We dayed with
him and he treated us with consideration. When we

178



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTX3TA

washed our hands after eating he would drink the
water in which we had washed because of the high
c^eem in which he held us. He travelled with us
until we climbed the mountain of Hinddkdsh men-
tioned above. On this mountain we found a warm
^ream spring, and washed our faces in it, with the
result that the skin peeled off our faces and we suffered
some pain.

We halted next at a place called Banj Hfr [PanjshfrJ,
which means “ Five Mountains,” where there was once
a fine and populous city built on a great river with
blue water like the sea. This country was devaAated
by Tinklz, the king of the Tatars, and has not been
inhabited since. We came to a mountain called
Pashdy, where there is the convent of the shaykh Atd
Awlij’d, which means ^ Father of the Saints.” He is
also ^led Sfsad Sdlah, which is the Persian for ” three
hundred years,*' because they say that he is three
hundred and fifty years old. They have a very high
opinion of him and come to visit him from the towns
and villages, and sultans and princesses visit him too.
He received us with honour and made us his guedls.
We encamped by a river near his convent and went
to see him, and when I saluted him he embraced me.
His skin is fresh and smoother than any 1 have seen;
anyone seeing him would take him to be fifty years
old. He told me that he grew new hair and teeth
every hundred years. ’ 1 had some doubts about him,
however, and God knows how much truth there is
in what he says.

We travelled thence to Parwdn, where I met the
amfr Buruntayh. He treated me well and wrote to
his representatives at Ghazna enjoining them to
show me honour. We went on to the village of
Charkh [Charikar], it being now summer, and from
there to the town of Ghazna. This is the town of
.the famous warrior-sultan Mahmiid ibn Sabuktagfn,
179



SELECTIONS FROM THE

one of the greater of rulers, who made frequent raids
into India and captured cities and fortresses there.’^'^
His grave is in this city and is surmounted by a hospice.
The greater part of the town is in ruins and nothing
but a fra(5fion of it remains, though it was once a large
city. It has an exceedingly cold climate, and the
inhabitants move from it in the cold season to Qandahar,
a large and prosperous town three nights’ journey
from Ghazna, but I did not visit it. We travelled on
to Kabul, formerly a va^ town, the site of which is
now occupied by a village inhabited by a tribe of
Persians called Afghdns. They hold mountains and
defiles and possess considerable strength, and are
mo^ly highwaymen. Their principal mountain is
called Kdh Sulayman. It is told that the prophet
Sulayman [Solomon] ascended this mountain and
having looked out over India, which was then covered
with darkness, returned without entering it.

From Kdbul we rode to Karmash, which is a fortress
belonging to the Afghdns, lying between two hills
where they intercept traffic on the road. During our
passage we had an engagement with them. They were
podted on the lower slope of the hill, but we shot
arrows at them and they fled. Our party was travel-
ling light and had about four thousand horses. I had
camels, as a result of which I became separated from
the caravan along with a party including a number of
Afghdns. We jettisoned some* of our provisions and
abandoned the loads of the camels that were jaded,
on the route, but next day our horses returned and
picked them up. We rejoined the caravan in the
late evening and passed the night at the station of
Shashnaghdr, which is the laft inhabited place on the
confines of the Turkish lands. From here we entered
the great desert which extends for fifteen days and
can be traversed only in one season of the year, after
the rains have fallen in Sind and India, that is at the

i8o



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

beginning of July.^* In this desert blows the deadly
samiim wind. A great caravan which preceded us
lo£I many camels and horses, but our company arrived
safely — praise be to God ! — at Panj Ab [Indus] which
is the river of Sind and means “ The Five Rivers.”
These flow into the great river and irrigate those
diRri^Is. We reached this river on the night that
the new moon of Muharram of the year 734 [12th
September 1333J rose upon us. From this point the
intelligence officials wrote to India informing the king
of our ariival and giving him all the details concern-
ing us.

Here ends the narrative of this journey. Praise
be to God, Lord of the worlds.




BOOK II

CH^VPTEB VI


Wii£N wc reached this river caJIcd Pani Ab, which
is the frontier of the territories of the sultan of India
and Sind, the otHcials of the intelligence service came
to us and sent a report about us to the governor of
the city of Multdn. From Sind to the city of Dihlf
[Delhi], the sultan's capital, it is Hfty days* march,
but when the intelligence otBccrs write to the sultan
from, Sind the letter reaches him in five days by the
poAal service. In India the poAal service is of two
kinds.^ The mounted couriers travel on horses
belonging to the sultan with relay's every four miles.
The service of couriers on foot is organized in the
following manner. At every third of a mile there is
an inhabited village, outside which there are three
pavilions. In these sit men girded up ready to move
off, each of whom has a rod a yard and a half long
with brass bells at the top. "When a courier leaves
the town he takes the letter in the fingers of one hand
and the rod with the bells in the other, and runs with
all his might. The men in the pavilions, on hearing
the sound of the bells, prepare to meet him, and when
he reaches them one of them takes the letter in his
hand and passes on, running with all his might and
shaking his rod until he reaches the next Nation,
and so the letter is passed on till it reaches its
dcflinalion. This poft is quicker than the mounted
pofl. It is sometimes used to transport fruits from
Khurdsin which arc highly valued in India; they arc

183



SELECTIONS FROM THE

put on plates and carried with great speed, to the
sultan. In the same way they transport the principal
criminals; they are each placed on a ^retcher and the
couriers run carrying the stretcher on their heads.
The sultan’s drinking water is brought to him by the
same means, when he resides at Dawlat Abad, from
the river Kank (Ganges), to which the Hindus go on
pilgrimage and which is at a di^ance of forty days’
journey from there.

When the intelligence officials write to the sultan
informing him of those who arrive in his country,
he Judies the report very minutely. They take the
utmost care in this matter, telling him that a certain
man has arrived of such-and-such an appearance and
dress, and noting the number of his party, slaves and
servants and beasts, his behaviour both in adlion and
at re^, and all his doings, omitting no details. When
the new arrival reaches the town of Multan, which is
the capital of Sind, he ftays there until an order is
received from the sultan regarding his entry and the
degree of hospitality to be extended to him. A man
is honoured in that country according to what may be
seen of his actions, conduct, and zeal, since no one
knows anything of his family or lineage. The king
of India, Sultan Muhammad Shah, makes a pradtice
of honouring Grangers and distinguishing them by
governorships or high dignities of State. The majority
of his courtiers, palace officials, ministers of State,
judges, and relatives by marriage are foreigners, and
he has issued a decree that foreigners are to be given
in his country the title of [Honourable], so that
this has become a proper name for them.

Every person proceeding to the court of this king
muSt needs have a gift ready to present to him, in
order to gain his favour. The sultan requites him
for it by a gift many times its value. When his
subjects grew accuSlomed to this pradlice,the merchants

184







TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

in Sind and India began to furnish each newcomer
with thousands of dinars as a loan, and to supply him
with whatever he might desire to offer as a gift or to
use on his own behalf, such as riding animals, camels,
and goods. They place both their money and their
persons at his service, and ^and before him like
attendants. When he reaches the sultan, he receives
a magnificent gift from him and pays off his debt to
them. This trade of theirs is a flourishing one and
brings in va^l profits. On reaching Sind I followed
this pradlicc and bought horses, camels, white slaves
and other goods from the merchants. I had already
bought from an *Irdq( merchant in Ghazna about
thirty horses and a camel with a load of arrows, for
this is one of the things presented to the sultan. This
merchant went off to Khurdsin and on returning to
India received his money from me. He made an
enormous profit through me and became one of the
principal merchants. I met him many years later,
at Aleppo, when the infidels had robbed me of every-
thing I possessed, but he gave me no assiftance.

After crossing the river of Sind called Panj Ab,
our way led through a foredl of reeds, in which I saw
a rhinoceros for the fir£l time. After two days’
march we reached Jandnf, a large and fine town on
the bank of the river of Sind. Its people are a people
called the Simira, whose anceflors eftablished them-
selves there on the conqueA of Sind in the time of
al-Hajjdj [712 a.d.]. These people never eat with
anyone, nor may anyone observe them while they are
eating, and they never marry outside their dan.^
From Jandnl we travelled to Slwasitdn [Sehwan], a
large town, outside which is a sandy desert, treeless
except for acacias. Nothing is grown on the river
here except pumpkins, and the food of the inhabitants
considls of sorghum and peas, of which they make
bread. There is a plentiful supply of fish and buffalo
185



SELECTIONS FROM THE

milk, and they eat also a kind of small lizard fluffed
with curcuma. When I saw this small animal and
them eating it, I took a loathing at it and would not
eat it. We entered Siwasitan during the hotted
period of the summer. The heat was intense, and my
companions used to sit naked except for a cloth round
the wai^l and another soaked with water on their
shoulders ; this dried in a very short time and they had
to keep con^antly wetting it again. ^

In this town I met the distinguished do6tor ‘Ala
al-Mulk of Khurasan, formerly qadi of Herat, who
had come to join the king of India and had been
appointed governor of the town and province of
Lahari in Sind. I decided to travel thither with him.
He had fifteen ships with which he sailed down the
river, carrying his baggage. One of these was a ship
called the ^awrah^ resembling the tartan of our
country, but broader and shorter. In the centre of
it there was a wooden cabin reached by a Staircase,
and on top of this there was a place prepared for the
governor to sit in. His suite sat in front of him and
slaves Stood to right and left, while the crew of about
forty men rowed. Accompanying the ahawrah were
four ships to right and left, two of which carried
the governor’s Standards, kettledrums, trumpets and
singers. Fir^ the drums and trumpets were sounded
and then the musicians sang, and this continued
alternately from early morning to the lunch hour.
When this moment arrived, the ships closed up and
gangways were placed from one to the other. The
musicians then came from on board the governor’s
ahawrah and sang until he finished eating, when they
had their meal and returned to their vessel. The
journey continued thereafter as before until nightfall.
The camp was then set up on the bank of the river,
the governor disembarked, tables were set and mo^
of the troops joined in the meal. After the la^ evening

i86



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

prayer sentries were polled for the night in reliefs.
As each relief hnished its tour of duty one of them
cried in a loud voice “ O lord King/ so many hours
of the night arc pait” At dawn the trumpets and
drums sounded and the dawn prayer was said, then
food was brought and when the meal was Hnished they
resumed their journey.

After five days' travelling we reached ‘Aid al-Mulk's
province, Ldharf, a fine town on the coadl where the
river of Sind discharges itself into the ocean.® It
possesses a large harbour, visited by men from Yemen,
Fdrs, and elsewhere. For this reason its contribu-
tions to the Treasury and its revenues are consider-
able; the governor told me that the revenue from
this town amounted to sixty lakhs per annum. The
governor receives a twentieth part of this, that being
the footing on which the sultan commits the pro-
vinces to his governors. I rode out one dav with
‘Aid al-Mulk, and we came to a plain called Tdrna,
seven miles from Ldharf, where I saw an innumerable
quantity of Aones in the shape of men and animals.
Many of them were disfigurea and their forms effaced,
but mere remained a head or a foot or something of
the sort. Some of the Aones also had the shape of
grains of wheat, chickpeas, beans and lentils, and there
were remains of a city wall and house walls. We saw
too the ruins of a house with a chamber of hewn
Aones, in the midA of which there was a platform of
hewn Aones resembling a single block, surmounted
by a human figure, except that its head was elongated
and its mouth on the side of its face and its hands
behind its back like a pinioned captive. The place
had pools of Ainking water and an inscription on one
of its walls in Indian charaAers. ‘Aid d-Mulk told
me that the hiAorians relate that in this place there
was a great city whose inhabitants were so depraved
that they were turned to Aone, and that it is their
187



SELECTIONS FROM THE

king who is on the terrace in the house, which is ^till
called “ the king’s palace.” They add that the in-
scription gives the date of the de^rudlion of the people
of that city, which occurred about a thousand years
ago.®

When I had spent five days in this city with ‘Ala
al-Mulk, he gave me a generous travelling provision
and I left for the town of Bakar, a fine city intersefted
by a channel from the river of Sind.*^ In the middle
of this canal there is a fine hospice at which travellers
are entertained. Thereafter I travelled from Bakar to
the large town of Uja [Uch] which lies on the bank
of the river and has fine bazaars and buildings. The
governor there at the time was the excellent king, the
Sharif Jalal ad-DIn al-Kijf, a gallant and generous
man. We formed a strong affeftion for one another,
and met later on at the capital, Delhi. When the
sultan left for Dawlat Abdd and bade me remain in
the capital, Jalal ad-Din said to mfe “ You will require
a large sum for your expenses and the sultan will
be away for a long time, so take my village and use its
revenues until I return.” I did so and gained about
five thousand dinars — ^may God give him riche^
recompense ! From Uja I travelled to Multan, the
capital of Sind and residence of the principal amir.

On the road to Multan and ten miles di^ant from
it is the river called Khusraw Abad, a large river that
cannot be crossed except by boat.® At this point the
goods and baggage of all who pass are subjedfed to
a rigorous examination. Their cu^om at the time
of our arrival was to take a quarter of everything
brought in by the merchants, and exadt a duty of
seven dinars for every horse. The idea of having my
t>aggage searched was very disagreeable to me, for
there was nothing valuable in it, though it seemed
a great deal in the eyes of the people. By the grace
of God there arrived on the scene one of the principal

i88



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

officers from the governor of Multin, who gave orders
that I should not be subjeftcd to examination or search.
We spent that night on the bank of the river and next
morning were visited by the poilma^er, who is the
person who keeps the sultan informed of affairs in
that town and di^lridl and of all that happens in it
and all who come to it. I was introduced to him and
went in his company to visit the governor of Multdn,
Qutb al-Mulk,

When I entered his presence, he rose to greet me,
shook my hand, and bade me sit beside him. 1
presented him with a white slave, a horse, and some
raisins and almonds. These are among the greatest
gifts that can be made to them, since they do not
grow in their land and arc imported from Khurdsdn.
The governor sat on a large carpeted dais, with the
army commanders on his right and left and armed
men dlanding at his back. The troops are passed in
review before him and a number of bows are kept
there. When anyone comes desiring to be enrolled
in the army as an archer, he is given one of the bows
to draw. They differ in dliffness, and his pay is
graduated according to the dlrength he shows in
drawing them. Anyone desiring to be enrolled as a
trooper sets off his horse at a canter or gallop and
tries to hit a target set up there with his lance. There
is a ring there too, suspended to a low wall; the candi-
date sets off his horse at a canter until he comes level
with the ring, and if he lifts it off with his lance he
is accounted by them a good horseman. For those
wishing to be enrolled as mounted archers there is a
ball placed on the ground, and their pay is propor-
tioned to their accuracy in hitting it with an arrow
while going at a canter or gallop.

Two months after we reached Multdn one of the
sultan’s household officers and the chief of police
arrived to arrange for the journey of the new arrivals
189



SELECTIONS FROM THE

[to Delhi]. They came to me together and asked me
why I had come to India. I replied that I had come
to enter the service of the Khund Alam [‘^ Ma^er of
the World ”], as the sultan is called in his dominions.
He had given orders that no one coming from
Khurasan should be allowed to enter India unless he
came with the intention of laying there. When I
had given my answer they called the qadi and notaries
and drew up a document witnessing to my under-
taking and those of my company who wished to
remain in India, but some of them refused to engage
themselves. We then prepared for the journey to
the capital, which is forty days’ march from Multan
through a continuous Wretch of inhabited country.
The principal member of our party was Khudhawand
Zadah, qadi of Tirmidh, who had come with his wife
and children. The chamberlain made special arrange-
ments for his journey and took twenty cooks with
him from Multan, himself going ahead with them
every night to prepare his meals, etc.

The fir^ town we reached after leaving Multdn
was Abiihar [Abohar], which is the firdl town in India
proper, and thence we entered a plain extending for
a day’s journey. On the borders of this plain are
inaccessible mountains, inhabited by Hindu infidels;
some of them are subjects [ryots] under Muslim rule,
and live in villages governed by a Muslim headman
appointed by the governor in whose fief the village
lies. Others of them are rebels and warriors, who
maintain themselves in the fastnesses of the moun-
tains and make plundering raids. On this road we
fell in with a raiding party, this being the firSt engage-
ment I witnessed in India. The main party had left
Abfihar in the early morning, but I had ^ayed there
with a small party of my companions until midday
and when we left, numbering in all twentyrtwo horse-
men, partly Arabs and partly Persians and Turks, we

190



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

were attacked on this plain by eighty infidels on foot
with two horsemen. My companions were men of
courage and ability and wc fought stoutly with them,
killing one of the horsemen and about twelve of the
footsoldicrs. I was hit by an arrow and my horse
by another, but God preserved me from them, for
there is no force in their arrows. One of our party
had his horse wounded, but we gave him in exchange
the horse we had captured from the infidel, and killed
the wounded horse, which was eaten by the Turks
of our party. Wc carried the heads of the slain to
the caAle of Abii Bak’har, which wc reached about
midnight, and suspended them from the wall.

Two days later wc reached Ajiidahan [Pakpattan],
a small town belonging to the pious Shaykh Farfd
ad-Dfn.® As I returned to the camp after visiting
this personage, I saw the people hurrying out, and some
of our party along with them. I asked them what
was happening and they told me that one of the Hindu
infidels had died, that a fire had been kindled to burn
him, and his wife would burn herself along with him.
After the burning my companions came back and told
me that she had embraced the dead man until she
herself was burned with him. Later on I used often
to see a Hindu woman, richly dressed, riding on horse-
back, followed by both Muslims and infidels and pre-
ceded by drums and trumpets; she was accompanied
by Brahmans, who are the chiefs of the Hindus. In
the sultan’s dominions they ask his permission to
burn her, which he accords them. The burning of
the wife after her husband’s death is regarded by them
as a commendable aft, but is not compulsory; only
when a widow burns herself her family acquire a
certain preftige by it and gain a reputation for fidelity.
A widow who does not burn herself dresses in coarse
garments and lives with her own people in misery,
despised for her lack of fidelity, but she is not forced
191



SELECTIONS FROM THE

to burn herself. Once in the town of Amjari [Am-
ihera, near Dhar] I saw three women whose husbands
had been killed in battle and who had agreed to burn
themselves. Each one had a horse brought to her
and mounted it, richly dressed and perfumed. . In her
right hand she held a coconut, with which she played,
and in her left a mirror, in which she looked at her
face. They were surrounded by Brahmans and their
own relatives, and were preceded by drums, trumpets
and bugles. Everyone of the infidels said to them
“ Take greetings from me to my father, or brother
or mother, or friend ” and they would say Yes
and smile at them. I rode out with my companions
to see the way in which the burning was carried out.
After three miles we came to a dark place with nmch
water and shady trees, among^ which there were
pavilions, each containing a ^one idol. Between the
pavilions there was a basin of water over which a
dense shade was ca^ by trees so thickly set that the
sun could not penetrate them. The place looked like
a spot in hell — God preserve us from it ! On reach-
ing these pavilions they descended to the pool, plunged
into it and dive^ed themselves of their clothes and
ornaments, which they di^ributed as alms. Each one
was then given an unsewn garment of coarse cotton
and tied part of it round her wai^ and part over her
head and shoulders. The fires had been lit near this
basin in a low lying spot, and oil of sesame poured
over them, so that the flames were increased. There
were about fifteen men there with faggots of thin
wood and about ten others with heavy pieces of wood,
and the drummers and trumpeters were ^landing by
waiting for the woman’s coming. The fire was
screened off by a blanket held by some men, so that
she should not be frightened by the sight of it. I saw
one of them, on coming to the blanket, pull it violently
out of the men’s hands, saying to them with a smile

192



TRAVELS OF lUN BATTOTA

** Do vou fnghtcn me with the fire ? I know that it
is a nrc, so let me alone.” Thereupon she joined
her hands above her head tn salutation to the fire and
caR herself into it. At the same moment the drums,
trumpets and bugles were sounded, the men threw
their firewood on her and the others put the heavy
wood on lop of her to prevent her moving, cries were
raised and there was a loud clamour. When 1 saw
this I had all but fallen oft my horse, if my companions
had not (Quickly brought water to me and laved my
face, after which I withdrew.

The Indians have a similar praflice of drowning
themselves and many of them do so in the river
Ganges, the river to which they go on pilgrimage,
and into which the ashes of those who arc burned arc
cast. They say that it is a river of Paradise. When
one of them comes to drown himself he says to those
present with him, ”Do not think that I drowm myself
lor any worldly reason or through penury; mv purpose
is solely to seek approach to Kusiy,” Kusiy being the
name of Cod in thetr language.'® He then drowns
himself, and when he is dead they take him out and
burn him and caA his ashes into this river.

Let us return to our original topic. We set out
from the town of Ajddahan, and after four days'
march reached Sarasatf [Sarsfiti or Sirsa], a large town
with quantities of rice of an excellent sort which is
exported to the capital, Delhi. The town produces
a large revenue; I was told how much it is, out have
forgotten the figure. Thence we travelled to Hdnsf,
an exceedingly fine, well built and populous city,
surrounded by a wall. Two days later we came to
Mas'iid Abdd, which is ten miles from Delhi," and
there we spent three days. The sultan was away at
the time in the diAriA of the town of Qanawj, which
is ten days* march from Delhi, but the queen-mother
was in the capital, and also the sultan's wazfr. He
193 o



SELECTIONS FROM THE

sent his officers to receive us, designating each
one of us a person of his own rank. ^ Meanwhile he
wrote to inform the sultan of our arrival, sending the
letter by courier po^, and received
during the three days that we spent at Mas ud Abad.
Thereafter the qadis, doftors and sh^khs, and some
of the amirs came out to meet us. The Indians c^l
the amirs “ kings,” using the term “ king where the
people of Diyar-Bakr, Egypt, and elsewhere say
“amir.” We then set out from Mas'dd Abad and
halted near a village called Palam. On the next day
we arrived at the city of Dihli [Delhi], the metropolis
of India, a va^ and magnificent city, uniting beauty
with ^rength. It is surrounded by a wall that has
no equal in the world, and is the larged city in India,
nay rather the larged city in the entire Muslim

Orient. . ,

The city of Delhi is made up now of four neigh-
bouring and contiguous towns. One of them is
Delhi proper, the old city built by the infidels and
captured in the year ii88. The second is calle
Siri, known also as the Abode of the Caliphate; this
was the town given by the sultan to Ghiyath ad-Din,
the grandson of the ‘Abbasid Caliph Multansir, when
he came to his court. The third is called Tughlaq
Abad, after its founder, the Sultan Tughlaq,' the^
father of the sultan of India to whose court we came.
The reason why he built it was that one day he said
to a former sultan “ O ma^er of the world, it were
fitting that a city should be built here.” The sultan
replied to him in je^ “ When you are sultan, build
it.” It came about by the decree of God that he
became sultan, so he built it and called it by his own
name. The fourth is called Jahan Panah, and is
set apart for the residence of the reigning sultan,
Muhammad Shah. He was the founder of it, and it
was his intention to unite these four towns within

194



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

a single wall, but after building part of it he gave
up the re^l because of the expense required for its
conftruftion.^

The cathedral mosque occupies a large area; its
walls, roof, and paving are all con^lrufted of white
^ones, admirably squared and firmly cemented with
lead. There is no wood in it at all. It has thirteen
domes of ^lone, its pulpit also is made of ilone, and
it has four courts. In the centre of the mosque is an
awe-inspiring column, and nobody knows of what
metal it is conftrufted. One of their learned men told
me that it is called Haft Jushy which means “ seven
metals,” and that it is con^lrufted from these seven.
A ipart of this column, of a finger's breadth, has been
polished, and gives out a brilliant gleam. Iron makes
no impression on it. It is thirty cubits high,^* and
we rolled a turban round it, and the portion which
encircled it measured eight cubits. At the ea^erni
gate there are two enormous idols of brass pro^ratej
on the ground and held by atones, and everyone)
entering or leaving the mosque treads on them. The
site was formerly occupied by an idol temple, and was
converted into a mosque on the conquest of the city.
In the northern court is the minaret, which has no
parallel in the lands of Islam. It is built of red 5lone,
unlike the re^ of the edifice, ornamented with sculp-
tures, and of great height. The ball on the top is of
glistening white marble and its “ apples ” [small balls
surmounting a minaret] are of pure gold. The
passage is so wide that elephants could go up by it.
A person in whom I have confidence told me that when
it was built he saw an elephant climbing with Clones
to the top. The Sultan Qutb ad-Din wished to build
one in the western court even larger, but was cut off
by death when only a third of it had been completed.
This minaret is one of the wonders of the world for
size, and the width of its passage is such that three



SELECTIONS FROM THE

elephants could mount it abreast. The third of it
built equals in height the whole of the other minaret
we have mentioned in the northern court, though to
one looking at it from below it does not seem so high
because of its bulk.

Outside Delhi is a large reservoir named after the
Sultan Lalmish, from which the inhabitants draw
their drinking water. It is supplied by rain water,
and is about two miles in length by half that breadth.
In the centre there is a great pavilion built of squared
^ones, two Glories high. When the reservoir is filled
with water it can be reached only in boats, but when
the water is low the people go into it. Inside it is
a mosque, and at mo^ times it is occupied by mendi-
cants devoted to the service of God. When the water
dries up at the sides of this reservoir, they sow sugar
canes, cucumbers, green melons and pumpkins there.
The melons and pumpkins are very sweet but of small
size. Between Delhi and the Abode of the Caliphate
is. the private reservoir, which is larger than the other.
Along its sides there are about forty pavilions, and
round about it live the musicians.

Among the learned and pious inhabitants of Delhi
is the devout and humble imam Kamal ad-Dm, called
“ The Cave Man ” from the cave in which he lives
outside the city. I had a slave-boy who ran away
from me, and whom I found in the possession of a
certain Turk. I proposed to take him back from him,
but the shaykh said to me “ This boy is no good to
you. Don’t take him.” The Turk wished to come
to an arrangement, so he paid me a hundred dinars
and kept the boy. Six months later the boy killed
his ma^er and was taken before the sultan, who
ordered him to he handed over to his. maker’s sons,
and they put him to death. When I saw this miracle
on the part of the shaykh I attached myself to him,
withdrawing from the world and giving all that I

196



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

possessed to the poor and needy. I flayed with him
for some time, and I used to see him fa^ for ten and
twenty days on end and remain ^landing moil of the
night. I continued with him until the sultan sent
for me and I became entangled in the world once
again — may God give me a good ending I

This king is of all men the fondeil of making gifts
and of shedding blood. His gate is never without
some poor man enriched or some living man executed,
and Tories are current amongil the people of his
generosity and courage and of his cruelty and violence
towards criminals. For all that, he is of all men the
moil humble and the readieil to show equity and
juilice. The ceremonies of religion arc ilri<5lly
complied with at his court, and he is severe in the
matter of attendance at prayer and in punishing those
who negleft it. He is one of those kings whose
felicity is unimpaired and surpassing all ordinary
experience, but his dominant equality is generosity.
We shall relate some Tories of this that are marvellous
beyond anything ever heard before, and I call God and
his Angels and His Prophets to witness that all that I tell
of his extraordinary generosity is absolute truth. I know
that some of the instances I shall relate will be unaccept-
able to the minds of many, and that they will regard
them as quite impossible, but in a matter which I
have seen with my own eyes and of which I know
the accuracy and have had a large share, I cannot do
otherwise than speak the truth.

The sultan’s palace at Delhi is called Sara^
and contains many doors. At the fir^ door there are
a number of guardians, and beside it trumpeters and
flute-players. When any amfr or person of note arrives
they sound their instruments and say “ So-and-so has
come, so-and-so has come.” The same takes place also at
the second and third doors. Outside the fir^l door are
platforms on which the executioners sit, for the custom
197



SELECTIONS FROM THE

among^ them is that when the sultan orders a man
to be executed, the sentence is carried out at the door
of the audience hall, and the body lies there over
three nights. Between the fir^ and second doors
there is a large vestibule with platforms along both
sides, on which sit those whose turn of duty it is to-
guard the doors. Between the second and third
doors there is a large platform on which the principal
naqib [keeper of the regi^er] sits; in front of him
there is a gold mace, which he holds in his hand,
and on his head he wears a jewelled tiara of gold,
surmounted by peacock feathers. The second door
leads to an extensive audience hall in which the people
sit. At the third door there are platforms occupied
by the scribes of the door. One of their cu^oms is
that none may pass through this door except those
whom the sultan has prescribed, and for each person
he prescribes a number of his ^aff to enter along with
him. Whenever any person comes to this door the
scribes write down “ So-and-so came at the fir^t hour ”
or the second, and so on, and the sultan receives a
report of this after the evening prayer. Another of
their cu^oms is that anyone who absents himself
from the palace for three days or more, with or with-
out excuse, may not enter this door thereafter except
by the sultan’s permission. If he has an excuse of
illness or otherwise he presents the sultan with a gift
suitable to his rank. The third door opens into an
immense audience hall called Hazdr UUun^ which
means “ A thousand pillars.” The pillars are of wood
and support a wooden roof, admirably carved. The
people sit under this, and it is in this hall that the
sultan holds public audiences.

As a rule his audiences are held in the afternoon,
though he often holds them early in the day. He
sits cross-legged on a throne placed on a dais carpeted
in white, with a large cushion behind him and two

198



TRAVELS OF IIlN BATTOTA

others as arm-rcRs on hts right and left. When he
takes his scat, the wazfr Rands in front of him, the
secretaries behind the waxir, then the chamberlains
and so on in order of precedence. As the sultan sits
down the chamberlains and naqlbs sav in their loudcR
voice BhtrMhh, At the sultan's head Rands the
“ great king ” Qib\i!a witli a fly-whisk in his hand
to drive ott the flics. A hundred armour-bearers
Rand on the right and a like number on the left,
carrying shields, sw'ords, and bc^ws. The other
funRionarics and notables sland along the hall to right
and left. Then they bring in sixty horses with the
royal harness, half of which are ranged on the right
and half on the left, where the sultan can see them.
Next fifty elephants arc brought in, which .ire adorned
with silken cloths, and have their tusks shod with iron
for greater cihcac^’ in killing criminals. On the neck
of each elephant is its mahout, who carries a sort of
iron axe with which he punishes it and dircRs it to
do what is required of it. Each elephant has on its
back a sort of large chcR capable of holding twenty
w'arriors or more or less, according to the size of the
bcaR. These elephants arc trained to make obeisance
to the sultan and incline their heads, and when they
do so the chamberlains cry in a loud voice BismilUh.
They also arc arranged half on the right and half on
the left behind the persons Randing. As each person
enters who has an appointed place of Randing on the
right or left, he makes obeisance on reaching the
Ration of the chamberlains, and the chamberlains say
BiimitUhy regulating the loudness of their utterance
by the rank of the person concerned, who then retires
to his appointed place, beyond which he never passes.
If it is one of the inildcl Hindus who makes obeisance,
the chamberlains say to him God guide thee.”

If there should be anyone at the door who has
come to ofTcr the sultan a gift, the chamberlains enter
199



SELECTIONS FROM THE

the sultan’s presence in order of precedence, make
obeisance in three places, and inform the sultan of
the person at the door. If he commands them to
bring him in, they place the gift in the hands of men
who ^and with it in front of the sultan where he can
see it. He then calls in the donor, who makes
obeisance three times before reaching the sultan and
makes another obeisance at the Nation of the chamber-
lains. The sultan then addresses him in person with
the greatest courtesy and bids him welcome. If he
is a person who is worthy of honour, the sultan takes
him by the hand or embraces him, and asks for some
part of his present. It is then placed before him,
and if it consi^s in weapons or fabrics he turns it this
way and that with his hand and expresses his approval,
to set the donor at ease and encourage him. He gives
him a robe of honour and assigns him a sum of money
to wash his head, according to their cu^lom in this
case, proportioned to his merits.

When the sultan returns from a journey, the
elephants are decorated, and on sixteen of them are
placed sixteen parasols, some brocaded and some set
with jewels. Wooden pavilions are built several
Tories high and covered with silk cloths, and in each
^lory there are singing girls wearing magnificent
dresses and ornaments, with dancing girls amongst
them. In the centre of each pavilion is a large tank
made of skins and filled with syrup-water, from which
all^ the people, natives or Grangers, may drink, re-
ceiving at the same time betel leaves and areca nuts.
The space between the pavilions is carpeted with silk
cloths, on which the sultan’s horse treads. The walls
of the ^reet along which he passes from the gate of
the city to the gate of the palace are hung with silk
cloths. In front of him march footmen from his
own slaves, several thousands in number, and behind
come the mob and the soldiers. On one of his entries

200



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

into the capital I saw three or four small catapults
placed on elephants throwing gold and silver coins
amongst the people from the moment when he entered
the city until he reached the palace.

I shall now mention a few of his magniheent gifts
and largesses. The merchant Shihdb ad -Din of
Kdzanin, who was a friend of al-Kdzaninfj the “ king ”
of the merchants in India, was invited by the latter
to join him and arrived with a valuable present for
the sultan. On their way they were attacked by a
considerable force of infidds, who killed the “ king ”
of the merchants and carried off as booty his money
and treasures and Shihdb ad-Dln^s present. Shihdb
ad-Dln himself escaped with his life, and the sultan,
on hearing of this, gave orders that he should be given
thirty thousand dinars and return to his own country.
He refused to accept it, however, saying that he had
come for the express purpose of seeing the sultan
and kissing the ground before him. They wrote to
the sultan to this effe^ and he, gratified with what
Shihdb ad-D(n had said, commanded him to be brought
to Delhi with every mark of honour. When Shihdb
ad-Dln was introduced into the sultan’s presence, the
sultan made him a rich present, and some days later
asked where he was. On hearing that he was ill,
he commanded one of his courtiers to go instantly
to the treasury and take a hundred thousand tangahs
of gold (the tangah being worth two and a half
Moroccan dinars) and carry them to him to set him
at ease. He ordered him to buy with this money
what Indian goods he pleased, and gave in^lruflions
that no one else should buy anything at all until
Shihdb ad-Dln had made all his purchases. In addi-
tion he ordered three ships to be made ready for his
journey with complete equipment and full pay and
provisions for the crew. So Shihdb ad-Dln departed
and disembarked in the island of Hormuz, where he
201



SELECTIONS FROM THE

built a great house. I saw this house later on, and I
saw also Shihab ad-Din, having lo^ all that' he had,
soliciting a gift at Shiraz from its sultan, Abu Ishaq.
That is the way with riches amassed in these Indian
lands; it is only rarely that anyone gets out ot the
country with them, and when he does leave it ana
reaches some other country, God sends upon him
some calamity which annihilates all that he possesses.
So it happened to Shihab ad-Din, for everything that
he had was taken from him in the civil war be^een
the king of Hormuz and his nephews, and he left the
country Gripped of all his wealth.

The dodlor Shams ad-Din, who was a philosopher
and a born poet, wrote a laudatory ode to the sultan
in Persian. The ode contained, twenty-seven verses,
and the sultan gave him a thousand silver dinars for •
each verse. This is more than has ever been related
of former kings, for they used to give a thousand
dirhams for each verse, which is only a tenth of the
sultan’s gift. Then too when the sultan heard the
^ory of the learned and pious qadi Majd ad-Din m
Shiraz, whose hiftory we have written in the^ nrft
volume, he sent ten thousand silver dinars to him at
Shiraz. Again, Burhan ad-Din of Sagharj [near
Samarqand] was a preacher and imam so liberal in
spending what he possessed that he used often to
contradl debts in order to give to others. The sultan
heard of him and sent him forty thousand dinars,
with a request that he would come to Delhi. He
accepted the gift and paid his debts with it, but went
off to Cathay and refused to come to the sultan, saying
“ I shall not go to a sultan in whose presence scholars
have to ^and.”

One of the Indian nobles claimed that the sultan
had put his brother to death without cause, and cited
him before the qadi. The sultan walked on foot and
unarmed to the qadi’s tribunal, saluted him and made

202



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

obeisance, having previously commanded the qddi not
to rise before him or move when he entered his court,
and. remained ^landing before him. The qadi gave
judgment againdl the sultan, to the effeft that he mudt
give satisfa^on to his adversary for the blood of his
brother, and he did so. At another time a certain
Muslim claimed that the sultan owed him a sum of
money. They carried the matter before the qddi,
who gave judgment again^ the sultan for the payment
of the debt, and he paid it.

When a famine broke out in India and Sind, and
prices became so high that a maund of wheat rose
to six dinars, the sultan ordered that every person in
Delhi should be given six months’ provisions from
the granary, at the rate of a pound and a half per
person per day, small or great, freeman or slave. The
doctors and qddis set about compiling regidlers of the
population of each quarter and brought the people,
each of whom received six months’ provisions.

In spite of all we have said of his humility, ju^ice,
compassion for the needy, and extraordinary generosity,
the sultan was far too ready to shed blood. He
punished small faults and great, without respect of
persons, whether men of learning, piety, or high
Elation. Every day hundreds of people, chained,
pinioned, and fettered, arc brought to his hall, and
those who are for execution are executed, those for
torture tortured, and those for beating beaten. It is
his cuftom that every day all persons who are in his
prison are brought to the hall, except only on Fridays;
this is a day of respite for them, on which they clean
themselves and remain at ease — may God deliver us
from misfortune 1 The sultan had a half-brother
named Mas'dd Khan, whose mother was the daughter
of Sultan *Ala ad-Dfn, and who was one of the mo^
beautiful men I have ever seen on earth. He suspefted
him of wishing to revolt, and questioned him on the
203



SELECTIONS FROM THE

matter. Mas‘iid confessed through fear of torture,
for anyone who denies an accusation of this sort which
the sultan formulates again^ him is put to the torture,
and the people consider death a lighter afBidlion than
torture. The sultan gave orders that he should be
beheaded in the market place, and his body lay there
for three days according to their custom.

One of the graved charges again^ the sultan is
that of compelling the inhabitants of Delhi to leave
the town. The reason for this was that they used to
write missives reviling and insulting him, seal them
and inscribe them, “ By the hand of the Master of
the World, none but he may read this.” They then
threw them into the audience-hall at night, and when
the sultan broke the seal he found them full of insults
and abuse. He decided to lay Delhi in ruins, and
having bought from all the inhabitants their houses
and dwellings and paid them the price of them, he
commanded them to move to Dawlat Abad.^® They
refused, and his herald was sent to proclaim that no
person should rernain in the city after three nights.
The majority complied with the order, but some of
them hid in the houses. The sultan ordered a search
to be made for any persons remaining in the town,
and his slaves found two men in the Greets, one a
cripple and the other blind. They were brought
before him and he gave orders that the cripple should
be flung from a mangonel and the blind man dragged
from Delhi to Dawlat Abad, a di^ance of forty days’
journey. He fell to pieces on the road and all of him
that reached Dawlat Abdd was his leg. When the
sultan did this, every person left the town, abandoning
furniture and possessions, and the city remained
utterly deserted. A person in whom I have con-
fidence told me that the sultan mounted one night
to the roof of his palace and looked out over Delhi,
where there was neither fire nor smoke nor lamp,

204



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

and said “ Now my mind is tranquil and my wrath
appeased.” Afterwards he wrote to the inhabitants of
the other cities commanding them to move to Delhi
to repopulate it. The residt was only to ruin their
cities and leave Delhi ^ill unpopulated) because of
its immensity, for it is one of the greatest cities in
the world. It was in this ^late that we found it on
our arrival, empty and unpopulated, save for a few
inhabitants.

Let us return now to that which concerns us, and
relate how we arrived firSt at the capital and our for-
tunes until we left his service. We reached Delhi
during the sultan*s absence, and proceeded to the
palace, where, after passing the fir^l, second, and third
doors, the principal naqlb introduced us into a spacious
audience-hall. Here we found the wazfr awaiting us.
On passing through the third door the great hall
called Haz4r USlun^ where the sultan holds his public
audiences, met our eyes. Thereupon the wazlr made
obeisance until his head nearly touched the ground,
and we too made obeisance by inclining the body and
touching the ground with our fingers, in the direction
of the sultan's throne. When we had performed this
ceremony the naqlbs cried in a loud voice Bismiliahy
and we zW retired.

After visiting the palace of the sultan’s mother and
presenting her with a gift, we returned to the house
which had been prepared for our occupation, and
hospitality-gifts were sent to us. In the house I
found everything that was required in the way of
furniture, carpets, mats, vessels, and bed. The beds
in’’India are light, and can be carried by a single man;
every person when travelling has to transport his own
bed, which his slave boy carries on his head. It
consifts of four conical legs with four crosspieces of
wood on which braids of silk or cotton are woven.
When one lies down on it, there is no need for any-
205



SELECTIONS FROM THE

thing to make it pliable, for it is pliable of itself.
Along with the bed they brought two mattresses and
pillows and a coverlet, all made of silk. Their cu^om
is to put linen or cotton slips on the mattresses and
coverlets, so that when they become dirty they wash
the slips, while the bedding inside is kept clean.
Next day we rode to the palace to salute the wazir,
who gave me two purses, each containing a thousand
silver dinars, saying “ This is for washing your head,”
and in addition gave me a robe of fine goathair. A
li^ was made of all my companions, servants, and
slave boys, and they were divided into four categories ;
those in the fir^ category each received two hundred
dinars, in the second a hundred and fifty, the third
a hundred, and the fourth sixty-five. There were
about forty of them, and the total sum given to them
was four thousand odd dinars. After that the sultan’s
hospitality-gift was fixed. This was composed of- a
thousand pounds of Indian flour, a thousand pounds
of flesh-meat, and I cannot say how many pounds of
sugar, ghee, and areca-nuts, with a thousand betel
leaves. The Indian pound equals twenty of our
Moroccan pounds and twenty-five Egyptian pounds.
Later on the sultan commanded some villages to be
assigned to me to the yestrly revenue of five thousand
dinars.

On the 4th of Sha-wwal [8th June 1334] the sultan
returned, to the ca^e of Tilbat, seven miles from
the capital, and the wazir ordered us to go out
to him. We set out, each man with his present of
horses, camels, fruits, swords, etc., and assembled at
the gate of the ca^le. The newcomers were intro-
duced in order of precedence and were given robes
of linen, embroidered in gold. When my turn came
I entered and found the sultan seated on a chair.
At fir^ I took him to be one of the chamberlains.
When I had twice made obeisance the “ king ” of the



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

Sultan’s intimate courtiers said “ BismiUaht Mawldnd
Badr ad^DIn,” for in India they used to call me Badr
ad'DiH) and [** Our MaAcr ”j is a title

given to all scholars. I approached the sultan, who
took my hand and shook it, and continuing to hold
it addressed me moA affably in Persian, saying
“ Your arrival is blessed; be at ease, I shall be com-
passionate to you and give you such favours that your
fellow-countrymen will hear of It and come to join
you.” Then he asked me where 1 came from and I
answered him, and every time he said any encouraging
word to me I kissed his hand, until I had kissed it
sc\’en times. All the new arrivals then assembled and
a meal was served to them.

Aftenv^ards the sultan used to summon us to eat
in his presence and would enquire how we fared and
address us moA affably. He assigned us pensions,
giving me twelve thousand dinars a year, and added
two ^ages to the three he had already commanded
for me. One day he sent the wazlr and the governor
of Sind to us to say, ** The MaAcr of the World says
* Whoever amongA you is capable of undertaking the
funAion of wazlr or secretary or commander or judge
or professor or shaykh, I shall appoint to that office.’ ”
Everyone was silent at firA, tor what they were
wanting was to gain riches and return to their coun-
tries. After some of the others had spoken the wazlr
said to me jn Arabic “ What do you say ?” I replied
“ Wazlrships and secretaryships are not my business,
but as to qddls and shaykhs, that is my occupation,
and the occupation of my fathers before me.” The
sultan was pleased with what I had said, and I was
summoned to the palace to do homage on appoint-
ment as qddl of the Mdlikite rite at Delhi.

It happens often that there is a long delay in the
payment of the money gifts of 'the sultan (though they
arc always paid in the end) and I waited six months
207



SELECTIONS FROM THE

before receiving the twelve thousand dinars promised
to me. They have a cuilom also of deducing a
tenth from all sums given by the sultan. Now, as
I have related, I had borrowed from the merchants
for the expenses of my journey and my present to the
sultan, as well as for my residence at Delhi. When
they prepared to return to their country, they impor-
tuned me to pay my debts, so I wrote a long poem
in praise of the sultan and presented it to him. He
received it with pleasure, and I was congratulated by
everyone. After waiting for some time I wrote a
petition and transmitted it to the sultan, who ordered
the wazir tor pay my debts. The wazir delayed for
some days, and meanwhile received orders to proceed
to Dawlat Abad. During this time the sultan had
gone out hunting; the wazir set off, and I received
nothing at aU until some time later. When my
creditors were ready to travel I said to them “ When
I go to the palace, claim your debt from me according
to the cu^om in this country,” for I knew that when
the sultan learned of that he would pay them. Their
cu^om is this; the creditor awaits the debtor at the
door of the palace, and when the debtor is on the
point of entering he says to him “ O enemy of the
sultan, by the head of the sultan you shall not enter
until you have paid me.” The debtor may not leave
the place after that until he pays him or obtains a
delay from him. They did this, and the sultan sent
a chamberlain to ask the merchants the amount of
the debt. They replied “ Fifty-five thousand dinars.”
The sultan then sent the chamberlain to say to them
The Ma^er of the World says to you ‘ The money
is in my possession, and I shall give you justice; do
not demand it of him.’ ” He then commanded two
officers to sit in the H^ of the Thousand Columns
to examine and verify the creditors’ documents. They
found them in order and informed the sultan, who

208



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

laughed and said “ I know he is a qddi and has seen
to his business with them.” He then commanded
the treasurer to pay the sum, but the treasurer greedily
demanded a bribe for doing so and would not write
the order. I sent him two hundred tangahs, but he
returned them. One of his servants told me from
him that he wanted five hundred tangahs and I refused
to,pa^ it. The matter came to the cars of the sultan,
who in great displeasure ordered payment to be sus-
pended until the treasurer's condua was inveftigated.

Later on, when the sultan went out to hunt, I went
out along with him at once, as I had already prepared
all that is required according to the habits of the
Indians, and had hired bearers, grooms, valets, and
runners. One day when the sultan was in his tent
he enquired who were outside. Ndsir ad-DIn, one
of his courtiers, said “ So-and-so, the Moroccan, who
is very upset” Why so ?” asked the sultan, and
he replied ” Because of his debt, since his creditors
arc pressing for payment. The Maflcr of the World
had commanded the wazfr to pay it, but he left before
doing so. Would not the Mailer of the World order
the creditors to wait until the wazfr returns or else
give orders for their claims to be met ?” The “ king ”
Dawlat-Shdh, who was present, said “ O Mailer of
the World, every day this man talks to us in Arabic,
and I do not know what he is saying. 'Do you know,
Ndsir ad-Dfn ?” He said this so that Ndsir ad-Din
might repeat what he had said. Ndsir ad-Dfn answered
“ He talks about the debt which he has contradVed.”
The sultan said “ When we return to the capital, go
yourself to the treasury and give him this money.”
The treasurer was present and said “ O Mafler of
the World, he is very extravagant. I have seen him
before in our own land, at the court of Sultan
Tarmashfrin." After this the sultan invited me to
his meal, I being in total ignorance of what had taken
209 p



SELECTIONS FROM THE

place. As I went out Nasir ad-Dm said “ Thank
the king Dawlat-Shah,” and Dawlat-Shah said to me
“ Thank the treasurer.” The day after our return, I
went to the palace, and presented to the sultan two
camels with richly embroidered saddles and harness,
along with eleven plates of sweetmeats. He ordered
the sweetmeats to be taken into his private apartments
and on retiring to them sent for me. After we had
eaten he asked me the names of the sweetmeats which
he had particularly enjoyed, and thereafter we took
betel and withdrew. A few moments later the
treasurer came to me and said “ Send your friends
to receive the money,” so I sent them, and on return-
ing to my house after the sunset prayer found the
money there in three sacks, containing the fifty-five
thousand dinars which was the amount of my debt,
together with the twelve thousand which the sultan
had previously commanded to be paid to me, less
one-tenth according to their cu^om.

On the 9th of fir^ Jumada [21^ Oftober 1341]}
the sultan left Delhi for Maoar [Coromandel] to
fight with a rebel in that diftridt. I was all prepared
to accompany him, but was commanded with some
others to remain in. Delhi, and the chamberlain took
written acknowledgments of the order from us as
a proof that we had received it. The sultan also
commanded that I should take charge of the mauso-
leum of Sultan Qutb ad-Di'n. He then sent for
us to bid us farewell, and asked me if I had any
reque^s. I took out a piece of paper with six peti-
tions, but he said to me Speak with your tongue.”
Amongdl other things I said “ What shall I do about
the mausoleum of Sultan Qutb ad-Din ? I have
given appointments in connexion with it to four
hundred and sixty persons, and the income from its
endowment does not cover their salaries and food.”
He said to the wazir “ Fifty thousand ” and then

210



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

added ** You have an anticipatory crop.” This
means “ Give him a hundred thousand maunds of
wheat and rice to be expended during this year, until
the crops produced by the endowments come in.”
I asked also that my house might be repaired. When
I had been granted my requests, he said “There is
another recommendation, and that is that you incur
no debts and so avoid being pressed for payment, for
you will not find anyone to bring me news of them.
Kegulate your expenses according to what I have
given you, as God has said [in the Koran] Keep not
thy hand bound to thy neck^ neither open it to JuUeSl extent
and again Eat and drinky and be not prodigal^ I
desired to kiss his foot, but he prevented me and
held back my head with his hand, so I kissed that
and retired.

I returned to the capital and busied myself with
repairing my house; on this I spent four thousand
dinars, of which I received from the treasury six
hundred and paid the reit myself, I also built a
mosque opposite my house, and occupied myself
with the dispositions for the mausoleum of Sultan
Qutb ad'Din. The sultan had fixed the daily issue
of food there at twelve maunds of flour and a like
quantity of meat. I saw that this amount was too
small, and that the produce which the sultan had
put at my disposal was plcntifiJ, and consequently
I dispensed every day thirty-five maunds of flour and
thirty-five of meat, together with proportionate quan-
tities of sugar, candy, ghee and betel, not only to the
salaried employees but also to visitors and travellers.
The famine at that time was severe, but the popula-
tion were relieved by this food, and the news of it
spread far and wide. The “ King ” Sabfh, having
gone to join the sultan at Dawlat Abdd, was asked by
him for news of the doings of the people [in Delhi]
and answered “ If there were in Delhi two such men

2II



SELECTIONS FROM THE

as so-and-so there would be no complaints of famine.”
The sultan was pleased at this and sent me a robe
of honour from his own wardrobe.

On setting out for Ma‘bar [Coromandel] an epi-
demic broke out in the sultan’s army, so he returned
and built a camp near the river Ganges. I left Delhi
and joined him there, and remained with him through
the campaign against the rebel governor of Oudh. He
gave me some thoroughbred horses when di^ributing
them to his courtiers and included me in the number
of the latter. I was present with him at the battle
and capture of the rebel, and returned with him to
Delhi. Afterwards I fell into disfavour with him
because I 'had visited the shaykh Shihab ad-Dm in
his cave outside Delhi.^® He had thoughts of punish-
ing me and gave orders that four of his slaves should
remain con^antly beside me in the audience-hall.
When this a6tion is taken with anyone, it rarely happens
that he escapes. I fa^ed five days on end, reading
the Koran from cover to cover each day, and taking
nothing but water. After five days I broke my fa^
and then continued to fa^ for another four days on
end, and was set free after the shaykh’s death, praise
be to God.

Some time later I withdrew from the sultan’s service
and attached myself to the learned and pious imam
Kamal ad-Din “ The Cave Man,” as I have already
related. The sultan was in Sind at the time, and at
hearing of my retreat from the world summoned me.
I entered his presence dressed as a mendicant, and
he spoke to me very kindly, desiring me to return to
his service. I refused and asked him for permission
to travel to Mecca, which he granted. This was at
the end of second Jumada 742 [early December 1341].

Forty days later the sultan sent me saddled horses,
slave girls and boys, robes and a sum of money, so
1 put on the robes and went to him. I had a tunic

212



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

of blue cotton which I wore during my retreat, and
as I put it off and dressed in the sultan’s robes I
upbraided myself. Ever after when I looked at that
tunic I felt a light within me, and it remained in my
possession until the infidels despoiled me of it on the
sea. When I presented myself before the sultan,
he showed me greater favour than before, and said to
me I have sent for you to go as my ambassador
to the king of China, for I know your love of travel.”
He then provided me with everything I required and
appointed certain other persons to accompany me, as
I shall relate presently.


ai3



CHAPTER VII


The king of China had sent valuable gifts to the
sultan, including a hundred slaves of both sexes, five
hundred pieces of velvet and silk cloth, musk, jewelled
garments and weapons, with a request that the sultan
would permit him to rebuild the idol-temple which
is near the mountains called Qarajil [Himalaya]. It
is in a place known as Samhal, to which the Chinese
go on pilgrimage; the Muslim army in India had
captured it, laid it in ruins and sacked it.^ The
sultan, on receiving this gift, wrote to the king saying
that the reque^ could not be granted by Islamic law,
as permission to build a temple in the territories of
the Muslims was granted only to those who paid a
poll-tax; to which he added “ If thou wilt pay the
ji%ya we shall empower thee to build it. And peace
be on those who follow the True Guidance.” He
requited his present with an even richer one — a
hundred thoroughbred horses, a hundred white slaves,
a hundred Hindu dancing- and singing-girls, twelve
hundred pieces of various kinds of cloth, gold and
silver candelabra and basins, brocade robes, caps,
quivers, swords, gloves embroidered with pearls, and
fifteen eunuchs. As my fellow-ambassadors the
sultan appointed the amir Zahir ad-Di'n of Zanjan,
one of the moft eminent men of learning, and the
eunuch Kafdr, the cup-bearer, into whose keeping
the pt-esent was entru^ed. He sent the amir
Muhammad of Herat with a thousand horsemen to
escort us to the port of embarkation, and we were
accompanied by the Chinese ambassadors, fifteen in

214



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

number, along v^ith their servants, about a hundred
men in all.

We set out therefore in imposing force and formed
a large camp. Ihe sultan gave inArudions that we
v.crc to be supplied with provisions while we were
travelling through his dominions. Our journey bc|;an
on the 17th ot Safar 743 [llnd Julv 1342]. lhat
was the day sclcflcd ^causc they choose either the
2nd, 7th, 12th, t7th, 22nd, or 27th of the month
as the day for setting out. On the first day's journey
we halted at the |x>U-Aation of Tilbat, seven miles
from Delhi, and travelled thence through Bajdna, a
large and well-built town with a magnificent mosque,
to Kul [KocI, Aligarh], where we encamped in a wide
plain outside the town.

On reaching KocI we heard that certain Hindu
inlidcls had invcRcd and surrounded the town of
al-JaliU.* Now this town lies at a diRance of seven
miles from KocI, so we made in that dirc£lion. Mean-
while the inlidcls were engaged m batdc with its
inhabitants and the latter were on the verge of dcflruc-
tion. The infidels knew nothing of our approach
until we charged down upon them, though the)
numbered about a thousand cavalry and three thousand
foot, and we killed them to the laA man and took
possession of their horses and their weapons. Of our
party twent) -three horsemen and fifty-five foot-soldiers
suffered inartjrdom, amongA them the eunuch Kdfur,
the cup-bearer, into whose hands the present had been
entrusted. We informed the sultan by letter of his
death and halted to await his reply. During that
time the infidels used to swoop down from an inacces-
sible hill which IS in those parts and raid the environs
of al-Jaldlf, and our party used to ride out every day
with the commander of that didlridl to assi^ him in
driving them off.

On one of these occasions I rode out with several

215



SELECTIONS FROM THE

of my friends and we went into a garden to take our
sie^a, for this was in the hot season. Then we heard
some shouting, so we mounted our horses and over-
took some infidels who had attacked one of the villages
of al-Jalali. When we pursued them they broke up
into small parties; our troop in following them did
the same, and I was isolated with five others. At
this point we were attacked by a body of cavalry and
foot-soldiers from a thicket thereabouts, and we fled
from them because of their numbers. About ten of
them pursued me, but afterwards all but three of them
gave up the chase. There was no road at aU before
me and the ground there was very ftony. My horse’s
forefeet got caught between the ^ones, so I dis-
mounted, freed its foot and mounted again. It is
cu^omary for a man in India to carry two swords,
one, called the ^irrup-sword, attached to the saddle,
and the other in his quiver. My ifirrup-sword fell
out of its scabbard, and as its ornaments were of gold
I dismounted, picked it up, slung it on me and mounted,
my pursuers chasing me all the while. After this I
came to a deep nullah, so I dismounted and climbed
down to the bottom of it, and that was the la^ I saw
of them.

I came out of this into a valley amidst -a patch of
tangled wood, traversed by a road, so I walked along
it, not knowing where it led to. At this jundhire
about forty of the infidels, carrying bows in their
hands, came out upon me and surrounded me. I was
afraid that they would all shoot at me at once if I
fled from them, and I was wearing no armour, so I
threw myself to the ground and surrendered, as they
do not kill those who do that. They seized me and
Gripped me of everything that I was carrying except
a tunic, shirt and trousers, then they took me into
that patch of jungle, and finally brought me to the part
of it where they stayed, near a tank of water situated

2i6



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

among^l those trees. They gave me bread made of
peas, and I ate some of it and drank some water. In
their company there were two Muslims who spoke
to me in Persian, and asked me all about myself. I
told them part of my ^lory, but concealed the faft
that I had come from the Sultan, Then they said to
me: “ You are sure to be put to death either by these
men or by others, but this man here (pointing to one
of them) is their leader.” So I spoke to him, using
the two Muslims as interpreters, and tried to con-
ciliate him. He gave me in charge of three of the
band, one of them an old man, with whom was his
son, and the third an evil black fellow. These three
spoke to me and I undei^ood from them that they
had received orders to kill me. In the evening of
the same day they carried me off to a cave, but God
sent an ague upon the black, so he put his feet upon
me, and the old mah and his son went to sleep. In
the morning they talked among themselves and made
signs to me to accompany them down to the tank.
I realized that they were going to kill me, so I spoke
to the old man and tried to gain his favour, and he
took pity on me. I cut off the sleeves of my shirt
and gave them to him so that the other members of
the band should not blame him on my account if I
escaped.

About noon we heard voices near the tank and they
thought that it was their comrades, so they made
signs to me to go down with them, but when we went
down we found some other people. The newcomers
advised my guards to accompany them but they refused,
and the three of them sat down in front of me, keeping
me facing them, and laid on the ground a hempen
rope which they had with them. I was watching them
all the time and saying to myself: “ It is with this
rope that they will bind me when they kill me.” I
remained thus for a time, then three of their party,
217



SELECTIONS FROM THE

the party that had captured me, came up and spoke
to them and I underwood that they said to them:
“ Why have you not killed him ?” The old man
pointed to the black, as though he were excusing
himself on the ground of his illness. One of these
three was a pleasant-looking youth, and he said to
me : “ Do you wish me to set you at liberty ?” I said
“ Yes,” and he answered “ Go.” So I took the tunic
which I was wearing and gave it to him and he gave
me a worn double-woven cloak which he had, and
showed me the way. I went off but I was afraid le^
they should change their minds and overtake me, so
I went into a reed thicket and hid there till sunset.

'Then I made my way out and followed the road
which the youth had shewn me. This led to a ^ream
from which I drank. I went on till near midnight
and came to a hill under which I slept. In the
morning I continued along the 'road, and sometime
before noon reached a high rocky hill on which there
were sweet lote-trees and zizyphus bushes. I Parted
to pull and eat the lotus berries so eagerly that the
thorns left scars on my arms that remain there to this
day. Coming down from that hill I entered a plain
sown with cotton and containing: ca^or-oil trees.
Here there was a hd'in^ which in their language means
a very broad well with a ^one casing and ^eps by
which you go down to reach the water. Some of
them have ^hone pavilions, arcades, and seats in the
centre and on the sides, and the kings and nobles of
the country vie with one another in con^rudling them
dong the highroads where there is no water. When
I reached the bdi^in I drank some water from it and I
found on it some mudiard shoots which had been
dropped by their owner when he washed them. Some
of these I ate and saved up the red:, then I lay down
under a cador-oil tree. While I was there about
forty mailed horsemen came to the bdHn to get water

218



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

and some of them entered, the sown fields, then they
went away, and God sealed their eyes that they did
not see me. After them came about fifty others
carrying arms and they too went down into the bd'in.
One of them came up to a tree opposite the one I
was under, yet he did not discover me. At this point
I made my way into the field of cotton and flayed
there the re^l of the day, while they flayed at the
ba'in washing their clothes and whiling away the
time. At night time their voices died away, so I
knew that they had either passed on or fallen asleep.
Thereupon I emerged and followed the track of the
horses, for it was a moonlit night, continuing till I
came to another bd^in with a dome over it. I went
down to it, drank some water, ate some of the mu^rd
shoots which I had, and went into the dome. I
found it full of grasses collefted by birds, so I went
to sleep in it. Now and again I felt the movement
of an animal amongft the grass; 1 suppose it was
a shake, but I was too worn out to pay any attention
to it.

The next morning I went along a broad road,
which led to a ruined village. Then I took another
road, but with the same result as before. Several
days passed in this manner. One day I came to
some tangled trees with a tank of water between them.
The space under these trees was like a room, and at
the sides of the tank were plants like dittany and
others. I intended to ^lop there until God should
send someone to bring me to inhabited country, but
I recovered a little ^rength, so I arose and wdked
along a road on which I found the tracks of cattle.
I found a bull carrying a packsaddle and a sickle,
but after all this road led to the villages of the infidels.
Then I followed up another road, and this brought
me to a ruined village. There I saw two naked
blacks, and in fear of them I remained under some
219



SELECTIONS FROM THE

trees there. At nightfall I entered the village and
found a house in one of whose rooms there was some-
thing like a large jar of the sort they make to ^ore
grain in. At the bottom of it there was a hole large
enough to admit a man, so I crept info it and found
inside it a layer of chopped ^traw, and among^ this
a ^one on which I laid my head and went to sleep.
On the top of the jar there was a bird which kept
fluttering its wings mo^ of the night — I suppose it
was frightened, so we made a pair of frightened
creatures. This went on for seven days from the
day on which I was taken prisoner, which was a
Saturday. On the seventh day I came to a village
of the unbelievers which was inhabited and possessed
a tank of water and plots of vegetables. I asked them
for some food but they refused to give me any. How-
ever, in the neighbourhood of a well I found some
radish leaves and ate them. I went into the village,
and found a troop of infidels with sentries polled.
The sentries challenged me but I did not answer them
and sat down on the ground. One of them came over
with a drawn sword and raised' it to ^rike me, but
I paid no attention to him, so utterly weary did I feel.
Then he searched me but found nothing on me, so
he took the shirt whose sleeves I had given to the
old man who had had charge of me.

On the eighth day I was consumed with thir^ and
I had no water at all; I came to a ruined village but
found no tank in it. They have a cu^om in those
villages of making tanks in which the rain-water
colledls, and this supplies them with drinking water
aU the year round. Then I went along a road and
this brought me to an uncased well over which was
a rope of vegetable fibre, but there was no vessel on
it to draw water with. I took a piece of cloth which
I had on my head and tied it to the rope and sucked
the water that soaked into it, but that did not slake

220



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

my thiril. I tied on my shoe next and drew up water
in it, but that did not satisfy me either, so I drew
water with it a second time, but the rope broke and
the shoe fell back into the well. I then tied on the
other shoe and drank until my thit^ was assuaged.
After that I cut the shoe and tied its uppers on my
foot with the rope off the well and bits or cloth which
I found there. While I was tying this on and wonder-
ing what to do, a person appeared before me. I
looked at him, and lol it was a black-skinned man,
carrying a jug and a ^aff in his hand, and a wallet on
his shoulder. He gave me the Muslim greeting
“ Peace be upon you ** and I replied “ Upon you be
pcrcc and the mercy and blessings of God.” Then
ne asked me in Persian who I was, and I answered
“ A man ailray,” and he said: ” So am I.” Thereupon
he tied his jug to a rope which he had with him and
drew up some water. I wished to drink but he
saying “Have patience,” opened his wallet and brought
out a handful of black chick-peas fried with a little
rice. After I had eaten some of this and drunk, he
made his ablutions and prayed two proilrations and I
did the same. Thereupon he asked me my name.
1 answered ^ Muhammad ” and asked him his, to
which he replied “Joyous Heart.” I took this as
a good omen and rejoiced at it. After this he said
to me “ In the name of God accompany me." I said
“ Yes," and walked on with him for a litdc, then I
found my limbs giving way, and as I was unable to
fland up I sat down. He said “ What is the matter
with you ?" I answered “ I was able to walk before
meeting you, but now that I have met you I cannot.”
Whereupon he said “ Glory be to God ! Mount on
my shoulders.” I said to him “ You are weak, and
hpc not Arength for tha^” but he replied “ God will
give me Arength. You muA do so." So I got up
on his shoulders and he said to me “ Say God is sufficient
221



SELECTIONS FROM THE

for us and an excellent guardian^ I repeated this over
and over again, but I could not keep my eyes open,
and regained consciousness only on feeling myself
falling to the ground. Then I woke up, but found
no trace of the man, and lo ! I was in an inhabited
village. I entered it and found it was a village of
Hindu peasants with a Muslim governor. They
informed him about me and he came to meet me.
I asked him the name of this village and he replied
“ Taj Bura.” The di^ance from there to Koel,
where our party was, is two farsakhs. The governor
provided a horse to take me to his house ^nd gave-
me hot food, and I washed. Then he said to me;
“ I have here a garment and a turban which were
left in my charge by a certain Arab from Egypt, one
of the soldiers belonging to the corps at Koel.” I
said to him “ Bring them ; I shall wear them until I
reach camp.” When he brought them I found that
they were two of my own garments which I had given
to that very Arab when we came to Koel. I was
extremely a^onished at this, then I thought of the
man who had carried me on his shoulders and I
remembered what the saint Abu ‘Abdallah al-Murshidi
had told me, as I have related in the fir^ journey,
when he said to me: “ You will enter the land of India
and meet there my brother Dilshad, who will deliver
you from a misfortune which .will befall you there.”

I remembered too how he had said, when I asked
him his name, “ Joyous Heart ” which, translated
into Persian, is Dilshad. So I knew that it was he
whom the saint had foretold that I should meet, and
that he too was one of the saints, but I enjoyed no
more of his company than the short space which I
have related.

The same night I wrote to my friends at Koel to
inform them of my safety, and they came, bringing
me a horse and clothes and rejoiced at my escape.

222



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

I found that the sultan's reply had reached them and
that he had sent a eunuch named Sunbul, the keeper
of the wardrobe, in place of the martyred Kafdr, with
orders to pursue our journey. I found, too, that they
had written to the sultan about me, and that they
regarded the journey as ill-omened on account of
what had happened to me and to Kdfiir, and were
wanting to go back. But when I saw that the sultan
insidled upon the journey, I urged them on with great
determination. They answered: “Do you not see
what has befallen us at the very outset of this mission ^
The sultan will excuse you, so let us return to him,
or dlay here until his reply reaches us.” But I said:
“ We cannot dlay, and wherever we are his reply will
overtake us.”

We left Koel, therefore, and encamped at Burj
Bdra [Burjpur], where there is a fine hermitage in
which lives a beautiful and virtuous shaykh called
Muhammad the Naked, because he wears nothing
but a cloth from his navel to the ground. Thence
we travelled to the river known as [“Black

Water,” Kalindi] and from there reached the city of
Qinawj [Kanauj], It is a large, well-built and dlrongly
fortified city; prices there are cheap and sugar plentiful,
and it is surrounded by a great wall. We spent three
days here and during this time received the sultan’s
reply to the letter about me. It ran thus “ If no
trace is found of so-and-so [i.e. Ibn Battdta], let
Wajih al-Mulk, the qSdf of Dawlat Abad, go in his
place.” We came next to the small town of Mawrl, and
thence reached Marh, a large town, inhabited chiefly
by infidels under Muslim control.® It takes its name
from the Malawa, a tribe of Hindus, of very powerful
build and good-looking; their women especially are
exceedingly beautiful and famous for the charms of
their company. From Math we travelled to ‘Alabdr
[Alapur], a small town inhabited like the former by
223



SELECTIONS FROM THE

infidels under Muslim control. A day’s journey from
there lived an infidel sultan, named Qatam, who was
sultan of Janbil** and was killed after besieging Guya-
lyur [Gwalior]. The governor of ‘Alabiir was the
Abyssinian Badr, a slave of the sultan’s, a man whose
bravery passed into a proverb. He was continually
making raids on the infidels alone and single handed,
killing and taking captive, so that his fame spread
far and wide and the infidels went in fear of him. He
was tall and corpulent, and used to eat a whole sheep
at a meal, and I was told that after eating he would
drink about a pound and a half of ghee, following
the custom of the Abyssinians in their own country.
He had a son nearly as brave as himself. During
a raid on a village belonging to some Hindus Badr’s
horse fell with him into a matamore and the villagers
surrounded him and killed him.

We journeyed thereafter to Galyiar or Guyalyur
[Gwalior], a large town with an impregnable fortress
isolated on the summit of a lofty hill. Over its gate
is an elephant with its mahout carved in ^one. The
governor of this town was a man of upright character,
and he treated me very honourably when I stayed
with him on a previous occasion. One day I came
before him as he was about to have an infidel cut in
two. I said to him “ By God I beseech you, do not
do this, for I have never seen anyone put to death
in my presence.” He ordered the man to be put in
prison so my intervention was the means of his escape.
From Galyiir we went to Parwan, a small town belong-
ing to the Muslims, but situated in the land of the
infidels. There are many tigers there, and one of the
inhabitants told me that a certain tiger used to enter
the town by night, although the gates were shut, and
used to seize people. It killed quite a number of
the townsfolk in this way. They used to wonder how
it made its way in. Here is an amazing thing; a

224



TRAVELS OF I U N BATTOTA

nun toM me that it was not a tiger who did this but
a human being, one of the magicians known as 'Jugis
[Yogis], appearing in the shape of a tiger. When I
heard this 1 refused to believe it, but a number of
people said the same, so let us give at this point some
account of these magicians.

The men of this class do some marvellous things.
One of them will spend months without eating or
drinking, and many of them have holes dug for them
in the earth which arc then built in on top of them,
leaving only a apace for air to enter. Thev Ray in
these for months, and t heard tell of one of them who
remained thus for a year. 'Vhc people sav that they
make up pills, one of which they take lor a given
number ot days or months, and during that lime
they require no food or drink. They can tell what is
happening at a diRance. The sultan holds them in
cReem and admits them to his company. Some cat
nothing but vegetables, and others, the maiority, cat
no meat; it is obvious (hat they have so disciplined
themselves in ascetic praRiccs that they have no need
of any of the goods or vanities of this world. There
are amongR them some who merely look at a man
and he falls dead on the spot. The common people
say that if the breoR of a man killed in this way is
cut open, it is found to contain no heart, and they
assert that his heart has been eaten. This is com*
moncR in the ease of women, and a woman who aRs
thus is called a kjfrJr, During the famine in Delhi
they brought one of these women to me, saying that
she had eaten the heart of a boy. I ordered them to
take her to the sultan's lieutenant, who commanded
that she should be put to the tcR. They filled four
jars with water, tied them to her hands and feet and
threw her into the river Jumna. As she did not
sink she was known to be a htjtdr\ had she not floated
she would not have been one. He ordered her then
225 Q



selections from the

to be burned ashes were collefted

by the men ar’^^ women of the town, for they believe
that anyone fumigates himself with them is safe
again^ a kaft^^ enchantments during that year.

The sultan once when I was at Delhi,

and on entering ^ found him in a private apartment
with some intimates and two of these jugis.

One of them squatted on the ground, then rose into
the air abov® heads, ^ill sitting. I w^s so
a^onished an^ frightened that I feU to the floor in
a faint. A potion was admini^ered to me, and I
revived and ^P* Meantime this man remained
in his sitting po^ure. His companion then took a
sandal from a- with him, and beat it on the

ground like infuriated. The sandal rose in the
air until it caP^^ above the neck of the sitting man and
then began neck while he descended

little by litde sat down alongside us. Then

the sultan sa^<^ ^ *^ot fear for your reason I

would have ordered them to do ^ill Granger things
than this yoP seen.” I took my leave, but was
affefted with palpitation and fell ill, until he ordered
me to be givP^ s. draught which removed it all.

To return °rir subject. We went from Parwan
to Kajarra,® where there is a large tank about a mile
long having on its banks temples with idols, which
have been ipade examples of [i.e. mutilated] by the
Muslims. Thence we journeyed through Chandiri
to the town Dhihar [Dhar],® which is the chief
city of Mal'^^j larged province in that di^ridt.
It is twenty'Tour days’ journey from Delhi, and all
along the rOad between them there are pillars, on
which is eflgraved the number of miles from each
pillar to tho next. When the traveller desires to
know now r^oany miles he has gone that day and how
far it is to hi® hdting place or to the. town he is making
for, he rea4® ^he inscription on the pillars and so

226



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

finds out. From Dhihdr wc travelled to Ujayn
[Ujjain], a fine and populous town, and thence to
Dawlat Abdd, the enormous city which rivals Delhi,
the capital, in importance and in the spaciousness of
its planning. It is divided into three se£Uons; one
is Dawlat Abld proper, and is reserved for the sultan
and his troops, the second is called Kataka, and the
third is the citadel, which is unequalled for its dlrength
and is called Duwaygir fpeogirij.^

At Dawlat Abdd resides the great khdn Qutld
Khdn, the sultan’s tutor, who is governor of the town,
and the sultan’s representative there and in the lands
of Sdghar, Tiling [Tclingana], and their dependent
territories. This province extends for three months’
march, is weU>populatcd, and wholly under his autho-
rity and that or his lieutenants. The fortress of
Duwaygir mentioned above is a rock situated in a
plain; £e rock has been excavated and a caiUe built
on its summit. It is reached by a ladder made of
leather, which is taken up at night. In its dungeons
arc imprisoned those convifled of serious crime, and
in these dungeons there are huge rats, bigger than
cats — in fa£l, cats run away from them and cannot
defend themselves againdl them, so they can be cap^
tured only by employing ruses. I saw them there
and marvelled at them. The inhabitants of Dawlat
Abdd belong to the tribe of Marhata [Marathas],
whose women God has endowed with special beauty,
particularly in their noses and eyebrows. The infidels
of this town arc merchants, dealing principally in
jewels, and their wealth is enormous. In Dawlat
Abdd there is an exceedingly fine and spacious bazaar
for singers and singing-girls, containing numerous
shops, each of which has a door leading to the house
of its proprietor. The shop is beautified with
carpets, ana in the centre of it there is a sort of large
cradle on which the singing-girl sits or reclines. She
227




TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

the ships tlicrc lying on the mud at ebb-tide and floating
on the water at high tide. This city is one of the
fineft there is in regard to the excellence of its con-
^Iruftion and the architecture of its mosques. The
reason is that the majority of its inhabitants are foreign
merchants, who arc always building fine mansions and
magnificent mosques and vie with one another in
doing so. We journeyed from this town to Kdwd,®
which is on a tidal bay also, and is in the territories
of the infidel rdja Jdlansf, of whom we shall speak
later. Thence we went to Qandahdr, a large town
belonging to the infidels and situated on a bay.
The sultan of Qandahdr is an infidel called Jdlansl,
who is under Muslim suzerainty and sends a gift
to the king of India every year.*® When we reached
Qandahdr he came out to welcome us and showed us
the greatcA honour, himself leaving his palace and
•installing us in it. The principal Muslims at his
court came to visit us, such as the children of the
Khwdja Bohra. One of these is the shipowner Ibrdhim,
who possesses six vessels of his own.

At Qandahdr we embarked on a ship belonging
to this Ibrdhim, called al~Jdgir, On this ship we put
seventy of the horses of the sultan’s present, and the
redl we put with the horses of our companions on a
ship belonging to Ibrdhlm’s brother, called Manurt.
Jdlansl gave us a vessel on which we put the horses
of Zahlr ad-Dln and Sunbul and their party, and he
equipped it for us with water, provisions and forage.
He sent his son with us on a ship called al^Uqayriy
which resembles a galley, but is rather broader; it
has sixty oars and is covered with a roof during battle
in order to proteCt the rowers from arrows and Clones.
I myself went on board al-Jdgir, which had a com-
plement of fifty rowers and fifty Abyssinian men-at-
arms. These latter are the guarantors of safety on
the Indian Ocean; let there be but one of them on
229



SELECTIONS FROM THE

a ship and it will be avoided by the Indian pirates and
idolaters. Two days later we called at the island of
Bayram,^^ and on the following day reached the town
of Quqa [Gogo, in Kathiawar], a large town with
important bazaars. We anchored four miles from
shore on account of the low tide, but I went on shore
in a small boat with some of my companions. The
sultan of Qdqa is a heathen called Dunqiil, who used
to profess submission to the king of India but was in
reality a rebel. On setting sail from this town we
arrived after three days at the island of Sandabiir
[Goa],^ on which there are thirty-six villages. It is
surrounded by a gulf, the waters of which are sweet and
agreeable at low tide but salt and bitter at high tide.
In the centre of the island are two cities, an ancient
one built by the infidels, and one built by the Muslims
when they fir^ captured the island. We passed by
this island and anchored at a smaller one near the main-
land. Next day we reached the town of Hinawr
[Honavar, Onore], which is on a large inlet navigable
for large ships. During th&pushkdl, which is the rainy
season, this bay is so ^ormy that for four months it
is impossible to sail on it except for fishing. The
women of this town and all the coa^al di^rifts wear
nothing but loose unsewn garments, one end of which
they gird round their wai^s, and drape the re^ over
their head and shoulders. They are beautiful and
virtuous, and each wears a gold ring in her nose.
One peculiarity among^ them is that they all know
the Koran by heart. I saw in the town thirteen
schools for girls and twenty-three for boys, a thing
which I have never seen elsewhere. Its inhabitants
live by maritime commerce, and have no cultivated
land. ^ The ruler of Hinawr is Sultan Jalal ad-Dm,
who^ is one of the be^l and mo^l powerful sultans.
He is under the suzerainty of an infidel sultan named
Haryab, of whom we shall speak later. The people

230



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

of Mulaybdr [Malabar] pay a fixed sum annually to
Sultan Jaldl ad-Dln, through fear of his sea-power.
His army is composed of about six thousand men,
horse and foot. On another occasion I dlayed for
eleven months at his court without ever eating bread,
for their sole food is rice. I lived also in the Maidive
Islands, Ceylon, and on the Coromandel and Malabar
coa^s for three years eating nothing but rice, until I
could not swallow it except by taking water with it.
On this occasion we dlayea with the sultan of Hinawr
for three days; he supplied us with provisions, and we
left him to continue our journey.

Three days later we reached the land of Mulaybdr
[Malabar], which is the pepper country. It extends
for two months* journey along the coail from Sandabdr
[Goa] to Kawlam [Quilon, in Travancore], The road
over the whole di^ance runs beneath the shade of
trees, and at every half-mile there is a wooden shed
with benches on which all travellers, whether Muslims
or infidels, may sit. At each shed there is a well for
drinking and an infidel who is in charge of it. If
the traveller is an infidel he gives him water in vessels;
if he is a Muslim he pours the water into his hands,
continuing to do so until he signs to him to ilop. It
is the cuftom of the infidels in the Mulaybdr lands
that no Muslim may enter their houses or eat from
their vessels; if he does so they break the vessels or
give them to the Muslims, In places where there are
no Muslim inhabitants they give him food on banana
leaves. At all the halting-places on this road there
are houses belonging to Muslims, at which Muslim
travellers alight, and where they buy all that they
need. Were it not for them no Muslim could travel
by it.

On this road, which, as we have said, extends for
a two months* march, there is not a foot of ground
but is cultivated. Every man has his own orchard,
231



SELECTIONS FROM THE

with his house in the middle and a wooden palisade
all round it. The road runs through the orchards,
and when it comes to a palisade there are wooden
^eps to go up by and another flight of ^eps down into
the next orchard. No one travels on a animal in that
country, and only the sultan possesses horses. The
princip^ vehicle of the inhabitants is a palanquin
carried on the shoulders of slaves or hired porters;
those who do not travel on palanquins go on root, be
they who they may. Baggage and merchandise is
transported by hired carriers, and a single merchant
may have a hundred such or thereabouts carrying his
goods. I have never seen a safer road than this, for
they put to death anyone who steals a single nut, and
if any fruit falls no one picks it up but the owner.
Indeed we sometimes met infidels during the night
on this road, and when they saw us they ^ood aside
to let us pass. Muslims are mo^ highly honoured
among^ them, except that, as we have. said, they do
not eat with them nor allow them into their houses. In
the Mulaybar lands there are twelve infidel sultans,
some of them strong with armies numbering fifty
thousand men, and others weak with armies of three
thousand. Yet there is no discord whatever between
them, and the strong does not desire to seize the
possessions of the weak. At the boundary of the
territories of each ruler there is a wooden gateway,
on which is engraved the name of the ruler whose
territories begin at that point. This is called the
“ Gate of Security ” of such-and-such a prince. If
any Muslim or infidel criminal flees from the terri-
tories of one and reaches the Gate of Security of
another, his life is safe, and the prince from whom he
has fled cannot seize him, even though he be a powerful
prince .with a great army. The riders in these lands
transmit their sovereignty to their sixers’ sons, to
the exclusion of their own children. I have seen this

232



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

pra£ticc nowhere else except among the veiled Massufa,
who will be mentioned later.

The firil town in the land of Mul:wbdr that we
entered was the town of Abu-Sanir [Barcclore], a
small place on a large inlet and abounding in coco-
palms. Two days* journey brought us to Fdkaniir
[Bacanor, now Barkur],“ a large town on an inlet;
here there is a large quantity of sugar-canes, which
are unexcelled in the r^ of that country. The chief
of the Muslim community at Fdkanur is called
Bdsadaw. He possesses about thirty warships, com-
manded by a Muslim called Liild, who is an evildoer
and a pirate and a robber of merchants. When we
anchored, the sultan sent his son to us to Aay on board
the ship as a hoRage. We went on shore to visit
him and he treated us with the utmo^ hospitality for
three nights, as a mark of resped^ for the sultan of
India and also from a desire to make some profit by
trading with the personnel of our vessels. It is a
cuRom of theirs that every ship that passes by a town
muR needs anchor at it and give a present to the ruler.
This they call the “ right of bandar'^ If anyone
omits to do this, they sail out in pursuit of him, bring
him into the port by force, double the tax on him,
and prevent him from proceeding on his journey for
as long as they wish. Three days after leaving
Fdkandr wc reached Manjanir [Mangalore], a large
town on the inlet called ad-Dumb, which is the largest
inlet in the land of Mulaybdr, This is the town at
which moil of the merchants from Firs and Yemen
disembark, and pepper and ginger are exceedingly
abundant there. The sultan of Manjarur is one of
the principal rulers in that land, and his name is Rdma
Daw. There is a colony of about four thousand
Muslims there, living in a suburb alongside the town.
Confli<5ls frequently break out between them and the
townspeople, but the sultan makes peace between them

233



SELECTIONS FROM THE

on account of his need of the merchants. We refused
to land until the sultan sent his son, as the previous
sultan had done. When he had done so, we went
on shore and were treated with great consideration.

After laying at Manjariir for three days, we set
sail for the town of Hili,^‘^ which we reached two days
later. It is large and well-built, situated on a big
inlet which is navigable for large vessels. This is the
farthest town reached by ships from China; they enter
only this port, the port of Kawlam, and Calicut. The
town of Hill is venerated by both Muslims and in-
fidels on account of its cathedral mosque, and sea-
farers make many votive offerings to it. This mosque
contains a number of ^udents, who receive ^ipends
from its revenues, and it has a kitchen from which
travellers and the Muslim poor are supplied with
food. Thence we sailed to Jurfattan [Cannanore],
Dahfattan, and Budfattan; the sultan of these towns
is called Kuwayl, and is one of the mo^t powerful
sultans of Mulaybar. At Dahfattan there is a great
hd^hi and a cathedral mosque, which were built by
Kuwayl’s grandfather, who was converted to Islam.
Moft of the inhabitants of Budfattan are Brahmans,
who are venerated by the infidels and who hate the
Muslims; for this reason there are no Muslims living
among^ them. From Budfattan we sailed to Fanda-
rayna [Panderani], a large and fine town with orchards
and bazaars. The Muslims occupy three quarters in
it, each of which has a mosque. It is at this town that
the Chinese vessels pass the winter. Thence we
travelled to the city of Qaliqfit [Calicut], which is
one of the chief ports in Miilaybar and one of the
larged harbours in the world. It is visited by men
from China, Sumatra, Ceylon, the Maldives, Yemen
and Fars, and in it gather merchants from all quarters.^®
The sultan of Caliciit is an infidel, known as “ the
Samari.” He is an aged man and shaves his beard,

234



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

as some of the Greeks do. In this town too lives
the famous shipowner Mithqdl, who possesses
wealth and many ships for his trade with India, China,
Yemen, and Pars. When we reached the city, the
principal inhabitants and merchants and the sultan’s
representative came out to welcome us, with drums,
trumpets, bugles and ^landards on their ships. We
entered the harbour in great pomp, the like of which
I have never seen in those lands, but it was a joy to
be followed by distress. We flopped in the port of
Cdlicdt, in which there were at the time thirteen
Chinese vessels, and disembarked. Every one of us
was lodged in a house and we ^ayed there three months
as the gucAs of the infidel, awaiting the season of the
voyage to China. On the Sea of China travelling is
done in Chinese ships only, so we shall describe their
arrangements.

The Chinese vessels arc of three kinds; large ships
called chunks^ middle-sized ones called zaws phows],
and small ones called The large ships have

anything from twelve down to three sails, which are
made of bamboo rods plaited like mats. They are
never lowered, but turned according to the direction
of the wind; at anchor they are left floating in the
wind. A ship carries a complement of a thousand
men, six hundred of whom arc sailors and four hundred
men-at-arms, including archers, men with shields and
arballAs, who throw naphtha. Each large vessel is
accompanied by three smaller ones, the “ half,” the
“ thircl,” and the “ quarter.”*^ These vessels are
built only in the towns of Zaytdn and Sin-Kaldn
[Canton]. The vessel has four decks and contains
rooms, cabins, and saloons for merchants; a cabin
has chambers and a lavatory, and can be locked by
its occupant, who takes along with him slave girls
and wives. Often a man will Jive in his cabin unknown
to any of the others on board until they meet on

ns



SELECTIONS FROM THE

reaching some town. The sailors have their children
living on board ship, and they cultivate green ^ufFs,
vegetables and ginger in wooden tanks. The owner’s
fadtor on board ship is like a great amir. When he
goes on shore he is preceded by archers and Abys-
sinians with javelins, swords, drums, trumpets and
bugles. On reaching the house where he ^ays they
^and their lances on both sides of the door, and
continue thus during his ^ay. Some of the Chinese
own large numbers of ships on which their fa6tors
are sent to foreign countries. There is no people in
the world wealthier than the Chinese.

When the time came for the voyage to China, the
sultan Samari equipped for us one of the thirteen
junks in the port of Caliciit. The fadlor on the junk
was called Sulayman of Safad, in Syria [Pale^ine].
I had previously made his acquaintance, and I said to
him “ I want a cabin to myself because of the slave-
girls, for it is my habit never to travel without them.”
He replied “ The merchailts from China have taken
the cabins for the forward and return journey. My
son-in-law has a cabin which I can give you, but it
has no lavatory; perhaps you may be able to exchange
it for another.” So I told my companions to take on
board all my effefts, and the male and female slaves
embarked on the junk. This was on a Thursday,
and I flayed on shore in order to attend the Friday
prayers and join them afterwards. The king Sunbul
and Zahir ad-Di'n also went on board with the present.
On the Friday morning a slave boy of mine named
Hilal came to me and said that the cabin we had taken
on the junk was small and unsuitable. When I
spoke of this to the captain he said “ It cannot be
helped, but if you like to transfer to the kakam there
are cabins on it at your choice.” I agreed to this
and gave orders accordingly to my companions, who
transferred the slave girls and effedts to the kakam

236



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

and were cAablishcd in it before the hour of the
Friday prayer. Now it is usual for this sea to become
Aormy ever)* day in the late aftcrnoon> and no one
can embark then. The junks had already set sail,
and none of them were left but the one which con*
tained the present, another junk whose owner had
decided to pass the winter at Fandaraynd, and the
kakam referred to. We spent the Friday night on
shore, we unable to embark on it, and those on board
unable to disembark and join us. I had nothing left
with me but a carpet to sleep on. On the Saturday
morning the junk and kakam were both at a diAance
from the port, and the junk which was to have made
for Fandarayni was driven ashore and broken in
pieces. Some of those who were on board were
drowned and some escaped. That night the same
fate met the junk which carried the sultan's present,
and all on board were drowned. Next morning we
found the bodies of Sunbul and Zihlr ad-Din, and
having prayed over them buried them. I saw the
inlidcl, the sultan of Cdlicdt, wearing a large white
cloth round his wai^l and a small turban, bare-footed,
with the parasol carried by a slave over his head and
a fire lit in front of him on the beach; his police officers
were beating the people to prevent them from plunder-
ing what the sea cail up. In all the lands of Mulaybdr,
except in this one land alone, it is the cuSiom that when-
ever a ship is wrecked all that is taken from it belongs
to the treasury. At Cdlicfit however it is retained
by its owners and for that reason Cdlicut has become
a flourishing city and attrafts large numbers of mer-
chants. When those on the kakam saw what had
h^pened to the junk they spread their sails and went
off, with all my goods and slave-boys and slave-girls
on board, leaving me alone on the beach with but
one slave whom I had enfranchised. When he saw
what had befallen me he deserted me, and I had

237



SELECTIONS FROM THE

nothing left with me at all except ten dinars and the
carpet I had slept on.

As I was told that the kakam would have to put
in at Kawlam, I decided to travel thither, it being a
ten days’ journey either by land or by the river, if
anyone prefers that route. I set out therefore by the
river, and hired one of the Muslims to carry the carpet
for me. Their custom is to disembark in the evening
and pass the night in the village on its banks, returning
to the boat in the morning. We did this too. There
was no Muslim on the boat except the man I had
hired, and he used to drink wine with the infidels
when we went ashore and annoy me with his brawling,
which made things all the worse for me. On the fifth
day of our journey we came to Kunja-Kari which is
on the top of a hill there; it is inhabited by Jews, who
have one of their own number as their governor, and
pay a polltax to the sultan of Kawlam. All the trees
along this river are cinnamon and brazil trees. They
use them for firewood in those parts and we used to
light fires with them to cook our food on this journey.
On the tenth day we reached the city of Kawlam
[Quilon], one of the fine^ towns in the Mulaybar
lands. It has fine bazaars, and its merchants are
called SfiKs. They are immensely wealthy; a single
merchant will buy a vessel with dl that is in it and
load it with goods from his own house. There is a
colony of Muslim merchants; the cathedral mosque is
a magnificent building, con^rufted by the merchant
Khwaja Muhazzab. This city is the neared of the
Mulaybar towns to China and it is to it that mo^
of the merchants [from China] come. Muslims are
honoured and respedled in it. The sultan of Kawlam
is an infidel called the Tirawari; he respedls the
Muslims and has severe laws again^ thieves and
profligates. I stayed some time at Kawlam in a
hospice, but heard no news of the kakam. During my

238



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

^lay the ambassadors from the king of China who had
been with us arrived there also. They had embarked on
one of the junks which was wrecked like the others.
The Chinese merchants provided them with clothes and
they returned to China, where I met them again later.

I intended at fir^i to return from Kawlam to the
sultan to tell him what had happened to the present,
but afterwards I was afraid that he would Hnd fault
with what I had done and ask me why I had not ^ayed
with the present. I determined therefore to return
to Sultan Jamdl ad'Din of Hinawr and dlay with him
until I should obtain news of the kakam. So I went
back to Cdlicilt and found there a vessel belonging
to the sultan [of India], on which I embarked. It
was then the end of the season for voyaging, and we
used to sail only during the first half of the day, then
anchor until the next day. We met four fighting
vessels on our way and were afraid of them, but after
all they did us no harm. On reaching Hinawr, I
went to the sultan and saluted him; he assigned me
a lodging, but without a servant, and asked me to
recite the prayers with him. I spent moil of my time
in the mosque^® and used to read the Koran through
every day, and later twice a day.

Sultan Jamdl ad-Dfn had fitted out fifty-two vessels
for an expedition to SandabUr [Goa]. A quarrel had
broken out there between the sultan and his son, and
the latter had written to Jamdl ad-Din inviting him
to seize the town and promising to accept Isldm and
marry his daughter. When the ships were made
ready I thought of setting out with them to the Holy
War, so I opened the Koran to take an augury, and
found at the top of the page In them is the name of God
frequently mentioned^ and verily God will aid those who
aid Him. I took this as a good omen, and when
the sultan came for the afternoon prayer I said to
him “ I wish to join the expedition.” “ In that case ”

239



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

he replied “ you will be their commander.” I related
to him the incident of my augury from the Koran,
which so delighted him that he resolved to join the
expedition himself, though previously he had not
intended to do so. He embarked on one of the vessels,
I being with him, on a Saturday, and we reached
Sandabdr on the Monday evening. The inhabitants
were prepared for the batde and had set up mangonels,
which they discharged against the vessels when they
advanced in the morning. Those on the ships jumped
into the water, shields and swords in hand, and I
jumped with them, and God granted the vidlory to
the Muslims. We entered the city at the point of
the sword and the greater part of the infidels fled into
their sultan’s palace, but when we threw fire into it
they came out and we seized them. The sultan
thereafter set them free and returned their wives and
children to them. They numbered about ten thousand,
and he assigned to them one of the suburbs
of the city and himself occupied the palace, giving
the neighbouring houses to his courtiers.

When I had llayed with him at Sandabiir for three
months after the conque^ of the town, I asked him
for permission to travel and he made me promise to
return to him. So I sailed to Hinawr and thence by
Manjarfir and the other towns as before to Calicut.

I went on from there to ash-Shaliyat, a mo^t beautiful
town, in which the fabrics called by its name are
manufadhired.^ After a long ^ay in this town I
returned to Calicfit. Two slaves of mine who had
been on the kakam arrived at Caliciit and told me
that the ruler of Sumatra had taken my slave-girls,
rhat my goods had been seized by various hands, and
that my companions were scattered to China, Sumatra
and Bengal. On hearing this I returned to Hinawr
and Sandabur, reaching it after an absence of five
months, and ^ayed there two months,

240



CHAPTER VUI

The infidel sultan of Sandab^r, from whom we had
captured the town, now advanced to recapture it. All
the infidels fled to join him, and our troops who were
quartered in the [outlying] villages, abandoned us.
We were besieged by the infidels and reduced to great
traits. When the situation became serious, I left
the town during the siege and returned to Cdlicut,
where I decided to travel to Dhibat al-Mahal [Maidive
islands], about which I had heard a number of tales.
Ten days after embarking at Cilicdt we reached these
islands, which are one of the wonders of the world
and number about two thousand in all.^ Each
hundred or less of them form a circular clu^er resem-
bling a ring, this ring having one entrance like a
gateway, and only through this entrance can ships
reach the islands. When a vessel arrives at any one
of them it mu^l needs take one of the inhabitants to
pilot it to the other Islands. They are so close-set
that on leaving one island the tops of the palms on
another are visible. If a ship loses its course it is
unable to enter and is carried by the wind to the
Coromandel coa^l or Ceylon.

^ The inhabitants of the Maldives are all Muslims,
pious and uprig t. The islands are divided into
twelve di^lrifls, each under a governor whom they call
the KarJui. The diilri<5l of Mahal, which has given
its name to the whole archipelago, is the residence of
their sultans. There is no agriculture at all on any
of the islands, except that a cereal resembling millet
is grown in one diftrifl and carried thence to Mahal.

241 R



SELECTIONS FROM THE

The inhabitants live on a fish called qulb-al-mds, which
has red flesh and no grease and smells like mutton.
On catching it they cut it in four, cook it lightly,
then smoke it in palm leaf baskets.^ When it is
quite dry, they eat it. Some of these fish are exported
to India, China, and Yemen. Mo^t of the trees on
those islands are coco-palms, which with the fish
mentioned above provide food for the inhabitants.
The coco-palm is an extraordinary tree ; it bears twelve
bunches a year, one in each month. Some are small,
some large, some dry and some green, never changing.
They make milk, oil, and honey from it, as we have
already related [p. 1 15].

The people of the Maidive Islands are upright and
pious, sound in belief and sincere in thought; their
bodies are weak, they are unused to fighting, and their
armour is prayer. Once when I ordered a thief’s
hand to be cut off, a number of those in the room
fainted. The Indian pirates do not raid or mole^
them, as they have learned from experience that any-
one who seizes anything from them speedily meets
misfortune. In each island of theirs there are beauti-
ful mosques, and mo^ of their buildings are made of
wood. They are very cleanly and avoid filth; mo^
of them bathe twice a day to cleanse themselves,
because of the extreme heat there and their profuse
perspiration. They make plentiful use of perfumed
oils, such as oil of sandal-wood. Their garments are
simply aprons; one they tie round their waists in place
of trousers, and on their backs they place other cloths
resembling the pilgrim garments. Some wear a
turban, others a small kerchief in^ead. When any
of them meets the qadi or preacher, he removes his
cloth from his shoulders, uncovering his back, and
accompanies him thus to his house. All, high or
low, are bare-footed; their lanes are kept swept and
clean and are shaded by trees, so that to walk in them

242



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

is like walking in an orchard. In spite of that every
person entering a house wash his feet with water
from ajar kept in a chamber in the vestibule, and wipe
them with a rough towel of palm matting which he
finds there. The same praftice is followed on entering
a mosque.

From these islands there are exported the fish we
have mentioned, coconuts, cloths, and cotton turbans,
as well as brass utensils, of which they have a great
many, cowrie shells, and qanbar. This is the hairy
integument of the coconut, which they tan in pits on
the shore, and afterwards beat out with bars; the
women then spin it and it is made into cords for
sewing [the planks of] ships together. These cords
are exported to India, China, and Yemen, and are
better than hemp. The Indian and Yemenite ships
are sewn together with them, for the Indian Ocean
is full of reefs, and if a ship is nailed with iron nails
it breaks up on ^riking the rocks, whereas if it is
sewn together with cords, it is given a certain resilience
and does not fall to pieces. The inhabitants of these
islands use cowrie shells as money. This is an animal
which they gather in the sea and place in pits, where
its flesh disappears, leaving its white shell. They are
used for buying and selling at the rate of four hundred
thousand shells for a gold dinar, but they often fall
in value to twelve hundred thousand for a dinar.
They sell them in exchange for rice to the people of
Bengal, who also use them as money, as well as to the
Yemenites, who use them in^ead of sand [as ballast]
in their ships. These shells are used also by the
negroes in their lands; I saw them being sold at
Malli and Gawgaw [see Ch. XIV.] at the rate of
1,150 for a gold dinar.

Their womenfolk do not cover their hands, not
even their queen does so, and they comb their hair
and gather it at one side. Mo^I of them wear only



SELECTIONS FROM THE

an apron from their waiils to the ground, the re^ of
their bodies being uncovered. When I held the
qadi'ship there, I tried to put an end to this pra<fl:ice
and ordered them to wear clothes, but I met with no
success. No woman was admitted to my presence in
a lawsuit unless her body was covered, but apart from
that I was unable to effeft anything. I had some
slave-girls who wore garments like those worn at
Delhi and who covered their heads, but it was more
of a disfigurement than an ornament in their case,
since they were not accustomed to it. A singular
custom amongSt them is to hire themselves out as
servants in houses at a fixed wage of five dinars or less,
their employer being responsible for their upkeep;
they do not look upon this as dishonourable, and
moSt of their girls do so. You will find ten or twenty
of them in a rich man’s house. Every utensil that a
girl breaks is charged up againSt her. When she
wishes to transfer from one house to another, her new
employers give her the sum which she owes to her
former employers; she pays this to the latter and
remains so much in debt to her new employers. The
chief occupation of these hired women is spinning
qanhar. It is easy to get married in these islands on
account of the smallness of the dowries and the pleasure
of their women’s society. When ships arrive, the
crew marry wives, and when they are about to sail
they divorce them.’ It is really a sort of temporary
marriage. The women never leave their country.

It is a Grange thing about these islands that their
ruler is a woman, Khadija. The sovereignty belonged
to her grandfather, then to her father, and after his
death to her brother Shihab ad-Dm, who was a minor.
When he was deposed and put to death some years
later, none of the royal house remained but Khadija
and her. two younger sixers, so they raised Khadija to
the throne. She was married to their preacher, Jamal

244



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

ad-Din, who became Wazir and the real holder
of authority, but orders arc issued in her name only.
They write the orders on palm leaves with a curved
iron inRrument resembling a knife; they write nothing
on paper but copies of the Koran and works on theology.
When a stranger comes to the islands and visits the
audience-hall custom demands that he take two pieces
of cloth with him. He makes obeisance towards the
Sultana and throws down one of these cloths, then to
her Wazir, who is her husband Jamdl ad-Din, and
throws down the other. Her army comprises about
a thousand men, recruited from abroad, though some
are natives. They come to the palace every day,
make obeisance, and retire, and they are paid in rice
monthly. At the end of each month they come to
the palace, make obeisance, and say to the Wazir
“ Transmit our homage and make it known that we
have come for our pay,” whereupon orders are given
for it to be issued to them. The qddi and the officials,
whom they call wazirs, also present their homage daily
at the palace and after the eunuchs have transmittea
it they withdraw. The qddi is held in greater respeft
among the people than all the other functionaries; his
orders are obeyed as implicitly as those of the ruler
or even more so. He sits on a carpet in the palace,
and enjoys the entire revenue of three islands, accord-
ing to ancient custom. There is no prison in these
islands; criminals are confined in wooden chambers
intended for merchandise. Each of them is secured
by a piece of wood, as is done amongdt us [in Morocco]
with Christian prisoners.

When I arrived at these islands 1 disembarked on
one of them called Kannalfis, a fine island containing
many mosques, and I put up at the house of one of
the pious persons there. On this island I met a man
called Muhammad, belonging to Dhafar, who told
me that if I entered the island of Mahal the Wazir
HS



SE LECTIO NS FROM THE

would detain me there, because they had no qadi.
Now my design was to sail from there to Ma'bar
[Coromandel], Ceylon, and Bengal, and thence on
to China. When I had spent a fortnight at Kannalus,
I set sail again with my companions, and having
visited on our way several other islands, at which we
were received with honour and hospitably entertained,
arrived on the tenth day at the island of Mahal, the
seat of the Sultana and her husband, and anchored in
its harbour. The cu^om of the country is that no
one may go ashore without permission. When per-
mission was given to us I wished to repair to one of
the mosques, but the attendants on shore prevented
me, saying that it was imperative that I should visit
the Wazir. I had previously enjoined the captain of
the ship to say, if he were asked about me, “ I do not
know him,” fearing that I should be detained by them,
and ignorant of the fadl that some busybody had
written to them telling them about me and that I
had been qadi at Delhi. On reaching the palace we
halted in some porticoes by the third gateway. The
qadi ‘Isa of Yemen came up and greeted me and I
greeted the Wazir. The captain brought ten pieces
of cloth and made obeisance towards the Sultana,
throwing down one piece, then to the Wazir, throwing
down another in the same way. When he had thrown
them all down he was asked about me and answered
“ I do not know him.” Afterwards they brought out
betel and rose-water to us, this being their mark of
honour, and lodged us in a house, where they sent
us food, consisting of a large platter of rice surrounded
by plates containing salted meat, chickens, ghee, and
fish. Two days later the Wazir sent me a robe, with
a hospitality-gift of food and a hundred thousand
cowries for my expenses.

When ten days had passed a ship arrived from Ceylon
bringing some darwishes, Arabs and Persians, who

246



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

recognized me and told the Wazir’s attendants who
I was. This made him more delighted to have
me, and at the beginning of Ramaddn he sent for me
to join in a banquet attended by the amfrs and minidlcrs.
Later on I asked his permission to give a banquet to
the darwishcs who had come from visiting the Foot
[of Adam, in Ceylon]. He gave permission, and sent
me five sheep, which arc rarities among them because
they are imported from Ma‘bar, Mulaybdr, and
Maqdashaw, together with rice, chickens, ghee, and
spices, I sent all this to the house of the wazfr
Sulaymdn, who had it excellently cooked for me, and
added to it besides sending carpets and brass utensils.
I asked the Wazfr’s permission for some of the
minidlers to attend my banquet, and he said to me
“And I shall come too.” So I thanked him and on
returning home to my house found him already there
with the minidlcrs and high officials. The Wazir sat
in an elevated wooden pavilion, and all the amirs and
minidlcrs who came greeted him and threw down an
unsewn cloth, so that there were collefted about a
hundred cloths, which were taken by the darwishes.
The food was then served, and when the gue^ls had
eaten, the Koran-readers chanted in beautiful voices.
The darwishes then began their ritual chants and
dances. I had made ready a fire and they went into
it, treading it with their feet, and some of them ate
it as one eats sweetmeats, until it was extinguished.
When the night came to an end, the Wazir with-
drew and I went with him. As we passed
orchard belonging to the treasury he said to me This
orchard is yours, and I shall build a house in it for you
to live in.” I thanked him and prayed for his happi-
ness. Afterwards he sent me two slave-girls, some
pieces of silk, and a casket of jewels.

The attitude of the Wazir afterwards became
hostile to me for the following reason. The wazir
247



SELECTIONS FROM THE

Sulayman had sent to me proposing that I should
marry his daughter, and I sent to the Wazir Jamal
ad-Din to ask his permission for my acceptance. The
messenger returned to me and said “ The proposal
does not find favour with him, for he wishes to marry
you to his own daughter when her period of widow-
hood comes to an end.” But I for my part refused
that, in fear of the ill luck attached to her, for she had
already had two husbands who had died before con-
summating the marriage. Meanwhile I was seriously
attacked by fever, for every person who comes to this
island inevitably contrails fever. I determined there-
fore to leave it, sold some of the jewels for cowries,
and hired a vessel to take me to Bengal. When I
went to take leave of the Wazir, the qadi came out
to me and said “ The Wazir says ‘ If you wish to go,
give us back what we have given you and go.’ ” I
replied “ I have bought cowries with some of the jewels,
so do what you like with those.” He came back to
me and said “ He says ‘ We gave you gold, not
cowries.’ ” I said “ I shall sell them and give you
back the gold.” So I went to the merchants, asking
them to buy back the cowries from me, but the Wazir
forbade them to do so, his purpose in all this being
to prevent my leaving him. Afterwards he sent one
of his courtiers to me to say “ The Wazir says ‘ Stay
with us, and you shall have what you will.’ ” So
reasoning with myself that I was in their power and
that if I did not ^ay of my own free will I should be
kept by main force, and that it was better to ^ay of
my own choice, I said to his messenger “ Very well,
I shall ^ay with him.” When the messenger returned
to him he was overjoyed, and summoned me. As I
entered he rose and embraced me saying “ We wish
you to ^ay near us and you wish to go away from
us^ 1” I made my excuses, which he accepted, and
said to him “ If you wish me to ^ay I have some

248



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

conditions to make.” He replied “ Granted. Name
them.” I said “ I cannot walk on foot.” (Now it is
their custom that no one rides there except the Wazir,
and when 1 had been given a horse and rode out on
it, the population, men and boys, used to follow me
in amazement. At length 1 complained to him, so
he had the dunqura beaten and a public proclamation
made that no one was to follow me. ^e dunqura
is a sort of brass basin which is beaten with an iron
rod and can be heard at a great diilance; after beating
it any proclamation which it is desired to make is
publicly announced.) The Wazir said If you wish
to ride in a palanquin, do soj if not we have a horse
and a marc — choose which of them you wish.” So
I chose the marc and it was brought to me on the
spot, along with a robe. Then I said “What shall
I do with the cowries I bought ?” He replied “ Send
one of vour companies to sell them for you in Bengal."
I said “ I shall, on condition that you too send someone
to help him in the transaction.” He agreed to that,
so I sent off my companion Abu Muhammad and they
sent a man named al-Hdlj *Alf.

Immediately after the Ramaddn fa^l I made an
agreement with the wazfr Sulaymdn to marry his
daughter, so I sent to the Wazfr Jamdl ad-Dfn re-
quedling that the ceremony might be held in his
presence at the palace. He gave his consent, and sent
the cu^omaiy betel and sandalwood. The gueits
arrived but the wazir Sulaymdn delayed. He was
sent for but drill did not come, and on being summoned
a second time excused himself on the ground of his
daughter’s illness. The Wazfr then said to me
privily “ His daughter has refused, and she is her
own midlress. The people have assembled, so what
do you say to marrying the Sultana’s mother-in-law
(It was her daughter to whom the Wazir’s son was
married.) I said “ Very well,” so the qddf and notaries
249



SELECTIONS FROM THE

were summoned, and the profession of faith recited.
The Wazir paid her- dowry, and she was conduced
to me a few days later. She was one of the beil of
women.

After this marriage the Wazir forced me to take
the office of qadi. The reason for this was that I
had reproached the qadi for his practice of taking a
tenth of all elates when he divided them amongst
the heirs, saying to him “ You should have nothing
but a fee agreed upon between you and the heirs.”
Besides he never did anything properly. When I
was appointed, I ^rove my utmost to e^ablish the
prescriptions of the Sacred Law. There are no law-
suits there like those in our land. The fir^l bad
cu^om I changed was the practice of divorced wives
of laying in the houses of their former husbands, for
they all do so till they marry another husband. I
soon put that to rights. About twenty-five- men who
had a£led thus were brought before me; I had them
beaten and paraded in the bazaars, and the women
put away from them. Afterwards I gave ^rift in-
jundlions that the prayers were to be observed, and
ordered men to go swiftly to the streets and bazaars
after the Friday service; anyone whom they found
not having prayed I had beaten and paraded. I
compelled the salaried prayer-leaders and muezzins
to be assiduous in their duties and sent letters to all
the islands to the same effefl. I tried also to make
the women wear clothes, but I could not manage
that.

Meanwhile I had married three other wives, one
the daughter of a wazir whom they held in high
e^eem and whose grandfather had been sultan, another
the former wife of Shihab ad-Din. After these
marriages the islanders came to fear me, because of
their weakness, and they exerted themselves to turn
the Wazir againft me by slanders, until our relations

250



TRAVELS OF I 1} N II ATT OTA

became drained. Kow it liappcncd that a slave
belonging to the sultan Shihdb ad-Din was brought
before me on a charge ofadultcrp, and I had him beaten
and put in prison. The Wazir sent some of his
principal attendants to me to ask me to set him at
liberty. 1 said to them “ Are you going to intercede
for a negro slave who has violated his masler's honour,
when you yourselves but ycRcrday deposed Shihdb
ad-Din and put him to death because he had entered
the house of one of his slaves r" Thereupon I sent
for the slave and had him beaten with bamboo rods,
which give heavier blows than whips, and paraded
through the island with a rope round his neck. When
the Wazir heard of this he fell into a violent rage,
assembled the miniilers and army commanders and
sent for me. 1 came to him, and though 1 usually
made obeisance to him, t did not make obeisance but
simply said SMm 'j/jjkum. Then I said to those
present “ Be my witnesses that 1 resign the ofBce of
qldi because of my inability to carry out its duties,”
The Wazir addressed me, whereupon I mounted [to
the dais], sat down in a place facing him, and answered
him in the moil uncompromising manner. At this
point the muezzin chanted the call to the sunset
prayer and he went into his palace saying “ They say
that I am sulun, but I sent for this fellow to vent
my wrath on him and he vented his wrath on me.”
The respeft in which I was held amongii them was
due solely to the sultan of India, for they were aware
of the regard in which he held me, and even though
they are far diflant from him yet the fear of him is
in their hearts.

When the Wazir entered bis palace he sent for the
former qddl who had been removed from office. This
man had an arrogant tongue, and said to me “ Our
mailer asks you why you violated his dignity in the
presence of witnesses, and did not make obeisance to
zyi



SELECTIONS FROM THE

him.” I answered “ I used to make obeisance to, him
only because I was on good terms with him, but when
his attitude changed I gave that up. The greeting
of Muslims is Saldm and nothing more, and I said
Salami He sent him to me a second time to say
“ You are aiming only at leaving us ; give back your
wives’ dowries and pay your debts and go, if you
will.” On hearing this I made obeisance to him,
went to my house, and acquitted all the debts I had
contracted. On learning that I had done so and was
bent upon going, the Wazir repented of what he had
said and withheld his permission for my departure.
So I swore with the moCl solemn oaths that I had no
alternative but to leave, and removed all my possessions
to a mosque on the coaCt. I made a compaCl with
two of the ministers that I should go to the land of
Ma‘bar [Coromandel], the king of which was the
husband of my wife’s siCter, and fetch troops from
there to bring the islands under his authority, and
that I should be his representative in them. I arranged
that the signal between us should be the hoiking of
white flags on the ships; when they saw these they
were to rise in revolt on the shore. I had never
sugge^ed this to myself until the Wazi'r became
e^ranged from me. He was afraid of me and used
to say “ This man will without doubt seize the wazirate,
either in my lifetime or after my death.” He was
con^antly making enquiries about me and saying “ I
have heard that the king of India has sent him money
to aid him to revolt againCl me.” He feared my
departure, le^t I should fetch troops from Ma'bar,
and sent to me asking me to ^ay until he could fit
out a vessel for me, but I refused. The ministers
and chief men came to me at the mosque and begged
me to return. I said to them “ If I had not sworn
I should return.” They sugge^ed that I should go
to one of the islands to avoid breaking my oath and

252



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

then return, so I said “ Very well,” in order to satisfy
them. When the night fixed for my departure came
I went to take leave of the Wazir, and he embraced
me and wept so copiously that his tears dropped on
my feet. He passed the following night guarding
the island in person, for fear that my relatives^ by
marriage and my friends would rise in revolt againSt

I set sail and reached the island of the wazfr^ Alf.
Here my wife was attacked by severe pains and wished
to go back, so I divorced her and left her there, sending
word to that effe^ to the Wazfr, because she was the
mother of his son’s wife. We continued to travel
through the islands from one diAridl to another and
came to a tiny island in which there was but one
house, occupied by a weaver. He had a wife and
family, a few coco-palms and a small boat, with which
he used to fish and to cross over to any of the islands
he wished to visit. His island contained also a lew
banana trees, but we saw no land birds on it except
two ravens, which came out to us on our arrival and
circled above our vessel. And I swear I envied tha
man, and wished that the island had been mine, that
I might have made it my retreat until the inevitable
hour should befall me. We then came to the islan
of Muliik where the ship belonging to the
Ibrdhfm was lying. This was the ship in whic
had decided to travel to Ma’bar. Ibrdhim and his
companions met me and showed me great hospitality.
The Wazir had sent inilruaions that I was to receive
in this island thirty dinars’ worth of cowries, together
with a quantity of coconut, honey, betel, areca-nuts,
and fish every day. I ^ayed seventy days at Mu u
and married two wives there. The islanders were
afraid that Ibrahim would plunder them at the moment
of sailing, so they proposed to seize all the weapons
on his ship and keep them until the day of his depar-

253



SELECTIONS FR OM THE

ture. A dispute arose over this, and we returned to
Mahal but did not enter the harbour. I wrote to
the Wazir to tell him what had occurred, whereupon
he wrote to say that there was no cause for seizing
the weapons. We returned to Muluk and set sail
from there in the middle of Rabi‘ II., 745 (22nd
August 1344). Four months later the Wazi'r Jamal
ad-Din died — may God have mercy upon him.

We set sail without an experienced pilot on board,
the di^ance between the island and Ma'bar being
a three days’ journey, and travelled for nine days,
emerging on the ninth day at the island of Saylan
[Ceylon]. We saw the mountain of Sarandib there,
rising into the heavens like a column of smoke.^
When we came to the island, the sailors said “ This
port is not in the territory of the sultan whose country
can safely be visited by merchants. It is in the ter-
ritory or Sultan Ayri Shakarwatf, who is an evil
tyrant and keeps pirate vessels.”^ We were afraid
to put into this harbour, but as a gale arose thereafter
and we dreaded the sinking of the ship, I said to the
captain “ Put me ashore and I shall get you a safe-
conduft from this sultan.” He did as I asked and put
me ashore, whereupon the infidels came to us and
said “ What are you I told them that I was the
brother-in-law and friend of the sultan of Ma‘bar,
that I had come to visit him, and that the contents
of the ship were a present for him. They went to
their sultan and informed him of this. Thereupon he
summoned me, and I visited him in the town of
Battala [Puttelam], which is his capital. It is a small
and pretty town, surrounded by a wooden wall with
wooden towers. The whole of- its coa^s are covered
with cinnamon trees brought down by torrents and
heaped up like hills on the shore. They are taken
without payment by the people of Ma'bar and Mulay-
bar, but in return for this they give presents of woven

254



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

fluffs and similar articles to the sultan. It is a day
and a night’s journey from this island to the land or

When I entered the presence of the infidel Sult^
Ayr! Shakarwatl, he rose to meet me, seated me beside
him, and spoke moft kindly to me. He said *
companions may land in safety and will be my gue s
until they sail, for the sultan of Ma bar and I arc
friends." He then ordered me to be lodged and 1
flayed with him three days, enjoying great consider:^
tion which increased every day. He underflood
Persian and was delighted with the talcs I told him
of kings and countries. One day, after presenting
me with some valuable pearls, he said ‘ Do not be
shy, but ask me for anything that you want 1
replied “Since reaching this island I
one desire, to visit the blessed Foot of Adam. ^^Iney
call Adam Bdbi, and Eve they call Mdmd.) That
is simple,” he answered, “We shall send an escort
with you to take you to it.” “ That is what I wan^
said 1, then I added “And this ship that I came in
can set out in safety for Ma’bar, and^ ^ ^
you will send me in your own vessels." Certainly
he replied. When I related this to the captain,
however, he said to me “ I shall not sail until you
return, even if I wait a year on your account, so
told the sultan of this, and he said “ He will remain

. as my guefl until you come back.”

The sultan then gave me a palanquin, which was
carried by his slaves, and sent with me four logis,
whose cuflom it is to make an annual pilgrimage o
the Foot, three Brahmans,' ten other persons from his
entourage, and fifteen men to carry provisions. a er
is plentiful along that road. On the firfl; day
encamped beside a river, which we crossed on a ratt,
made of bamboo canes. Thence we journeye
Mandr Mandall [Minneri-Mandel], a fine town

^5S



SELECTIONS FROM THE

situated at the extremity of the sultan’s territories.
The inhabitants entertained us with a fine banquet,
the chief dish at which was buffalo calves, which they
hunt in a fore^ there and bring in alive. After
passing the small town of Bandar Salawdt [Chilaw]
our way lay through rugged country intersected with
dreams. In this part there are many elephants, but
they do no harm to pilgrims and drangers, through
the blessed favour of the Shaykh Abu ‘Abdallah, who
was the fird to open up this road for the pilgrimage
to the Foot. These infidels used formerly to prevent
Muslims from making this pilgrimage and would
maltreat them, and neither eat nor trade with them,
but since the adventure that happened to the Shaykh,
as we have related above [p. 95], they honour the
Muslims, allow them to enter their houses, eat with
them, and have no suspicions regarding their dealings
with their wives and children. To this day they
continue to pay the greated veneration to this Shaykh,
and call him “ the Great Shaykh.”

After this we came to the town of Kunakar, which is
the capital of the principal sultan in this land.® It
lies in a narrow valley between two hills, near a great
lake called the Lake of Rubies, because rubies are
found in it. Outside the town is the mosque of Shaykh
‘Othman of Shiraz, known as the Shawush; the sultan
and inhabitants visit his tomb and venerate him. He
was the guide to the Foot, and when his hand and
foot were cut off, his sons and slaves took his place
as guides. The reason for his mutilation was that he
killed a cow. The Hindu infidels have a law that
anyone who kills a cow is slaughtered in the same
fashion or else put in its skin and burned. As Shaykh
‘Othman was so highly revered by them, they cut
off his hand and foot, indead, and assigned to him
the revenues of one of the bazaars. The sultan of
Kunakar is called the Kunar, and possesses a white



TRAVELS .OF IBN BATTOTA

elephant, the only white elephant I have seen in the
whole world. He rides on it at fe^ivals and puts
great rubies on its forehead. The marvellous rubies
called hahramdn [carbuncles] are found only in this
town. Some are taken from the lake and these are
regarded by them as the moft valuable, and some are
obtained by digging. In the island of Ceylon rubies
are found in all parts. The land is private property,
and a man buys a parcel of it and digs for rubies.
Some of them are red, some yellow [topazes], and
some blue [sapphires]. Their cuSlom is that all
rubies of the value of a hundred fanams belong to
the sultan, who pays their price and takes them;
those of less value belong to the finders. A hundred
fanams equal in value six gold dinars.

We went on from Kunafeir and halted at a cave called
after XJSii Mahmiid the Ldrf, a pious man who dug
out this cave at the foot of a hill beside a small lake.
Thence we travelled to the Lake of Monkeys. There
are in these mountains numbers or monkeys.
They are black and have long tails, and their males
are bearded like men. Shaykh ‘Othmdn and his sons
and others as well told me that these monkeys have
a chief, whom they obey as if he were a king. He
fallens on his head a fiUet of leaves and leans upon
a On his right and his left are four monkeys

carrying flaves in their hands. When the chief
monkey sits down the four monkeys ^land behind
him, and his female and young come and sit in front
of him every day. The other monkeys come and sit
at a diflance from him, then one of the four monkeys
addresses them and all the monkeys withdraw. After
this each one brings a banana or a lemon or some
such fruit, and the monkey chief with his young and
the four monkeys eat. One of the Yogis told me that
he had seen the four monkeys in the presence of their
chief beating a monkey with Clicks and after the beating
257 s



SEI.ECTIONS FROM THE

pulling out its hair. We continued our journey to
a place called “ The Old Woman’s Hut,” which is
the end of the inhabited part, and marched thence
by a number of grottoes. In this place we saw the
flying leech, which sits on trees and in the vegetation
near water. When a man approaches it jumps out
at him, and wheresoever it alights on his body the
blood flows freely. The inhabitants keep a lemon in
readiness for it; they squeeze this over it and it falls
off them, then they scrape the place on which it
alighted with a wooden knife which they have for the
purpose.

The mountain of Sarandi'b [Adam’s Peak] is one
of the higheff in the world. We saw it from the sea
when we were nine days’ journey away, and when
we climbed it we saw the clouds below us, shutting
out our view of its base. On it there are many ever-
green trees and flowers of various colours, including
a red rose as big as the palm of a hand. There are
two tracks on the mountain leading to the Foot, one
called Bdba track and the other Mama track, meaning
Adam and Eve. The Mamd track is easy and is
the route by which the pilgrims return, but anyone
who goes by that way is not considered by them to
have made the pilgrimage at all. The Baba track is
difficult and ^iff climbing. Former generations cut
a sort of stairway on the mountain, and fixed iron
^anchions on it, to which they attached chains for
climbers to hold on by."^ There are ten such chains,
two at the foot of the hill by the “ threshold,” seven
successive chains farther on, and the tenth is the
“ Chain of the Profession of Faith,” so called because
when one reaches it and looks down to the foot of the
hill, he is seized , by apprehensions and recites the
profession of faith for fear of falling. When you
climb padt this chain you find a rough track. From
the tenth chain to the grotto of Khidr is seven miles ;

258






PILGRIMS CLIMBING TO \D\MS FOOT
Fro tat tgbtee lb ce tury print





TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

this grotto lies in a wide plateau, and near by it is
a spnng full of fish, but no one catches them. Close
to this there are two tanks cut in the rock on cither
side of the path. At the grotto of Khidr the pilgrims
leave their belongings and ascend thence for two miles
to the summit of the mountain where the Foot is.

The blessed Footprint, the Foot of our father
Adam, is on a lofty black rock m a wide plateau.
The blessed Foot sank into the rock far enough to
leave its impression hollowed out. It is eleven spans
long. In ancient days the Chinese came here and
cut out of the rock the mark of the great toe and the
adjoining parts. They put this in a temple at Zayttin,
where it is visited by men from the farthefl parts of
the land. In the rock where the Foot is there are
nine holes cut out, in which the infidel pilgrims place
offerings of cold, precious Clones, and jewels. You
can see the Qarwishes, after they reach the grotto of
Khidr, racing one another to take what there is in
these holes. We, for our part, found nothing in
them but a few flones and a little gold, which we gave
to the guide. It is cuflomary for the pilgrims to flay
at the grotto of Khidr for three days, visiting the Foot
every morning and evening, and we followed this
prafiice. When the three days were over we returned
by the Mdmd track, halting at a number of villages
on the mountain. At the mot of the mountain there
is an ancient tree whose leaves never fall, situated in
a place that cannot be got at. I have never met
anyone who has seen its leaves. I saw there a number
of Yogis who never quit the base of the mountain
waiting for its leaves to fall. They tell lying tales
about it, one being that whosoever eats of it regains
his youth, even if he be an old man, but that is false.
Beneath the mountain is the great lake from which
the rubies are taken ; its water is a bright blue to the
sight.


IS9



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

We travelled thence to Dinawar, a large town on
the coaft, inhabited by merchants. In this town
there is an idol, known as Dinawar, in a va^ temple,®
in which there are about a thousand Brahmans and
Yogis, and about five hundred women, daughters of
the infidels, who sing and dance every night in front
of the idol. The city and all its revenues form an
endowment belonging to the idol, from which all who
live in the temple and who visit it are supplied with
food. The idol itself is of gold, about a man’s height,
and in the place of its eyes it has two great rubies,
which, as I was told, shine at night like lamps. We
went on to the town of Qali [Point de Gralle], a small
place eighteen miles from Dinawar, and journeyed
thence to the town of Kalanbii [Colombo], which is
one of the fine^ and larged towns in Ceylon. In it
resides the wazir and ruler of the sea Jala^ti, who
has with him about five hundred Abyssinians. Three
days after leaving Kalanbd we reached Battdla again
and visited the sultan of whom we have spoken above.
I found the captain Ibrahim awaiting me and we set
sail for the land of Ma‘bar.


260



CtWITliR IX


O". our VO) jgc :o Mi’bir [Cofo landcl] a gale sprang
up and our ship near!) fdicd with ualcr. We had
no capcr.crccd pilot on board. We narrowl) escaped
being urcched on some rocha, and then came into some
shallows where the ship ran aground. We were
face to-face with death, and thoie on board jettisoned
all that the) had, and bade farewell to one another.
We cut down l.he nvasl and threw it overboard, and
the iailo.T made a wooden raft. We were then about
SIX n Ics from ll e shore, t set about climbing down
to the rail, when m) co-ipanions (for 1 had two slave
girls ard two of m) compan.ons with me) said to me
“Are ) 0 u going to go on the raft and leave us?"
So I put their safet) before mj own and said “You
two go ar d Uwe with }ou the girl that 1 like." The
other girl said “ 1 am a good swimmer and I shall
hold on to one of the raft ropes and swim with them."
So both m) companions and the one girl went on the
rafr, the oilier girl swimming. The sailors tied ropes
to the raft and swam with their aid I sent along
with them all the things that I valued and the jewels
and ambergris, and they rcaehed the shore in safety
because the wind was in their favour. 1 myself flayed
on the ship. The captain made his way ashore on
the rudder. The sailors set to work to make four
rafts, but night fell before they were completed, and
the ship lillcd with water. 1 climbed on the poop
and flayed there until morning, when a party of in-
fidels came out to us m a boat and we went ashore
with them In the land of Ma'bar. We told them



SELECTIONS FROM THE

that we were friends of their sultan, under whose
protection they live, and they wrote informing him
of this. He was then two days’ journey away,, on' an
expedition. I too wrote to him telling him what had
happened to me.

We Clayed there three days, at the end of which
an amir arrived from the sultan with a body of horse
and foot, bringing a palanquin and ten horses. I
and my companions, the captain, and one of the slave-
girls rode, and the other was carried in the palanquin.
We reached the fort of Harkatd,^ where we spent
the night, and where I left the slave-girls and some,
of my slaves and companions. On the following day
we arrived at the camp of the sultan, who was Ghiyath
ad-Din of Damaghan.^ He was married to the
daughter of the late Sultan Jalal ad-Din, and it was
her siCter that I had married in Delhi. It is a cuClom
throughout the land of India that no person enters
the sultan’s presence without boots on. I had no boots
with me so one of the infidels gave me a pair. There
were a number of Muslims there and I was aClonished
to find an infidel show greater courtesy than they did.
When I appeared before the sultan he bade me be.
seated and assigned to me three tents in his vicinity,
sending me carpets and food. .Later on I had an
interview with him and put before him the projeCt
to send an army to the Maidive Islands. He resolved
to do so, decided what vessels were to be sent, and
designated a gift for the Sultana, together with robes
and presents for the ministers and amirs. He charged
me to draw up his contraCl of marriage with the
Sultana’s siCter and ordered three vessels to be loaded
with alms for the poor of the islands. Then he said
to me You will return in five days’ time,” but the
admiral said to him “ It is impossible to sail to the
islands for three months yet.” “ Well then ” he
replied to me, “ if that is the case, come to Fattan

262



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

until we finish the present campaign and return to
our capital Mutra [Madura], and the expedition will
5lart from there.”

The country through which we were to pass was
an uninterrupted and impassable jungle of trees and
reeds. The sultan gave orders that every man in
the army, great and small alike, should carry a hatchet
to cut it down, and when the camp was struck, he rode
forward with his troops and they cut down those
trees from morning to noon. Fooa was then brought,
and the whole army ate in relays, afterwards returning
to their tree-felling until the evening. All the infidels
whom they found in the jungle were taken prisoner,
and brought to the camp with their wives and children.
Their pradlice is to fortify their camp with a wooden
palisade, which has four gates. Outside the palisade
there are platforms about three feet high on which
they light a fire at night. By the fire there is pofred
a night guard of slaves and footsoldiers, each of whom
carries a bundle of thin canes. If a party of infidels
should attempt to attack the camp by night each sentry
lights the bundle he has in his hand, so that the night
becomes as bright as the day, and the horsemen ride
out in pursuit of the infidels. In the morning the
infidels whom our troops had captured the previous
day were divided into four groups and impaled at
the four gates of the camp. Their women and little
children were butchered mso and the women tied by
their hair to the pales. Thereafter the camp was
frruck and they set to work cutting down another
patch of jungle, and all those who were taken prisoner
were treated in the same way. This [slaughtering
of women and children] is a dafrardly praftice,
which I have never known of any [other] king,
and it was because of it that God brought him to a
speedy end.

I left the camp and reached Fattan, which is a large
263



SELECTIONS FROM THE

and fine city on the coa^, with a wonderful harbour.®
There is a great wooden pavilion in it, eredled on
enormous beams and reached by a covered wooden
gallery. When an enemy attacks the place they tie
all the vessels in port to this pavilion, which is manned
by soldiers and archers, so that the enemy has no
chance [of capturing them]. In this city there is
a fine mosque, built of ^lone, and it has also large
quantities of grapes and excellent pomegranates. I
met here the pious shaykh Muhammad of Nishapfir,
one of the crazy darwishes who let their hair hang
loose over their shoulders. He had with him a lion
which he had tamed, and which used to eat and sit
along with the darwishes. Accompanying him were
about thirty darwishes, one of whom had a gazelle.
Though the gazelle and the lion used to be together
in the same place, the lion did not molest it. While
I was laying at Fattan the sultan fell ill and came
to the city. I went out to meet him and made him
a present. When he had taken up his residence
there he sent for the admiral and said to him “ Take
no business in hand except [to equip] the ships which
are to make the expedition to the islands.” He wished
also to give me the value of my present, but I refused
it. Afterwards I was sorry for this, because he died
and I received nothing. He ftayed a fortnight at
Fattan and then .set out for his capital, but I ^ayed
there for another fortnight.

I then journeyed to his capital, the city of Mutra
[Madura], a large town with wide Greets. On my
arrival I found it in the grip of a plague. Those
who were attacked by it died on the second or third
day, or at the mo^l on the fourth. When I went out
I saw none but sick and dead. The sultan on reaching
Mutra had found his mother, wife, and son ill, and
after laying in the town for three days, he went out
to a river three miles away. I joined him there, and

264



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

he ordered me to be lodged alongside the qddi.
Exactly a fortnight later the sultan died and was
succeeded by his nephew Ndsir ad-Dfn. The new
sultan gave orders that I should be furnished with
all the ships that his uncle had appointed for the
expedition to the islands. Later on, however, I fell
ill of a fever which is mortal in those parts, and thought
that my time had come. God inspired me to have
recourse to the tamarind, which grows abundantly
there, so I took about a pound of it, put it in water
and drank it. It relaxed me for three days, and God
healed me of my illness. I took a dislike to this town
in consequence, and asked the sultan for permission
to depart. He said to me “ Why should you go ?
It is only a month until the season for the expedition
to the islands. Stay until we give you all that the
Ma^lc^ of the World [the late sultan] ordered for
you." I refused however, and he wrote on my behalf
to Fattan, that I might sail In any ship I wished.

I returned to Fattan, and found eight vessels sailing
to Yemen, on one of which I embarked. We fell in
with four warships which engaged us for a short time,
but afterwards they retired and we went on to Kawlam
[Quilon]. As I was ilill feeling the cffefls of my
illness, 1 flayed there for three months, afterwards
embarking on a vessel with the intention of making
for Sultan Jamil ad-Dln of Hinawr. When we
reached the small island between Hinawr and Fikan^r,"*
we were assailed by the infidels with twelve warships,
who fought us vigorously and got the better of us.
They seized all that I had kept in reserve for emer-
gencies, together with the jewels and precious Clones
which the king of Ceylon gave me, my clothes and the
travelling provisions I kept with me which had been
given me by pious men and saints, leaving me with
no covering but my trousers. They seized the pos-
sessions of every one on board, and put us ashore on



SELECTIONS FROM THE'.

the coa^l. I made my way back to Caliciit, and
went into a mosque; one of the theologians sent
me a robe, the qadi sent a turban, and a merchant
another robe.

At Caliciit I learned of the marriage of the Sultana
Khadija [of the Maidive islands] with the wazir
‘Abdallah after the death of the wazir Jamal ad-Din,
and that my wife, whom I had left there pregnant, had
given birth to a son. I thought therefore of making
a journey to the islands, but remembering the hostility
of the wazir ‘Abdallah towards me I [sought an omen
from the Koran and] opened the volume at these
words The angels shall descend upon them saying “ Fear
not, neither he sadF So I commended myself to God,
and set sail. Ten days later I disembarked at Kan-
naliis, where the governor received me with honour,
made me his gue^t, and fitted out a boat for me.
Some of the islanders went to the wazir ‘Abdallah
and informed him of my arrival. He asked about
me and who had come with me, and was told that
the purpose of my visit was to fetch my son, who
was about two years old.® His mother came to the
wazir to lay a complaint again^ this, but he replied
to her “ I for my part will not hinder him from taking
away his son.” He pressed me to visit the island [of
Mahal], and lodged me in a house facing the tower
of his palace, that he might observe my movements.
My son was brought to me, but I thought it better
that he should ^tay with them so I gave him back to
them. After a ^ay of five days, it appeared to me
that the be^ plan was to ha^en my departure, and I
asked permission to leave. The wazir summoned
nie, and when I entered his presence he seated me at
his side and asked how I fared. I ate a meal in his
company and washed my hands in the same basin
with him,, a thing which he does with no one. Betel
was brought in and I took my leave. He sent me

266



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

robes and hundreds of thousands of cowries, and was
mo^l generous in his treatment of me.

I set out again, and we spent forty-three nights at
sea, arriving eventually at the land of Bangdia [Bengal].
This is a v^ country, abounding in rice, and nowhere
in the world have I seen any land where prices are
lower than there; on the other hand it is a gloomy
place, and the people of Khurdsin call it “ A hell full
of good things?’ I have seen fat fowls sold there at
the rate of eight for a single dirham, young pigeons
at fifteen to the dirham, and a fat ram sold for two
dirhams. I saw too a piece of fine cotton cloth, of
excellent Quality, thirty cubits long, sold for two
dinars, and a beautiful slave-girl for a single gold
dinar, that is, t^vo and a half gold dinars in Moroccan
money. The firA city in Bengal that we entered was
Sudkdwdn, a large town on the coaA of the great
sea.® Close by it the river Ganges, to which the
Hindus go on pilgrimage, and the river Jiin’ unite
and discharge together into the sea. They have a
large fleet on the river, with which they make war on
the inhabitants of the land of Laknawti.®

The sultan of Bengal is Sultan Fakhr ad-Dfn, an
excellent ruler with a partiality for Arangers, especially
danvfshes and sdffs. The kingship of this land
belonged to Sultan Ndsir ad-Dln, whose grandson
was taken prisoner by the sultan of Delhi, and released
by Sultan Muhammad when he became king, on
condition of sharing his sovereignty with him. He
broke his promise and Sultan Muhammad went to
war with him, put him to death, and appointed a
relative by marriage of his own as governor of that
country. This man was put to death by the troops
and the kingdom was seized by ‘AH-Shdh, who was
then in Laknawti. When Fakhr ad-D/n saw that
the kingship had passed out of the hands of Ndsir
ad-Dfn’s descendants (he was a client of theirs), he
267



SELECTIONS FROM THE

revolted in Sudkawan and Bengal and made himself
an independent ruler. A violent struggle took place
between him and ‘AH-Shah. During the season of
winter and mud, Fakhr ad-Din used to make expedi-
tions up the river again^ the land of Laknawti, because
of his naval superiority, but when the rainless season
returned, ‘AH-Shah would make raids by land on
Bengal, because of his superiority in land-forces.
When I entered Sudkawan I did not visit the sultan,
nor did I meet him, as he is a rebel again^ the king
of India, and I was afraid of the consequences which
a visit to him might entail.

I set out from Sudkawan for the mountains of
Kamard, a month’s journey from there. This is a
va^t range of mountains extending to China and also
to the land of Thubbat [Tibet], where the musk deer
are. The inhabitants of this range resemble the
Turks; they possess great endurance, and their value
as slaves is many times greater than a slave of any
other nationality.® They are famous for their magical
practices. My purpose in travelling to these moun-
tains was to meet a notable saint who lives there,
namely, Shaykh Jalal ad-Din of Tabriz. At a distance
of two days’ journey from his abode I was met by
four of his disciples, who told me that the Shaykh
had said to the darwishes who were with him “ The
traveller from the We^ has come to you; go out
to welcome him.” He had no knowledge whatever
about me, but this had been revealed to him. I went
with them to the Shaykh and arrived at his hermitage,
situated outside the cave. There is no cultivated
land there, but the inhabitants of the country, both
Muslim and infidel, come to visit him, bringing gifts
and presents, and the darwishes and travellers live
on these offerings. The Shaykh however limits him-
self to a single cow, with whose milk he breaks his fa^t
every ten days. It was by his labours that the people



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

of thue mounuini bcumc converted to IsUm, and
that wai the reason for his settling amongfl them.
When I came into his presence he rose to greet me
and embraced me. He asked me about my native
land and my travels, and when 1 had given him an
account of them he said to me “ You arc the traveller
of the Arabs-" Those of his disciples who were there
said “ And the non-Arabs too, O our mafler-" “ And
of the non-Arabs too " he repeated, “ so show him
honour." They then took me to the hermitage and
gave me hospiulity for three days.

On the day when 1 visited the Shaykh I saw that he
was wearing a wide mantle of goatshair. It took my
fancy and I said to mpclf “ I wish the Shaykh could
have given it to me." When I visited him to bid
him farewell, he went to the side of the cave, took oflt
the mantle and placed it upon me, together with a
skull-cap from his head, himself putting on a patched
garment. The darwlshcs told me that the Shavkh
was not in the habit of wearing this mantle and nad
put it on only when I arrived, saying to them “ This
mantle will be asked for by the Moroccan, and it
will be taken from him by an infidel sultan, who svill
give it to our brother Burhin ad-DIn of Sigharj,
whose it is and for whom it was made" When they
told me this I said to them " I have obtained the
blessing of the Shaykh through his clothing me with
his garments, and I for my part shall not enter the
presence of any sulun, infidel or Muslim, svearing
this mantle" With this 1 withdrew from the Shaykh’s
presence. Now it came about a long time afterwards
that I visited China and eventually reaehed the city
of Khansd [Hang-chosv-fu]. My party were separated
from me by the pressure of the crowd and I was wearing
this mantle. I happened to be in a certain direct
when the wazlr came by with a large suite. His eye
fell upon me, and summoning me he clasped my hand,
269



SELECTIONS FROM THE

asked me about my arrival, and continued talking to
me until I came to the sultan’s palace with him. At
this point I wished to take leave of him, but he would
not hear of it and introduced me into the sultan’s
presence. The latter queftioned me about the
Muhammadan sultans and when I replied to his
que^ions, he looked at the mantle and took a liking
to it. The wazir said to me “ Take it oftV’ and I
could not resist his order. So the sultan took it and
ordered me to be given ten robes, a horse and harness,
and a sum of money. The incident roused my anger,
but afterwards I recalled the Shaykh’s saying that an
infidel sultan would seize it and I was deeply amazed
at the fulfilment of the predidlion. The following
year I entered the palace of the king of China at
Khan-Batiq [Peking], and sought out the convent of
the Shaykh Burhan ad-Dm of Sagharj. I found him
reading and wearing that identical mantle. I was
a^onished and took it in my hand to examine it.
He said to me “ Why examine it when you know it
already “ True ” I replied, “ it is the one that
was taken from me by the sultan of Khansa.” “ This
mantle ” he went on “ was made specially for, me by
my brother Jalal ad-Din, who wrote to me saying
‘ The mantle will reach you by the hand of so-and-so.’ ”
Then he brought out the letter and I read it, marvel-
ling at the Shaykh’s perfeft foreknowledge. I told
Burhan ad-Din the beginning of the ^ory, and he said
to me “ My brother Jalal ad-Din can do much more
than all this, he has the powers of creation at his
disposal, but he has now passed to the mercy of God.
I have been told ” he added, “ that he prayed the dawn-
pmyer every day at Mecca, and that he made the
pilgrimage every year, for he used to disappear from
sight on the days of ‘Arafa and the festival, and no
one knew where he went.”

When I had bidden farewell to Shaykh Jalal ad-Din

270



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

I journeyed to Habanq, an exceedingly large and
beautiful city, traversed by the river which descends
from the Kdmarii mountains. This river is called
the Blue River,*® and is used by travellers to Bengal
and Laknawtl. On its banks there are water wheels,
orchards, and villages to right and to left, like the
Nile in Egypt. Its people are infidels under Muslim
rule, who are mulcted of half their crops and pay
taxes over and above that. We travelled down the
river for fifteen days between villages and orchards,
juil as if we were going through a bazaar. There
are innumerable vessels on it and each vessel carries
a drum; when two vessels meet, each of them beats
its drum and they salute one another. Sultan Fakhr
ad-Dln gave orders that no passage-money should be
taken on this river from darwishes, and that provisions
were to be supplied to those of them who had none,
and when a darwish comes to a town he is given half
a dinar. After fifteen days* sailing down the river,
as we have related, we reached the city of Sunur-
kdwdn,'* where we found a junk on the point of sailing
for the land of Jdwa [Sumatra], which is a journey
of forty days from there, so we embarked on it.


271



CHAPTER X


Fifteen days after leaving Sunarkawan we reached
the country of the Barahnakar, whose mouths are like
those of dogs.^ This tribe is a rabble, professing
neither the religion of the Hindus nor any other.
They live in reed huts roofed with grasses on the
seashore, and have abundant banana, areca, and betel
trees. Their men are shaped like ourselves, except
that their mouths are shaped like those of dogs; this
is not the case with their womenfolk, however, who
are endowed with surpassing beauty. Their men too
go unclothed, not even hiding their nakedness, except
occasionally for an ornamental pouch of reeds sus-
pended from their wai^s. The women wear aprons
of leaves of trees. With them reside a number of


Muslims from Bengal and Sumatra, who occupy a
separate quarter. The natives do all their trafficking
with the merchants on the shore, and bring them
water on elephants, because the water is at some
di^ance from the coa^ and they will not let the
merchants go to draw it for themselves, fearing for
their women because they make advances to well-
formed men. Elephants are numerous in their land,
but no one may dispose of them except the sultan,
from whom they are bought in exchange for woven
^uffs.


Their sultan came to meet us, riding on an elephant,
which carried a sort of packsaddle made of skins.
He himself was dressed* in goatskins with the hair
to the outside; on his head there were three coloured
bands of silk, and he had a reed javelin in his hand.
Accompanying were about twenty of his relatives,

272



T U A V i: L S OF I U N II A T T O T A

mounted on clqdunts. We sent him a present of
pepper, fiingcr, cinnamon, [cured] Ush from the
Slaik!l\c hlarfJs, and seme Hcn^*a!i cloth. They do
not ucaf the cloth ihcmscKcs, but cover their ele-
phants with it on fcaCt dap. This sultan exacts from
cscry ship that puts in at his land a slave mrl, a white
slave, enough cloth to cover an elephant, anu ornaments
of gold, which his wife wcata on her girdle and her
toes. If anyone withholds this tribute, they put a
spell on him which raises a ilorm on sea, so that he
perishes or all but perishes.

Twcnty*bvc davs after leaving these people sve
reached the island of Jiwa [^Sumatra], “ from svhich
the incense called /iu/ takes jts name. We saw the
island when we were tlill half a day's journey from it.
It U verdant and fertile; the commontil trees there
are the coco-palm, arcca, clove, Indian 3loe> jack-
tree,* mango, jamim,* sweet orange, and camphor
cane, ‘fhe commerce of its inhablunti is carried on
with pieces of tin and native Chinese gold, unsmcltcd.
The majority of the aromatic plants which grow there
arc found only in (he di^lri^s occupied by the intidels;
in the Muslim dii\ri£U they arc levs plentiful. When
we reached the harbour its people came out to us in
small boats with coconuts, bananas, mangoes, and
fish. Their cu^lom is to present these to the mcr-
chir\ts, who recompense them, each according to his
means. The admirars representative also came on
board, and after interviewing the merchants who were
with us gave us permission to land. So we went
ashore to the port, a large village on the coaft with
a number of houses, called Sarh;l.‘^ It is four miles
diflanl from the town. The admiral's representative
having written to the sultan to inform nim of my
arrival, the Utter ordered the amir DawUsa to meet
me, along with the aidi and other dolors of the law.
They came out for that purpose, bringing one of the
273 T



SELECTIONS FROM THE

sultan’s horses and some other horses as well. I and
my companions mounted, and we rode in to the sultan’s
capital, the town of Sumutra, a large and beautiful
city encompassed by a wooden wall with wooden
towers.

The sultan of Jawa, al-Malik az-Zahir, is a mo^
illu^rious and open-handed ruler, and a lover of
theologians. He is con^antly engaged in warring
for the Faith [again^ the infidels] and in raiding
expeditions, but is withal a humble-hearted man, who
walks on foot to the Friday prayers. His subjects
also take a pleasure in warring for the Faith and
voluntarily accompany him on his expeditions. • They
have the upper hand over all the infidels in their
vicinity, who pay them a poll-tax to secure peace.

As we went towards the palace we found near by
it some spears ^uck in the ground on both sides of
the road. These are to indicate to the people to dis-
mount ; no one who is riding may go beyond them, so
we dismounted there. On entering the audience-hall
we found the sultan’s lieutenant, who rose and greeted
us with a handshake. We sat down with him and
he wrote a note to the sultan informing him of our
arrival, sealed it and gave it to a page, who brought
the reply written on the back. After this a page
rought 2. buqshaj that is, a linen bag. The lieutenant
ta ing this led me by the hand into a small house,
were he spends his hours of leisure during the day.
•tie then brought out of the huqsha three aprons, one

1 - ’ cotton and the third of

silk and linen, three garments like aprons which they
call underclothing, three garments of different kinds
^ jniddleclothing, three woollen mantles, one of
hem being white, and three turbans. I put on one
or the aprons m place of trousers, according to their
custom, and one garment of each kind, and my com-
panions took the reil of them. After food had been

274


TRAVELS OF IRN BATTOTA

served we left the palace and rode in company with
the lieutenant to a garden surrounded by a wooden
wall. In the midA of the garden there was a house
built of wood and carpeted with Arips of cotton velvet,
some dyed and others undyed. We sat down here
along with the lieutenant. The amfr Dawlasa then
came bringing two slave girls and two men servants,
and said to me **The sultan says to you that this
present is in proportion to his means, not to those of
Sultan Muhammad [of India]/' The lieutenant left
after this, and the amir Dawlasa remained with me.

The amir and I were acquainted with one another,
as he had come as an envoy to the sultan at Delhi.
I said to him ** When can I sec the sultan ?" and he
replied “ It is the cuAom of our country that a new-
comer t^'aits three nights before saluting the sultan»
that he may recover from the fatigue of his journey.”
We Aayed for three days, food being sent to us thnee
a day and fruits and rare sweetmeats every evening
and morning. On the fourth day, which was a Friday,
the amfr Dawlasa came to me and said “ You will
salute the sultan [today] in the royal enclosure of the
cathedral mosque after the service.” After the prayer
I went in to the sultan; he shook me by the hand
and 1 saluted him, whereupon he bade me sic down
upon his left and asked me about Sultan Muhammad
and about my travels. He remained in the mosque
until the afternoon prayers had been recited, alter
which he went into a chamber there, put off the
garments he was wearing (these were robes of the kind
worn by theologians, which he puts on when he comes
to the mosque on Fridays), and dressed in his royal
robes, which arc mantles of silk and cotton. On
leaving the mosque he found elephants and horses at
the gate. Their cuAom is that if the sultan rides on
an elephant his suite ride on horses, and vice vgrsa.
On this occasion he mounted an elephant, so we rode
275



SELECTIONS FROM THE

on horses, and went with him to the audience hall.
We dismounted at the usual place [where the lances
were] and the sultan rode on into the palace, where
a ceremonial audience was held, the sultan remaining
on his elephant opposite the pavilion where he sits
[at receptions]. Male musicians came in and sang
before him, after which they led in horses with silk
caparisons, golden anklets, and halters of embroidered
silk. These horses danced before him, a thing which
astonished me, though I had seen the same performance
at the court of the king of India.

My Slay at his court in Sumutra la^ed fifteen days,
after which I asked his permission to continue my
journey, since it was now the sailing season, and because
it is not possible to travel to China at all times of the
year. He fitted out a junk for us, provisioned us,
and made us rich presents — may God reward him ! —
sending^ one of his courtiers with us to bring his
hospitality gift to us on the junk. We sailed along
the coa^l of his territories for twenty-one nights, and
arrived at Mul-Jawa, an infidel land, two months’
ourney in length, and containing aromatic spices and
the excellent aloes called Qdguli and Qamdri, Qaqula
and Qamara [after which these aloes are named] form
part of the territories of this land.® In the territories
of the sultan of Sumutra there is only incense, camphor,
and a little cloves and Indian aloes, whereas the larged
quantity of these is found in Mul-Jawa.

On reaching the port of Qaqula, we found there a
number of junks ready for making piratical raids, and
also for dealing with any junks that might attempt to
resist their exactions, for they impose a tribute on each
[calling at that place]. We went ashore to
Qaqula, which is a fine town with a wall of hewn
^ne^ broad enough for three elephants to walk
abrea^ on it. The fir^ thing I saw outside the town
was elephants bearing loads of Indian aloes, which

276



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

they burn in their houses and which fetches the same
price as firewood with us, or even less. That is when
they arc selling amongil themselves; to the merchants,
on the other hand, they sell a load of it for a roll of
cotton cloth, which is dearer in their land than silk.
Elephants are very numerous there; they ride on
them and use them to carry loads. Every person has
his elephants picketed at his door, and every shop>
keeper his elephant picketed near him, for riding on
to his house and for carrying loads. The same is
the case with all the people of China and Cathay
[Northern China].

The sultan of Mul-Jdwa is an inhdcl; I saw him
outside his palace sitting beside a pavilion on the bare
ground. With him were the omcers of iffatc, and
the troops were passing in review before him — foot-
soldiers, for there are no horses there except those
belonging to the sultan, and they have no beafls but
elephants on which to ride and 6ght. He was told
about me and summoned me, whereupon I came
forward and said “Peace \ai-ialdm\ be upon those
who follow the true religion,”' They undcrAood
nothing but the word as^Ja/Jm, The sultan then
welcomed me and ordered a piece of cloth to be spread
for me to sit upon. I said to the interpreter “ How
can I sit on the cloth when the sultan is sitting on the
ground?” He replied “Such is his habit; he sits
on the ground out of humility. You arc a gue^l and
have come from a great sultan, so he wishes to show
you honour.” Thereupon I sat down, and having
asked me very briefly about the sultan [of India] he
said to me “ You shall ilay with us as a gue^l for three
days, and after that you may go.”

While this sultan was sitting in audience, I saw a
man with a knife in his hand resembling a book-
binder's tool. * He put this knife to his own neck,
and delivered a long speech which I did not under-
277



SELECTIONS FROM THE

^and, then gripped it with both hands and cut his
own throat. So sharp was the knife and so strong
his grip that his head fell to the ground. I was
amazed at his action. The sultan said to me “ Does
anyone do this in your country 1 replied “ I have
never seen such a thing.” Then he laughed and said
“ These are our slaves, who kill themselves for love
of us.” He gave orders that the body should be
carried away and burned, and the sultan’s lieutenants,
the officers of ^ate, the troops, and the citizens went out
to his cremation. The sultan assigned a large pension
to his children, wife, and brothers, and they were held
in high e^eem because of this aft. One of those
present at this audience told me that the speech made
by the man was a declaration of his affeftion for the
sultan, and that he was slaying himself for love of
him, as his father had slain himself for love of the
sultan’s father, and his grandfather for love of the
sultan’s grandfather. Thereafter I withdrew from
the audience and he sent me a gueft’s portion for three
days.

We continued our journey by sea and thirty-four
days later came to the sluggish or motionless sea.®
There is a reddish tinge in its waters, which, they say,
is due to soil from a country in the vicinity. There
are no winds or waves or movement at all in it, in
spite of its wide extent. It is on account of this sea
that each Chinese junk is accompanied by three vessels,
as we have mentioned, which take it in tow and row
it forwards. Besides this every junk has about twenty
oars as big as mafts, each of which is manned by a
mufter of thirty men or so, who ftand in two ranks
facing one another. Attached to the oars are two
enormous ropes as thick as cables; one of the ranks
pulls on the cable [at its side], then lets go, and the
other rank pulls [on the cable at its side]. They chant
in musical voices as they do this, moft commonly

278



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

saying /j’/i, Wc passed thirty-seven days on

this sea, and the sailors were surprised at the facility
of our crossing, for they [usually] spend forty to fifty
days on it, and forty days is the shortcut time required
under the mo^ favourable circum^ances.

Thereafter wc reached the land of Tawdlisl, it being
their king who is called by that name. It is a vait
country and its king is a rival of the king of China.
He possesses many junks, with which he makes war on
the Chinese until thty come to terms with him on
certain conditions. The inhabitants of this land are
idolaters; they arc handsome men and closely resemble
the Turks in figure. Their skin is moil commonly
of a reddish hue, and they arc brave and warlike.
Their women ride on horseback and arc skilful archers,
and fight exadlly like men. We put in at one of their
ports, at the town of Kayldkari, which is among their
fineA and larceA cities. It was formerly the residence
of the son of their king. When we anchored in the
port their troops came down and the captain went
ashore to them, taking with him a present for the
prince. When he enquired of them about him,
however, they told him that the prince’s father had
appointed him governor of another diAriA and had
made his daughter, whose name was Urduja, governor
of this city.®

The day following our arrival at the port of Kaylij-
karf, this princess summoned the ship's captain and
clerk, the merchants and pilots, the commander of
the footsoldicrs, and the commanders of the archers
to a banquet which she had prepared for them, accord-
ing to her cuAom, The captain wished me to go
with them, but I declined, because, being infidels, it
is not lawful to eat their food. When they came into
her presence she asked them if there was any one else
of their company who had not come. The captain
replied “There is only one man left, a bakhshi (that
279



SELECTIONS FROM THE

is, a qadi, in their tongue), and he will not eat your
food.” Thereupon she said “ Call him,” so her guards
came [to me] along with the captain’s party and said
“ Comply with the princess’s wish.” I went to her
then, and found her sitting in full ^ate. On my
saluting her she replied to me in Turkish, and asked
me from what land I had come. I said to her “ From
the land of India.” “ From the pepper country .f”’
she asked, and I replied “ Yes.” She questioned me
about this land and events there, and when I had
answered she said “ I muSl positively make an expedi-
tion to it and take possession of it for myself, for the
quantity of its riches and its troops attrafts me.” I
replied “ Do so.” She ordered me to be given robes,
two elephant loads of rice, two buffaloes, ten sheep,
four pounds of syrup, and four martahdns (that is,
large jars) filled with ginger, pepper, lemons, and
mangoes, all of them salted, these being among the
things prepared for sea vogayes.

The captain told that this princess has in her army
women, female servants and slave-girls, who fight like
men. She goes out in person with her troops, male
and female, makes raids on her enemies, takes part
in the fighting, and engages in single combat with
picked warriors. He told me too that during a fierce
engagement with certain of her enemies, many of her
troops were killed and they were all but defeated,
when she dashed forward and broke through the ranks
until she reached the king again^ whom she was
fighting, and dealt him a mortal blow with her lance.
He fell dead and his army took to flight. She brought
back his head on the point of a spear, and his relatives
redeemed it from her for a large sum of money. When
she returned to her father he gave her this town,
which had formerly been in her brother’s hands.
The captain told me also that she is sought in marriage
by various princes, but she says “ I shall marry none

280



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

but him who fights and overcomes me in single com-
bat,” and they avoid fighting with her for fear of the
disgrace [that would attach to them] if she overcame
them.

We then left the land of Tawilisi and after seventeen
days at sea with a favouring wind, sailing with maximum
speed and case, reached the land of China.



CHAPTER XI


The land of China is of va^l extent, and abounding
in produce, fruits, grain, gold and silver. In this
respedl there is no country in the world that can rival
it. It is traversed by the river called the “ Water
of Life,” .which rises in some mountains, called the
“ Mountain of Apes,” near the city of Khan-Baliq
[Peking] and flows through the centre of China for
the space of six months’ journey, until finally it reaches
Sin as-Sin [Canton].^ It is bordered by villages,
fields, fruit gardens, and bazaars, ju^ like the Egyptian
Nile, only that [the country through which runs] this
river is even more richly cultivated . and populous,
and there are many waterwheels on it. In the land
of China there is abundant sugar-cane, equal, nay
superior, in quality to that of Egypt, as well as grapes
and plums. I used to think that the ‘Othmani plums
of Damascus had no equal, until I saw the plums in
China. It has wonderful melons too, like those of
Khwarizm and Isfahan. All the fruits which we have
in our country are to be found there, either much the
same or of better quality. Wheat is very abundant
in China, indeed better wheat I have never seen, and
the same may be said of their lentils and chick-peas.

The Chinese pottery [porcelain] is manufadlured
only in the towns of Zaytun and Si'n-kalan. It is
made of the soil of some mountains in that di^ri<5l,
which takes fire like charcoal, as we shall relate sub-
sequently. They mix this with some ^ones which
they have, burn the whole for three days, then pour
water over it. This gives a kind of clay which they

282



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTDTA

cause to ferment. The bcA quality of [porcelain is
made from] clay that has fermented for a complete
month, but no more, the poorer quality [from clay]
that has fermented for ten days. The price of this
porcelain there is the same as, or even less than, that
of ordinary pottery in our country. It is exported to
India and other countries, even reaching as far as
our own lands in the We^, and it is the hne^ of all
makes of pottery.

The hens and cocks in China arc very big indeed,
bigger than geese in our country, and hens* eggs there
arc bigger than our goose eggs. On the other hand
their geese are not at all large.* We bought a hen
once and set about cooking it, but it was too big for
one pot, so we put it tn two. Cocks over there are
about the size of oAriches; often a cock will shed its
feathers and [nothing but] a great red body remains.
The lirA time I saw a Chinese cock was in the city
of Kawlam. I took it for an oArich and was amazed
at it, but its owner told me that in China there were
some even bigger than that, and when I got to China
I saw for myself the truth of what he had told me
about them.

The Chinese themselves arc infidels, who worship
idols and burn their dead like the Hindus.* The
king of China is a Tatar, one of the descendants of
Tinkiz [Chingiz] Khdn. In every Chinese city there
is a quarter for Muslims in which they live by them-
selves, and in which they have mosques both for the
Friday services and for other religious purposes. The
Muslims arc honoured and respefted. The Chinese
infidels eat the fiesh of swine and dogs, and sell it
in their markets. They arc wealthy folk and well-to-
do, but they make no display either in their food or
their clothes. You will sec one of their principal
merchants, a man so rich that his wealth cannot be
counted, wearing a coarse cotton tunic. But there is
283



SELECTIONS FROM THE

one thing that the Chinese take a pride in, that is,
gold and silver plate. Every one of them carries a
Slick, on which they lean in walking, and which they
call “ the third leg.” Silk is very plentiful among
them, because the silk-worm attaches itself to fruits
and feeds on them without requiring much care. For
that reason it is so common to be worn by even the
very poorest there. Were it not for the merchants it
would have no value at all, for a single piece of cotton
cloth is sold in their country for the price of many
pieces of silk. It is cu^omary among^ them for a
merchant to ca^ what gold and silver he has into
ingots, each weighing a hundredweight or more or
less, and to put those ingots above the door of his
house.

The Chinese use neither [gold] dinars nor [silver]
dirhams in their commerce. All the gold and silver
that comes into their country is ca^ by them into
ingots, as we have described. Their buying and
selling is carried on exclusively by means of pieces of
paper, each of the size of the palm of the hand, and
stamped with the sultan’s seal. Twenty-five of these
pieces of paper are called a hdlisht, which takes the
place of the dinar with us [as the unit of currency].'*
When these notes become torn by handling, one
takes them to an office corresponding to our mint,
and receives their equivalent in new notes on delivering
up the old ones. This transaftion is made without
charge and involves no expense,® for those who have
the duty of making the notes receive regular salaries
from the sultan. Indeed the direflion of that office
is given to one of their principal amirs. If anyone
goes to the bazaar with a silver dirham or a dinar,
intending to buy something, no one will accept it
from him or pay any attention to him until he changes
if for bdlisht^ and with that he may buy what he will..

All the inhabitants of China and of Cathay® use in

284



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

place of charcoal a kind of lumpy earth found in their
country. It resembles our fuller’s earth, and its
colour too is the colour of fuller’s earth. Elephants
[are used to] carry loads of it. They break it up into
pieces about the size of pieces of charcoal with us,
and set it on fire and it burns like charcoal, only giving
out more heat than a charcoal fire. When it is reduced
to cinders, they knead it with water, dry it, and use
it again for cooking, and so on over and over again
until it is entirely consumed. It is from this clay
that they make the Chinese porcelain ware, after
adding to it some other ^ones, as we have related.’

The Chinese are of all peoples the mo^l skilful in
the arts and possessed of the greatest mailery of them.
This charafteri^lic of theirs is well known, and has
frequently been described at length in the works of
various writers. In regard to portraiture there is
none, whether Greek or any other, who can match
them in precision, for in this art they show a marvel-
lous talent. I myself saw an extraordinary example
of this gift of theirs, I never returned to any of their
cities alter I had visited it a time without finding
my portrait and the portraits of my companions drawn
on the walls and on sheets of paper exhibited in the
bazaars. When I visited the sultan’s city I passed
with my companions through the painters’ bazaar on
my way to the sultan’s palace. We were dressed
after the ‘Irdql fashion. On returning from the
palace in the evening, I passed through the same
bazaar, and saw my portrait and those of my com-
panions drawn on a sheet of paper which they had
affixed to the wall. Each of us set to examining the
other’s portrait [and found that] the likeness was
perfect in every respefl. I was told that the sultan
had ordered them to do this, and that they had come
to the palace while we were there and had been ob-
serving us and drawing our portraits without our
285



SELECTIONS FROM THE

noticing it^ This is a cuftom of theirs, I mean making
portraits of all who pass through their country. In
faft they have brought this to such perfection that if
a Granger commits any offence that obliges him to
flee from China, they send his portrait far and wide.
A search is then made for him and wheresoever the
[person bearing a] resemblance to that portrait is
found he is arreCled.

When a Muhammadan merchant enters any town
in China, he is given the choice between Claying with
some specified merchant among the Muslims domiciled
there, or going to a hoClelry. If he chooses to Clay
with the merchant, his money is taken into cuClody
and put under the charge of the resident merchant.
The latter then pays from it all his expenses with
honeCly and charity. When the visitor wishes to
depart, his money is examined, and if any of it is
found to be missing, the resident merchant who was
put in charge of it is obliged to make good the deficit.
If the visitor chooses to go to the hoClelry, his property
is deposited under the charge of the keeper of the
hoClelry. The keeper buys for him whatever he
desires and presents him with an account. If he
desires to take a concubine, the keeper purchases a
slave-girl for him and lodges him in an apartment
opening out of the hoClelry, and purveys for them
both. Slave-girls fetch a low price; yet all the Chinese
sell their sons and daughters, and consider it no
disgrace. They are not compelled, however, to travel
with those who buy them, nor on the other hand,
are they hindered from going if they choose to do so.
In the same way, if a Clranger desires to marry, marry
he may; but as for spending his money in debauchery,
no, that he may not do. They say “ We will not
have it noised about amongCl Muslims that their people
waCle their subClance in our country, because it is aland
of riotous living and [women of] surpassing beauty.”

286



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

China is the safest and be^l regulated of countries
for a traveller. A man may go by himself a nine
months* journey, carrying with him large sums of
money, without any fear on that account. The system
by which they ensure his safety is as follows. At
every po^l-5lation in their country they have a ho^lelry
controlled by an officer, who is stationed there with
a company of horsemen and footsoldiers. After
sunset or later in the evening the officer visits the
hostelry with his clerk, rcgillers the names of all
travellers laying there for the night, seals up the liit,
and locks them into the hostelry. After sunrise he
returns with his clerk, calls each person by name, and
writes a detailed description of them on the li^l. He
then sends a man with them to conduft them to the
next poft-^lation and bring back a clearance certificate
from the controller there to the effe(5t that all these
persons have arrived at that station. If the guide
does not produce this document, he is held responsible
for them. This is the pra£lice at every Elation in
their country from Sfn as-Sln to Khdn-Bdliq. In
these hoflelries there is everything that the traveller
requires in the way of provisions, especially fowls and
geese. Sheep on the other hand, are scarce with
them.

To return to the account of our journey. The
fir^l city which we reached after our sea voyage was
the city of Zaytun. [Now although zaytun means
“ olives ”] there are no olives in this city, nor indeed
in all the lands of the Chinese nor in India; it is simply
a name which has been given to the place.® Zaytdn
is an immense city. In it are woven the damask silk
and satin fabrics which go by its name,® and which
are superior to the fabrics of Khansa and Khdn-Baliq.
The port of Zaytiin is one of the largest in the world,
or perhaps the very largest. I saw in it about a
hundred large junks; as for small junks, they could
287



SELECTIONS FROM THE

not be counted for multitude. It is formed by a
large inlet of the sea which penetrates the land to the
point where it unites with the great river. In this
city, as in all Chinese towns, a man will have a fruit-
garden and a field with his house set in the middle
of it, ju^ as in the town of Sijilmasa in our own
country.^® For this reason their towns are extensive.
The Muslims live in a town apart from the others.

On the day that I reached Zaytiin I saw there the
amir who had come to India as an envoy with the
present [to the sultan], and who afterwards travelled
with our party and was shipwrecked on the junk.
He greeted me, and introduced me to the controller
of the douane and saw that I was given good apart-
ments [there] I received visits from the qadi of
the Muslims, the shaykh al-Islam, and the principal
merchants. Among^ the latter was Sharaf ad-Dln of
Tabriz, one of the merchants from whom I had
borrowed at the time of my arrival in India, and the
one who had treated me mo^ fairly. He knew the
Koran by heart and used to recite it con^antly. These
merchants, living as they do in a land of infidels, are
overjoyed when a Muslim comes to them. They say
“ He has come from the land of Islam,” and they
make him the recipient of the tithes on their properties,
so that he becomes as rich as themselves.^ There
was living at Zaytdn, among^ other eminent shaykhs,
Burhan ad-Dln of Kazarfin, who has a hermitage out-
side the town, and it is to him that the merchants pay
the sums they vow to Shaykh Abii Ishaq of Kdzarfin
[see p. 97].

When the controller of the douane learned my ^ory
he wrote to the Qan,^^ who is their Emperor, to inform
him of my arrival on a mission from the king of India.
I asked him to send with me someone to conduft me
to the di^rift of Sin [Sin as-Sln], which they call
Sin-kalan,^^ so that I might see that di^ridf, which is

288




CANTON IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY




TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

in his province, in the interval before the arrival of
the Qdn*s reply. He granted my reque^, and sent
one of his officers to conduA me. 1 sailed up the
river on a vessel resembling the war galleys in our
coun^, except that in this the rowers plied their oars
^landing upright, their place being in the centre of
the vessel,^ while the passengers were at the forepart
and the ^ern. They spread over the ship awnings
made from a plant which grows in their country,
resembling but different from flax, and finer than
hemp [perhaps grass-cloth]. We sailed up this river
for twenty-seven days.*® Every day we used to tie
up about noon by a village where we could buy what
we needed and pray the noon prayers, then in the
evenings we went ashore at another village and so
on, until we reached the city of Sfn-kalin or Sfn as-Sfn.
Porcelain is manufa^hired there as well as at Zaytdn,
and hereabouts the river of the “Water of Life”
flows into the sea, so they call the place “ The Meeting
of the Waters.” Sln-kalan is a city of the fir^l rank,
in regard to size and the quality of its bazaars. One
of the largest of these is the porcelain bazaar, from
which porcelain is exported to all parts of China, to
India, and to Yemen. In the centre of this city there
is an enormous temple with nine portalsj” inside each
of which there is a portico with benches where the
inmates of the temple sit. Between the second and
third portals there is a place containing chambers,
which are occupied by the blind and crippled. Each
of the occupants receives subsistence and clothing from
die endowment of the temple. There are similar
establishments between all the portals. In the interior
there is a hospital for the sick and a kitchen for cooking
food, and it has a Staff of doSlors and servitors. I was
told that aged persons who are incapacitated from
gaining their livelihood receive subsistence and clothing
at this temple, likewise orphans and destitute widows.

289 u



SELECTIONS FROM THE

This temple was built by one of their kings, who
moreover endowed it with [the revenues of] this city
and the villages and fruit gardens belonging to it.
The portrait of this king is painted in the temple we
have described, and they worship it.

In one of the quarters of this city is the Muham-
madan town, where the Muslims have their cathedral
mosque, hospice and bazaar. They have also a qadi
and a shaykh, for in every one of the cities of China
there mu^ always be a Shaykh al-Islam, to whom all
matters concerning the Muslims are referred [i.e. who
adfs as intermediary between the government and the
Muslim community], and a qadi to decide legal cases
between them. My quarters were in the house of
Awhad ad-Din of Sinjar, one of their principal men,
of excellent charafter and immensely wealthy. I
^ayed with him for fourteen days, during which gifts
were poured upon me one after the other from the
qadi and other Muslims. Every day they made a
new entertainment, to which they came in beautifully-
appointed boats, bringing musicians with them.
Beyond the city of Sin-kalan there is no other city,
either infidel or Muslim. It is sixty days’ journey,
so I was told, from there to the Rampart of Gog and
Magog, the intervening territory being occupied by
nomadic infidels, who eat men when they get hold
of thernr^® On that account no one ever crosses their
country or visits it, and I did not find in Sin-kalan
anyone who had himself seen the Rampart or even
seen anyone who had seen it.

A few days after my return to Zaytdn, the Qan’s
order arrived with in^rudtions to convey me to his
capital with all honour and dignity, by water if I
preferred, otherwise by land. I chose to sail up the
■river, so they made ready for me a fine vessel of the
sort that is designed for the use of governors. The
governor sent his ^aff with us, and he, and likewise

290



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

the qddi and the Muslim merchants, sent us large
quantities of provisions. We travelled as ^late-gue^ls,
eating our midday meal at one village, and our evening
meal at another. After ten days* journey we reached
Qanjanfii, a large and beautiful city set in a broad
plain and surrounded by fruit-gardens,^® which gave
the place the look of the Ghdta at Damascus.^ On
our arrival, we were met outside the town by the
qddf, the Shaykh al-Isldm, and the merchants, with
^andards, drums, trumpets, and bugles, and musicians.
They brought horses for us, so we rode in on horse-
back while they walked on foot before us. No one
rode along with us but the qddi and the Shaykh
al-Isldm. The governor of the city with his ^aff
also came out [to meet us], for the sultan’s gue^l is
held in very high honour by them, and so we entered
the city. It has four walls; between the firft and
second live the sultan’s slaves, who are some of them
day-guards and others night-guards of the city; between
the second and third are the quarters of the mounted
troops and the general who governs the city; within
the third wall live the Muslims (it was here that we
lodged at the house of their shaykh), and within the
fourth is the Chinese quarter, which is the largest of
these four cities [in one]. The distance separating
each gate in this city from the next is three or four
miles, and every inhabitant, as we have said, has his
own orchard, house, and grounds.

One day as I was staying at Qanjanfd, a very large
vessel came in, belonging to one of their moil re-
spedled dodlors. I was asked if he might see me,
and he was announced as “ Mawlan^ [Our mailer
i.e. The reverend] Qiwam ad-Din of Ceuta.” His
name roused my intereil, and when he came in and
we fell to conversation ^ter the usual greetings, it
ilruck me that I knew him. I kept looking at him
intently, and at lail he said “ I see you are looking
291



SELECTIONS FROM THE

at me as if you knew me.” So I said to him “ Where
do you come from ?” He replied “ From Ceuta.”
“ And I ” said I “ from Tangier.” Whereupon he
broke into fresh greetings to me, and wept until I
wept in sympathy with him. I then said to him
“ Did you go to India ?” He replied “ Yes, I went
to the capital, Delhi.” Then when he told me that,
I remembered him and said “ Are you al-Bushri ?”
and he replied “ Yes.” I remembered he had come
to Delhi with his mother’s brother, Abu-’l-Qasim of
Murcia, as a beardless youth and a very clever student.
I had spoken of him to the sultan of India, who gave
him three thousand dinars and invited him to ^ay
at his court, but he refused, as he was set on going
to China, where he prospered exceedingly, and ac-
quired enormous wealth. He told me that he had
about fifty white slaves and as many slave-girls, and
presented me with two of each, along with many
other gifts. I met his brother in after years in the
Negrolands — ^what a di^ance lies between them I
I ^ayed at Qanjanfd for fifteen days and then
continued my journey. The land of China, in spite
of all that is agreeable in it, did not attradl me. On
the contrary I was sorely grieved that heathendom
had so Strong a hold over it. Whenever I went out
of my house I used to see any number of revolting
things, and that distressed me so much that I used
to keep indoors and go out only in case of necessity.
When I met Muslims in China I always felt juSt as
though I were meeting my own faith and kin. So
great was the kindness of this dodtor al-Bushrf that
when I left Qanjanfd he accompanied me for four
days, until I reached the town of .Baywam Qutlfi.^^
This is a small town, inhabited by Chinese, a pro-
portion of them being troops, the reSt common people.
The Muslim community there consiSls of four houses
only, the inhabitants of which are agents of my learned

292



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

friend. We put up at the house of one of them, and
^ayed with him for three days, after which I bade the
dodor adieu and set out again.

I sailed up the river with the usual routine, flopping
for dinner at one village, and for supper at another.
After seventeen days of this, we reached the city of
Khansi [Hang-chow], which is the biggc^ city I
have ever seen on the face of the earth.” It is so
long that it takes three days to traverse in the ordinary
routine of marches and halts. It is built after the
Chinese fashion already described, each person, that
is, having his own house and garden. It is divided
into six cities, as we shall describe later. On our
arrival a party came out to meet us, consiAing of the
qidi and the Shaykh al-Islim of the city, and the
family of 'Othmdn ibn AfBn of Egypt, who arc the
principal Muslim residents there, accompanied by
a white flag, drums, bugles, and trumpets. The
governor of the city also came out [to meet us] with
his escort, and so we entered the town.

Khansd consiAs of six cities, each with its own wall,
and an outer wall surrounding the whole. In the hrA
city arc the quarters of the city guards and their com-
mander; 1 was told by the qddf and others that they
muAcred twelve thousand men on the rcgiAcr of
troops. We passed the firA night after our entry in
the house of their commander. On the second day
we entered the second city through a gate called the
Jews* Gate. In this city live the Jews, ChriAians,
and sun-worshipping Turks, a large number in all;
its governor is a Chinese and we passed the second
night in his house. On the third day we entered
the third city, and this is inhabited by the Muslims.
Theirs is a fine city, and their bazaars are arranged
juA as they are in Islamic countries; they have mosques
in it and muezzins — we heard them calling to the
noon prayers as we entered. We Aayed here in the

293



SELECTIONS FR OM THE

mansion of the family of ‘Othman ibn ‘Affan of Egypt.
He was a wealthy merchant, who conceived a liking
for this city and made his home in it, so that it came
be be called ‘Othmdniya after him, and he transmitted
to his posterity the influence and respe< 51 : which he
enjoyed there. It was he who built the cathedral
mosque of Khansa, and endowed it with large bene-
fadlions. The number of Muslims in this city is
very large, and our dlay with them ladled fifteen days.
Every day and night we were the gue^s at a new
entertainment, and they continuously provided the
mo^ sumptuous meats, and went out with us every
day on pleasure rides into different quarters of the
city.

One day they rode out with me and we entered the
fourth city, which is the seat of governnient, and in
which the chief governor Qurtay resides. When we
entered the gate leading to it, my companions were
separated from me, and I was found by the wazfr,
who conduced me to the palace of the chief governor
Qurtay. It was on this occasion that he took from
me the mantle which the saint Jalal ad-Din of Shiraz
had given me, as I have already related [p. 269].
No one resides in this city, which is the mo^l beautiful
of the six, except the sultan’s slaves and servants.
It is traversed by three breams, one of them being
a canal taken off from the great river, which is used
by small boats bringing provisions and coal to the
town, and there are pleasure boats on it as well. The
citadeP® lies in the centre of' this city. It is of enor-'
mous size, and the government house, ^ands in the
middle of it, surrounded by [the court of] the citadel
on all sides. Within it there are arcades, in which
sit workmen making rich garments and weapons.
The amir Qurtay told me that there were sixteen
hundred ma^er-workmen there, each with three or
four apprentices working under him. They are all

294



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

without exception the slaves of the Qin; they have
chains on their feet, and they live outside the fortress.
They arc permitted to go out to the bazaars in the
city, but may not go Beyond its gate. They arc
passed in review before the governor every day, a
hundred at a time, and if any one of them is missing,
his commander is held responsible for him. Their
cuflom is that when one of them has served for ten
years, he is freed from his chains and given the choice
between ilaying in service, without chains, or going
wherever he will within the Qin’s dominions, but
not outside them. When he reaches the age of fifty
he is exempted from work and maintained [by the
^te]. In the same way anyone else who has attained
this age or thereabouts is maintained."^ Anyone
who reaches the age of sixty is regarded by them as
a' child, and legal penalties cease to be applicable to
him. Old men in China arc greatly respected, and
each one of them is called Atd, which means
“ Father.”

The amir Qurtay is the principal amir in China.®
He entertained us in his palace, and prepared a banquet
(their name for it is fowa),^ which was attended by
the principal men of the city. He had Muslim cooks
brought, who slaughtered the animals [in accordance
with Muslim ritu:u, so that the food should be cere*
monially clean] and cooked the food. This amir, in
spite or his ei^tcd rank, presented the dishes to us
with his own hand, and with his own hand carved
the meat. We flayed with him as his gueAs for three
days. He sent his son with us to the canal, where
we went on board a ship resembling a fire-ship, and
the amlris son went on another along with musicians
and singers. They sang in Chinese, Arabic, and
Persian. The amir's son was a great admirer of
Persian melody, and when they sang a certain Persian
poem he commanded them to repeat it over and over

295



SELECTIONS FROM THE

again, until I learned it from them by heart. It has
a pleasant lilt, and goes like this ;

Td dil bimihnat dddim
dat bahr-i fikr uftddim
Chun dar namdx. t flddim
qavl bimihrdb andaritn?'^

On this canal there was assembled a large crowd in
ships with brightly-coloured sails and silk awnings,
and their ships too were admirably painted. They
began a mimic battle and bombarded each other with
oranges and lemons.^ We returned in the evening
to the amir’s palace, and spent the night there. The
musicians were there, and sang all kinds of pleasing
melodies.

That same night a certain juggler, one of the Qan’s
slaves, was there. The ami'r said to him “ Show us
some of your feats.” So he took a wooden ball with
holes in which there were long leather thongs, and
threw it into the air. It rose right out of our sight,
for we were sitting in the middle of the palace court,
during the season of intense heat. When nothing,
blit a short piece of the cord remained in his hand,
he ordered one of his apprentices to go up the rope,
which he did until he too disappeared from our sight.
The juggler called him three times without receiving
any reply, so he took a knife in his hand, as if he were
enraged, and climbed up the rope until he disappeared
as well. The next thing was that he threw the boy’s
hand to the ground, and then threw down his foot,
followed by his other hand, then his other foot, then
his trunk, and finally his head. After that he came
down himself puffing and blowing, with his clothes
all smeared with blood, and kissed the ground in front
of the amir, saying something to him in Chinese.
The amir gave him some order, and thereupon he took
the boy s limbs, placed them each touching the other.



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

2nd gave him a kick, and up he rose as sound as ever,
i was amazed and took palpitation of the heart, juA
as had happened to me when I saw something similar
at the court of the king of India, so they admmi^cred
some potion to me which removed my di^lress. The
qddi Afkhar ad-Dfn was sitting beside me, and he
said to me: ** By God, there was no climbing or coming
down or cutting up of limbs at all; the whole thing
is Juil hocus-pocus.”

On the following day we entered the fifth and
largcR city, which is inhabited by the common folk.
Its bazaars arc good and contain very skilful artificers;
it is there that the fabrics which take their name from
this town arc woven. We passed a night in this city
as the gucdls of its governor, and on the morrow entered
the sixth city through a gate called Boatmen’s gate.
This sixth city, which lies on the banks of the great
river, is inhabited by seamen, fishermen, caulkers, and
carpenters, along with archers and footsoldiers, all of
them being slaves of the sultan. No other persons
live Qn this town] with them, and their numbers are
very great. We spent a night there as the guc^^s of
its governor. The amir Qurtay equipped a vessel
for us with all that was needed in the way of provisions,
etc., and sent his suite with us to arrange for our
hospitable reception [on the journey]. So we left this
city, which is the laA of the provinces of China [proper],
and entered the land of Khitd [Cathay].

Cathay is the bcR cultivated country in the world.
There is not a spot in the whole extent of it that is
not brought under cultivation. The reason is that
if any part is left uncultivated its inhabitants or their
neighbours arc assessed for the land-tax due thereon.
Fruit-gardens, villages, and fields extend along both
banks of this river without interruption from the city
of Khansd to the city of Khdn-Bdiiq [Peking], which
is a space of sixty-four days' journey. There are no
297



SELECTIONS FROM THE

Muslims to be found in these di^rifts, except casual
travellers, since the country is not suitable for [their]
permanent residence, and there is no large city in it,
only villages and wide spaces,^® covered with corn,
fruit-trees, and sugarcane. I have never seen any-
thing in the world like it, except a space of four days’
journey between Anbdr and ‘Ana [in ‘Iraq; see
P* 303]* disembark every night and

^ay in the villages in order to receive our provisions
as gue^s of the sultan.

.Thus we completed our journey to the city of Khan-
Baliq, also called Khaniqii,^® the capital of the Qan —
he being their emperor, whose dominion extends over
the countries of China and Cathay. When we arrived
there we moored at a distance of ten miles from the
city, as is their custom, and a written report of our
arrival was sent to the admirals, who gave us per-
mission to enter the port of the city. Having done
so, we disembarked and entered the town, which is
one of the largest towns in the world. It is not laid
out, however, after the Chinese fashion, with gardens
inside the city, but is juft like the cities in other coun-
tries with gardens outside the walls. The sultan’s
city lies in the centre, like a citadel, as we shall relate.
I ftayed with Shaykh Burhan ad-Din of Sdgharj —
the same man to whom the king of India sent 40,000
dinars with an invitation to him [to come to India],
and who took the money and paid his debts with them,
but refused to go to the king and set out [inftead]
for China [see above p. 202]. The Qan set him at
the head of all the Muslims who live in his territories,
and gave him the title of Sadr al-Jihdn. The word
qdn is a term applied by them to every person who
exercises the sovereignty over [all] the provinces, juft
as every ruler of the country of Ldr is called atdbeg?^
His name is Pashay,^^ and there is no infidel on the
face of the earth who owns an empire greater than his.

298



TRAVELS OF IHN liATTOTA

His palace lies in the centre of the [inner] city, which is
appropriated to his residence. The greater part of it is
conftrufled of cars-ed wood, and it is excellently planned.

When we reached the capital Khin-Blliq, we found
that the Qin was absent irons it at that time, as he
had gone out to tijjht his cousin Finlz, who had
rebelled againsl him in the dislrifl of Qariqorum and
Biih-lliligts in Cathay.^ The dislance between these
places and the capital is a three months' journey
through cultis-atcd diilrifls. After his departure the
majority of his amirs threw oiT their allegiance to him
and agreed to de|>ose him because he had departed
from the precepts of the TjtJf, that is, the precepts
which were laid dosvn by their anceflor Tinklz
[Chingiz] Khin, svho laid wafle the lands of IsUm.
They went over to his rebel nephew and wrote to the
Qin to the elTefl that he should abdicate and retain
the city of Khansi as an appanage. He refused to
do so, foughc them, and w'os defeated and killed.

It was a few dap after our arrival at his capital
that the news of this was received. The city was
decorated; trumpets, bugles and drums were played,
and games and entertainments held for the space of
a month. Thereafter the slain Qln was brought,
with about a hundred other slain, his cousins, relatives,
and intimates. A great eJ'ar, that is, a subterranean
chamber, was dug for him and richly furnished. The
Qin was laid in it with his weapons, and all the gold
and silver plate from his palace was deposited in it
with him. With him also were put four slavegirls
and six of the principal mamluks, who carried drinking
vessels, then the door of the chamber was built up and
the whole thing covered over with earth until it reached
the size of a large mound. After that they brought
■four horses and drove then about the Qin's grave
until they flopped [from exhauflion], then they set
up a wooden ereftion over the grave and suspended
299



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

the horses on it, having fir^ driven a piece of wood
. through each horse from tail to mouth.^^ The above-
mentioned relatives of the Qan were also placed in
subterranean chambers along with their weapons and
house utensils, and they impaled over the tombs of the
principal members, of whom there were ten, three horses
each, and over the tombs of the re^l one horse each.

This day was observed as a solemn holiday, and
not one person was absent from the ceremony, men
or women, Muslim or heathen. They were all
dressed in mourning robes, which are white capes in
the case of the infidels and [long] white garments in
the case of the Muslims. The Qan’s khatiins and
courtiers lived in tents near his grave for forty days,
some even more than that, up to a year; and a bazaar
was e^ablished there to supply the food and other
things which they required. Such practices as these
are observed, so far as I can record, by no other people
in these days. The heathen Indians and Chinese, on
the other hand, burn their dead; other people do
indeed bury the dead man, but they do not put anyone
in with him. However, I have been told by tru^-
worthy persons in the Negrolands that the heathen
there, when their king died, used to make a na us
for him and put in with him some of his courtiers
and servants, along with thirty of the sons and daughters
of their principal families, fir^ breaking their hands and
feet, and they put in drinking vessels along with them.

When the Qan was slain, as we have related, and
his nephew Firfiz obtained the sovereign power, he
chose to make his capital at the city of Qaraqorum,
on account of its proximity to the territories of his
cousins, the kings of Turki^an and Transoxania.^®
Afterwards several of the amirs who were not present
when the Qan was killed revolted again^ him and
intercepted communications and the disorders grew
to serious proportions.


300



CHAPTER XII


When the revolt broke out and the flames of disorder
were kindled, Shaykh Burhdn ad-Dfn and others
advised me to return to [Southern] China before the
diilurbances became chronic. They presented them-
selves with me to the representatives of Sultan Fi'ruz,
who sent three of his suite to escort me and wrote
orders for my treatment as a gucSt [on the journey].
We travelled down the river to KhansS, and thence
to Qanjanfii and Zaytdn, and on reaching the lail
I found the junks ready to sail for India. Among^l
them was a junk belonging to al-Malik az-Zihir, the
ruler of Jdwa [Sumatra], the crew of which were
Muslims. His agent knew me and was delighted at
my arrival. .We sailed with fair winds for ten days,
but as we approached the land of TawdlisI, the wind
changed, the sky darkened, and it rained heavily. We
passed ten days without seeing the sun, and then
entered a sea which we did not know. The crew of
the junk became alarmed and wished to return to
China, but that was out of the queAion. We passed
forty-two days not knowing in what sea we were.

, On the forty-third day there was visible to us at
early dawn a mountain, projefling from the sea at
a distance of about twenty miles from us, and the wind
was carrying us straight towards it. The sailors were
puzzled and said “We are nowhere near land, and there
is no record of a mountain in the sea. If the wind
drives us on it we are lo^l.” So all on board began
to humble themselves and concentrate their thoughts
on God, and renew their repentance. We implored
301



SELECTIONS FROM THE

God in prayer and sought the mediation of his prophet
[Muhammad] — on whom be the Blessing and Peace
of God; the merchants vowed to distribute large sums
in alms, and I wrote down their vows for them in
a register with my own hand. The wind calmed a
little, and later on when the sun rose we saw that the
mountain had risen into the air, and that daylight
was visible between it and the sea. We were amazed
at this, and I saw the crew weeping, and taking fare-
well of one another. So I said “ What is the matter
with you They replied “ What we thought was.
a mountain is the Rukh, and if it sees us it will make
an end of us.”^ We were at that moment less than
ten miles away from it. JuSt then God of His mercy
sent us a favourable wind, which turned us in another
direSlion, so that we did not see it and could not
learn its true shape.

Two months after this we reached Jawa and landed
at [the town of] Sumutra. We found its sultan
al-Malik az-Zahir ju^ returned from a raid, with a
large train of captives. He sent me two girls and
two boys, and lodged me in the usual manner. ' I
was present at the marriage of his son to the daughter
of the sultan’s brother. After two months’ ^ay on
this island I took a passage on a junk. The sultan
on bidding me farewell, gave me a great deal of aloes-
wood, camphor, clpves, and sandalwood. I left him
and set sail, and after forty days reached Kawlam
[Quilon]. Here I disembarked and put up in
proximity to the qadi of the Muslims; this was in
Ramadan [January 1347] and I attended the festival
prayer in the cathedral mosque there. From Kawlam
we went on to Calicdt, and ^ayed there for some
days. I intended to return to Delhi, but on second
thoughts I had some fears about doing so, so I re-
embarked and twenty-eight days later I arrived at
Dhafdri (p. 1 1 3), that being in Muharram of the

302



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

year [seven hundred and] fortycight [end of April

1347 ]- ^

Thereafter I took ship and arrived at Mascat, a
small town in which there is a great abundance of the
fish called qulb aUmds (p. 242). Thence we sailed
to the ports of Qurayydt, Shabba, Kalba,* and Qalhdt,
which has been mentioned before [p. 1 18]. All these
towns form part of the province of Hormuz, though
they arc reckoned to be in the diifrift of ‘Omdn.
We- sailed on to Hormuz, and after spending three
nights there, travelled by land to KawrdAdn, Ldr, and
Khunjubdl — all of which have been mentioned before,
(p. 120) — thence to KdrzC,® where we flayed for three
nights, and so through a number of other towns and
villages to the city of Shfrdz. From Shirdz I travelled
to Isfahdn, and thence through Tuflar [Shushtar] to
Basra, where I visited the sacred tombs which arc
there, and so through Mash-had ‘AH [Najaf] and
Hilla to Baghddd, which I reached in Shawwdl of
the year 48 [January 1348]. I met there a man
from Morocco, who informed me of the disafler at
Tarifa, and of the capture of al-Khadrd [Algeciras]
by the Chriflians^ — may God repair the breach that
Isidm has suffered thereby I

The sultan of Baghddd and of 'Irdq at the time of
my arrival at the date mentioned was Shaykh Hasan,®
the cousin of the late Sultan Abii Sa'ld by his father’s
sifter. When Abd Sa‘fd died, he took possession
of his kingdom in ‘Irdq, and married his widow
Dilshdd, the daughter of Dimashq Khwdja, son of
the amir Chdbdn, jufl as Sultan Abd SaHd had done
in marrying Shaykh Hasan’s wife. Sultan Hasan
was away from Baghddd at this time, on his way to
fight Sultan Atdbeg Afrdsiydb, the ruler of the country
of Ldr.

After leaving Baghddd I travelled to the cip^ of
Anbdr, then successively to Hit, Haditha, and ‘Ana.®

303



SELECTIONS FROM THE

This is one of the richest and mo^ fertile in

• the world, and there are buildings all along the road
between these points, so that one walks as it were
through one [continuous] bazaar. We have already
said that we have seen nothing to equal the country
along the banks of the river of China, except this
di^ri6t. I came next to the town of Rahba, which
is the fineft town in ‘Iraq, and the frontier town of
Syria.'^ Thence we went on to as-Sukhna, a pretty
town,® inhabited mainly by infidels, that is Chrillians.
It is called as-Sukhna [“ the hot town ”] because of
the heat of its water, and contains bathhouses for men
and women. They draw their water by night and
put it on the roofs to cool. Thereafter we journeyed
to Tadmur [Palmyra], the city of the prophet Solomon,
which was built for him by the jinn,® and thence to
Damascus, which I thus revisited after twenty years’
absence. I had left a wife of mine there pregnant,
and I learned while I was in India that she had borne
a male child, whereupon I sent to the boy’s maternal
grandfather, who belonged to Miknasa [Mequinez]
in Morocco, forty gold dinars in Indian money. When
I arrived in Damascus on this occasion I had no
thought but to enquire after my son. I went to the
mosque, where by good fortune I found Ndr ad-Di'n
as-Sakhawi, the imam and principal [shaykh] of the
Malikites. I greeted him but he did not recognize
me, so I made myself known to him and asked him,
about the boy. He replied “ He is dead these twelve
years.” He told me that a scholar from Tangier
was living in the Zahiriya academy, so I went to see
him, to enquire after my father and relatives. I
found him to be a venerable shaykh, and when I had
greeted him and told him the name of my family he
informed me that my father had died fifteen years
before and that my mother was ^lill alive. I remained
at Damascus until the end of the year, though there

304



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

was a great scarcity of provisions and bread rose to
the price of seven ounces for a dirham nuqra [about
jdJ. Their ounce equals four Moroccan ounces.

On leaving Damascus I went to Aleppo, by way
of Hims, Hamdh, Ma'arra, and Sarmln. It happened
at this time that a certain danvish, known as the
Principal Shaykh, who lived on a hill outside the town
of ‘Ayntdb,*® where he used to be visited by the people
in search of the blessings he conveyed, having one
disciple attendant on him but [otherwise] a solitary
and unmarried, said in one of his discourses: “The
Prophet — may God bless him and give him pcacel —
could not do without women, but I can do without
them." Evidence to that effeft was brought again^
him and proved before a qddf, and the case was
referred to the commandcr-in-chicf. The shaykh
and his disciple, who had assented to his statement,
were brought up [for examination]; the principal
judges of the four rites decided on legal grounds
that both should be punished by death, and they were
duly executed.

Early in June we heard at Aleppo that the plague
had broken out at Gaza, and that the number of
deaths there reached over a thousand a day. On
travelling to Hims I found that the plague had broken
out there: about three hundred persons died of it on
the day that I arrived. So I went on to Damascus,
and arrived there on a Thursday. The inhabitants
had then been failing for three days; on the Friday
they went out to the mosque of the Footprints,
as we have related in the firil book, and God
eased them of the plague [p, 68], The number of
deaths among them reached a maximum of 2,400 a
day. Thereafter I journeyed to ‘Ajaldn and thence
to Jerusalem, where I found that the ravages of the
plague had ceased. We revisited Hebron, and thence
went to Gaza, the greater part of which we found
305 X



SELECTIONS FROM THE

deserted because of the number of those who died
there of the plague. I was told by the qadi that the
number of deaths there reached i,ioo a day. We
continued our journey overland to Damietta, and on
to Alexandria. Here we found that the plague was
diminishing in intensity, though the number of deaths
had previously reached a thousand and eighty a day.
I then travelled to Cairo, where I was told that the
number of deaths during the epidemic rose to twenty-
one thousand a day.^^ From Cairo I travelled
through the Sa‘id [Upper Egypt] to ‘Aydhab,
whence I took ship to Judda, and thence reached
Mecca on 22nd Sha‘ban of the year 49 [r6th
November 1348].

After the pilgrimage of this year [28th Feb. — 2nd
March 1349] I travelled with the Syrian caravan
to Tayba [Madina], thence to Jerusalem, and back
through Gaza to Cairo . Here we learned that through
our ma^er, the Commander of the Faithful, Abd
‘Inan (may God ^rengthen him I), God had united
the scattered forces of the House of Man'n^ and
healed by his blessing the we^ern lands when they
had all but succumbed. [We were told that] he had
poured out his bounty upon great and small, and
overwhelmed the whole nation by the torrent of his
favours, so that all hearts were filled with the desire
of landing at his gate and with the hope of kissing
his stirrup. Thereupon I decided to journey to his
illu^rious capital, moved also by the longing called
forth within me by memories of my home, by
yearning for my family and friends, and by love of
my country, wifiich surpasses in my eyes all other
countries.

I took ship on a small trading-vessel belonging to
a Tunisian in Safar of the year [April-May 1349],
and travelled to Jerba, where I disembarked. The
vessel went on to Tunis, and was captured by the

306



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

encmy.“ From Jcrba I went in a small boat to Qabis
[Gabes], where I put up as the gue^ of the two
illu^lrious brothers, Abu Marwdn and Abu’l-Abbas,
sons of Makkf, the governors of Jerba and Gabes.
I attended with them the fcdlLval of the birthday of
the Prophet [i2th Rabi L=3ist May]. Thereafter
I went bv boat to Safdqus [Sfax] and continued by
sea to Bulydna,^* from which point I travelled on land
in the company of the Arabs, and after some discom-
forts reached the city of Tunis'", at the time when it
was being besieged by the Arabs. I dlayed at Tunis
thirty-six days and then took ship with the Catalans.
We reached the island of Sarddniya [Sardinia], one
of the islands belonging to the ChriAians, where there
is a wonderful harbour, with great baulks of wood
m a circle round it and an entrance like a gateway,
which is opened only if they give permission.^ In
the island there are fortified towns; we went into one
of them, and [saw] in it a large number of bazaars.
I made a vow to God to fail for two successive months
if He should deliver us from this island, because we
found out that its inhabitants were proposing to pursue
us when we left to take us captive. We then sailed
away and ten days later reached the town of Tenes,
then Mdzdna, then Mudlaghdnim [Modlaganem],
and so to Tilimsdn [Tlemscn], I went to al-‘Ubbdd
and visited [the tomb of] Shaykh Ab\i Madin.^® I
left Tilimsdn by the Nadr^ima road, then took the
Akhandaqdn road, and spent the night at the hermi-
tage of Shaykh Ibrdhfm. We set out from there
and when we were near Azghanghdn'^ we were at-
tacked by fifty men on foot and two horsemen. I
had with me the pilgrim Ibn Qarf'dt of Tangier and
his brother Muhammad, who afterwards perished as
a martyr at sea. We resolved to make a fight for it
and put up a flag, whereupon they made peace with
us and we went with them, praise be to God. Thus

307



SELECTIONS FROM THE

we reached the town of Taza, where I learned the
news of my mother’s death of the plague — may God
Mo^l High have mercy on her. Then I set out
from Taza and arrived at the royal city of Fez on
Friday, at the end of the month of Sha'ban of the year
750 [13th November 1349].

I presented myself before our mo^ noble ma^er,
the mo^ generous imam, the Commander of the
Faithful, al-Mutawakkil Abd ‘Inan — ^may God enlarge
his greatness and humble his enemies. His dignity
made me forget the dignity of the sultan of ‘Iraq,
his beauty the beauty of the king of India, his fine-
qualities the noble charafter of the king of Yemen,
his courage the courage of the king of the Turks,
his clemency the clemency of the king of the Greeks,
his devotion the devotion of the king of Turki^an,
and his knowledge the knowledge of the king of
Jawa. I laid down the ^aff of travel in his glorious
land, having assured myself after unbiassed considera-
tion that it is the be^ of countries, for in it fruits
are plentiful, and running water and nourishing food
are never exhau^ed. Few indeed are the lands which
unite all these advantages, and well spoken are the
poet’s words ;

Of all the lands the Weft by this token’s the beft :

Here the full moon is spied and the sun speeds to reft.

The dirhams of the We^ are small, but their utility
is great. When you compare its prices with the prices
of Egypt and Syria, you will see the truth of my
contention, and realize the superiority of the Maghrib.
For I assure you that mutton in Egypt is sold at
eighteen ounces for a dirham nuqra^ which equals in
value six dirhams of the Maghrib,^® whereas in the
Maghrib- meat is sOld, when prices are high, at eighteen
ounces for two dirhams, that is a third of a nuqra.
As for melted butter, it is usually not to be found in

308



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

Egypt at all. The kinds of things that the Egyptians
cat along with their bread would not even be looked
at in the Maghrib. They consist for the mo^l part
of lentils and chickpeas, which they cook in enormous
cauldrons,'® and on which they put oil of sesame;
baiUlii^ a kind of peas which they cook and cat with
olive oil; gherkins, which they cook and mix with
curdled milk; purslane*® which they prepare in the
same way; the buds of almond trees, which they cook
and serve in curdled milk; and colocasia, which they
cook. All these things are easily come b^ in the
Maghrib, but God has enabled Its inhabitants to
dispense with them, by reason of the abundance of
fleshmeats, melted butter, fresh butter, honey, and
other produfb. As for green vegetables, they are
the rarcA of things in Egypt, and moA of their fruit
has to be brought from Syria. Grapes, when they
arc cheap, are sold amongA them at a dirham nuqra
for three of their pounds, their pound being twelve
ounces.

As for Syria, fruits arc indeed plentiful there, but
in the Maghrib they arc cheaper. Grapes are sold
there at the rate of one of their pounds for a dirham
nuqra (their pound is three Maghrib! pounds), and
when their price is low, two pounds tor a dirham
nuqra. Pomegranates and quinces arc sold at eight
fah [coppers] apiece, which equals a dirham of our
money. As for vegetables the quantity sold for a
dirham nuqra is less than that sold for a small dirham
in our country. Meat is sold there at the rate of one
Syrian pound for two and a half dirhams nuqra. If
vou consider all this, it will be clear to you that the
lands of the Maghrib arc the cheapest in co^l of living,
the mo^ abundant in good things, and bleft with the
greatest share of material comforts and advantages.
Moreover, God has augmented the honour and excel-
lence of the Maghrib by the imdmate of our mailer,

309



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

the Commander of the Faithful, who has spread the
shelter of security throughout its territories and made
the sun of equity to rise within its borders, who has
caused the clouds of beneficence to shed their rain
upon its dwellers in country and town, who has purified
it from evildoers, and e^ablished it in the ways alike
of worldly prosperity and of religious observance.






CHAPTER Xin


After I had been privileged to observe this noble
majeily and to share in the all-embracing bounty of
his beneficence, I set out to visit the tomb of my
mother. I arrived at my home town of Tangier and
visited her, and went on to the town of Sabta [Ceuta],
where I iiayed for some months. While I was there
I suffered from an illness for three months, but after-
wards God reilored me to health. I then proposed
to take part in the jiiJJ and the defence of the frontier,
so I crossed the sea from Ceuta in a barque belonging
to the people of Asild [Arzila], and reached the land
of Andalusia (may God Almighty guard herl) where
the reward of the dweller is abundant and a recom-
pense is laid up for the settler and visitor. This was
after the death of the Chriflian tyrant Adfiinus
fAIphonso XI.] and his ten-months' siege of the Jebel
[Gibraltar], when he thought that he would capture
ail that the Muslims dlill retain of Andalusia; but
God took him whence he did not reckon, and he,
who of all men flood in the mofl mortal terror of the
plague, died of it.‘ The firfl part of Andalusia that
I saw was the Mount of Conquefl [Gibraltar]. I
walked round the mountain and saw the marvellous
works executed on it by our mailer [the late Sultan
of Morocco] Abu'l-Hasan and the armament with
which he equipped it, together with the additions
made thereto by our mafler [Abii ‘InSn], may God
flrengthen him, and I should have liked to remain
as one of its defenders to the end of my days.

Ibn Juzayy adds: “The Mount of Conquefl is the
citadel of Islam, an obflruSion fluck in the throats
3 ”



SELECTIONS FROM THE

of the idolaters. From it began the great conque^
[of Spain by the Arabs], and at it disembarked Tariq
ibn Ziyad, the freedman of Miisa ibn Nusayr, when
he crossed [the strait in 7^^]* name was linked
with his, and it was called Jebel Tariq [The Mount
of Tariq]. It is called also the Mount of Conque^,
because the conque^ began there. The remains of
the wall built by Tariq and his army are ^ill in exig-
ence; they are known as the Wall of the Arabs, and
I myself have seen them during my ^ay there at the
time of the siege of Algeciras (may God re^ore it
[to Islam] !).

“ Gibraltar was recaptured by our late ma^er Abu’l-
Hasan, who recovered it from the hands of the Chris-
tians after they had possessed it for over twenty years.
He sent his son, the noble prince Abii Malik, to
besiege it, aiding him with large sums of money and
powerful armies. It was taken after a six months’
siege in the year 733 [1333 a.d.]. At that time it
was not in the present ^ate. Our late ma^er Abu’l-
Hasan built in it the huge keep at the top of the
fortress; before that it was a small tower, which was
laid in ruins by the atones from the catapults, and he
built the new one in its place. He built the arsenal
there too (for there was no arsenal in the place before),
as well as the great wall which surrounds the Red
Mound, Parting from the arsenal and extending to
the tileyard. Later on our ma^er, the Commander
of the Faithful, Abd ‘Inan (may God ^rengthen him)
again took in hand its fortification and embellishment,
and ^rengthened the wall of the extremity of the
mount, which is the mo^t formidable and useful of
its walls. He also sent thither large quantities of
munitions, food^uffs, and provisions of all kinds, and
thereby acquitted himself of his duty to God Mo^
High with singleness of purpose and sincere devotion.
His concern for the affairs of the Jebel reached such

312



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

lengths that he gave orders for the conAruftion of
a model of it, on which he had represented models
of its walls, towers, citadel, gates, arsenal, mosques,
munition-Aores, and corn-granaries, together with the
shape of the Jebcl itself and the adjacent Red Mound.
This model was executed in the palace precindls; it
was a marvellous likeness and a piece of fine crafts-
manship. Any one who has seen the Jebel and then
sees this copy will recogni2c its merit. This was due
solely to his eagerness (may God strengthen him) to
learn how matters Stood there, and his anxiety to
Strengthen its defences and equipment. May God
MoSl High grant victory to Isidm in the WeStern
Peninsula [Spain] at his hands, and bring to pass his
hope of conquering the lands of the infidels and
breaking the Strcngdi of the adorers of the cross.”

To resume the narrative of our Shaykh. I went
out of Gibraltar to the town of Ronda, one of the
strongest and moSt beautifully situated fortresses of
the Muslims. The qddf there was my cousin, the
doflor Abu’I-Qdsim Muhammad b. Yahyd Ibn Bat-
tiita. I Stayed at Ronda for five days, then went
on to the town of Marbala [Marbella]. The road
between these two places is difficult and exceedingly
rough. Marbala is a pretty little town in a fertile
diStrift. I found there a company of horsemen setting
out for Mdlaqa, and intended to go in their company,
but God by His grace preserved me, for they went
on ahead of me and were captured on the way, as we
shall relate. I set out after them, and when I had
traversed the diSlridt of Marbala, and entered the
diSlrift of SuhayP I passed a dead horse lying in the
ditch, and a little farther on a pannier of fish thrown
on the ground. This aroused my suspicions. In
front of me there was a watchtower, and I said to
myself “ If an enemy were to appear here, the man
on the tower would give the alarm.” So I went on

313



SELECTIONS, FROM THE

to a house thereabouts, and at it I found a horse
killed. While I was there I heard a shout behind
me (for I had gone ahead of my party) and turning
back to them, found the commander , of the fort of
Suhayl with them. He told me that four galleys
belonging to the enemy had appeared there, and a
number of the men on board had landed when the
watchman was not in the tower. The horsemen who
had ju^t left Marbala, twelve in number, had en-
countered this raiding force. The Chri^ians had
killed one of them, one had escaped, and ten were
taken prisoner. A fisherman was killed along with
them, and it was he whose basket I had found lying
on the road.

The officer advised me to spend the night with him
in his quarters, so that he could escort me thence to
Malaqa. I passed the night in the ca^le of the regi-
ment of mounted frontiersmen called the Suhayl
regiment. All this time the galleys of which we have
spoken were lying close by. On the morrow he rode
with me and we reached Malaqa, which is one of the
larged and mo^ beautiful towns of Andalusia. It
unites the conveniences of both sea and. land, and is
abundantly supplied with food^uffs and fruits. I
saw grapes being sold in its bazaars at the rate of
eight pounds for a small dirham, and its ruby-coloured
Murcian pomegranates have no equal in the world.
As for figs and almonds, they are exported from
Malaqa and its outlying di^ridls to the lands both
of the Ea^t and the We^t. At Malaqa there is manu-
failured excellent gilded pottery, which is exported
thence to the moft distant lands. Its mosque covers
a large area and has a reputation for sandlity; the court
of the mosque is of unequalled beauty, and contains
exceptionally tall orange trees.

On my arrival at Malaqa I found the qddf sitting
in the great mosque, along with the doftors of the

314



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

law and the principal inhabitants, all engaged in
coUc(5ting money to ransom the prisoners of whom
we have spoken. I said to him ‘"Praise be to God,
Who hath preserved me, and hath not made me one
of them.” 1 told him what had happened to me after
they had gone, and he marvelled at it and sent me a
hospitality-gifr, as also did the preacher of the town.

hrom Mdlaqa I journeyed to the town of Ballash
[Velcj], a di^ance of twenty-four miles. Ballash is
a fine town with a magnificent mosque; grapes, fruits,
and figs are ju^ as plentiful there as at Mdlaqa. We
went on from there to al-Hamma [Alhama], which is
a small town with a mo^ clcgajit mosque in a fine
situation. Near by, at a di^lance of a mile or so from
the town, is the hot spring [from which the town
derives its name],* on the bank of the river. There
is a bathhouse here for men and another for women.

Thence I went to on the city of Gharndta [Granada],
the metropolis of Andalusia and the bride of its cities.
Its environs have not their equal in any country in
the world. They extend for the space of forty miles,
and arc traversed by the celebrated river of Shannil
[Xcnil] and many other breams. Around it on every
side are orchards, gardens, flowery meads, noble
buildings, and vineyards. One of the mo^l beautiful
places there is ad-dama* [the Fountain of Tears],*
which is a hill covered with gardens and orchards and
has no parallel in any other country. The king of
Gharndta at the time of my visit was Sultan Abu’l-
Hajjdj Yiisuf. I did not meet him on account of an
illness from which he was suffering,® but the noble,
pious, and virtuous woman, his mo&cr, sent me some
gold dinars, of which I made good use.

1 met at Gharndta a number of its di^ingUished
scholars and the principal Shaykh, who is dso the
superior of the Sdff orders. I spent some days with
him in his hermitage outside Gharndta. He showed

315



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

me the greater honour and went with me to visit
the hospice, famed for its sandlity, known as the
Outpoll of al-Uqdb [the Eagle]. Al-‘Uqab is a hill
overlooking the environs of Gharnata, about eight
miles from the city and close by the ruined city of
al-Bira.® There is also at Gharnata a company of
Persian darwishes, who have made their homes there
because of its resemblance to their native lands. One
is from Samarqand, another from Tabriz, a third from
Quniya [Konia], one from Khurasan, two from India,
and so on.

On leaving Gharnata I travelled back through
al-Hamma, Ballash, and Malaqa, to the cattle of
Dhakwan, which is a fine fortress with abundant
water, trees, and fruits."^ From there I went to
Ronda and on to Gibraltar, where I embarked on the
ship by which I had crossed before, and which belonged
to the people of Asila [Arzila]. I arrived at Sabta
[Ceuta] and went on to Asila, where I ^ayed for
some months. Thence I travelled to Sala [Sallee, by
Rabat] and from there reached the city of Marrakush.
It is one of the mpft beautiful of cities, spaciously
built and extending over a wide area, with abundant
supplies. It contains magnificent mosques, such as
its principal mosque, known as the Mosque of the
Kutubiyin [the Booksellers]. There is a marvellously
tall minaret there; I climbed it and obtained a view
of the whole town from it. The town is now largely
in ruins, so that I could compare it only to Baghdad,
though the bazaars in Baghdad are finer.® At Mar-
rakush too there is a splendid college, distinguished
by its fine site and solid conStrudtion ; it was built
by our maSter, the Commander of the Faithful,
Abu’l-FIasan [the late sultan of Morocco].


316



CHAPTER XIV


From Marrdkush I travelled with the suite of our
mailer [the Sultan] to Fez, where I took leave of our
mailer and set out for the Kegrolands. I reached the
town of Sijilmdsa, a very fine town, with quantities
of excellent dates. ‘ The City of Ihsra rivals it in
abundance of dates, but the Sijilmdsa dates .arc better,
and the kind called irJ,r has no equal in the world.
1 ilayed there with the learned Abfi Muhammad
al-Bushrl, the man whose brother I met in the city
of Qanjanfu in China. How ilrangcly separated they
arc 1 He showed me the utmoil honour.

At Sijilmdsa I bought c.imels and a four months'
supply of forage for them. Thereupon I set out on
the lA Muharram of the year [seven hundred and]
fift\'-ihrcc [i8th Februar)' I3J2] with a caravan
including, amongA others, a number of the merchants
of Sijilmdsa. After twenty-five days we reached
Taghdzd, an unattraAive village, with the curious
feature that its houses and mosques arc built of blocks
of salt, roofed with camel skins. There arc no trees
there, nothing but sand. In the sand is a salt mine;
they dig for the salt, and find it in thick slabs, lying
one on top of the other, as though they had been
tool-squared and laid under the surface of the earth."
A camel will carry two of these slabs. No one lives
at Taghdzd except the slaves of the Massfifa tribe,
who dig for the salt; they subsiA on dates imported
from Dar'a* and Sijilmdsa, camels’ flesh, and millet
imported from the Ncgrolands. The negroes come
up from their country and take away the salt from there.

317



SELECTIONS FROM THE

At Iwdlatan a load of salt brings eight to ten mithqdls\-
in the town of Malli it sells for twenty to thirty, and
sometimes as much as forty. The negroes use salt
as a medium of exchange, ju^l as gold and silver is
used [elsewhere]; they cut it up into pieces and buy
and sell with it. The business done at Taghaza, for
all its meanness, amounts to an enormous figure in
terms of hundredweights of gold-du^."*

We passed ten days of discomfort there, because
the water is brackish and the place is plagued with
flies. Water supplies are laid in at Taghaza for the
crossing of the desert which lies beyond it, which is
a ten-nights’ journey with no water on the way except
on rare occasions. We indeed had the good fortune
to find water in plenty, in pools left by the rain. One
day we found a pool of sweet water between two
rocky prominences. We quenched our thiril at it
and then washed our clothes. Truffles are plentiful
in this desert and it swarms with lice, so that people
wear ^ring necklaces containing mercury, which kills
them. At that time we used to go ahead of the caravan,
and when we found a place suitable for pasturage we
would graze our bea^s. We went on doing this until
one of our party was lo^ in the desert; after that I
neither went ahead nor lagged behind. We passed
a caravan on the way and they told us that some of
their party had become separated from them. We
found one of them dead under a shrub, of the sort
that grows in the sand, with his clothes on and a whip
in his hand. The water was only about a mile away
from him.

We came next to Tasarahla, a place of subterranean
water-beds, where the caravans halt.® They ^ay
there three days to re^t, mend their waterskins, fill
them with water, and sew on them covers of sack-
cloth as a precaution again^ the wind. From this
point the takshif is despatched. The takshif is a name

318



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

given to any man of the MassUfa tribe who is hired
by the persons in the caravan to go ahead to Iwdldtan,
carrying letters from them to their friends there, so
that they may take lodgings for them. These persons
then come out a di^ance of four nights' journey to
meet the caravan, and bring water with them. Anyone
who has no friend in IwdUtan writes to some merchant
well known for his worthy charaftcr, who then under-
takes the same services for him. It often happens
that the tahklf perishes in this desert, with the result
that the people of Iwdidtan know nothing about the
caravan, and all or moA of those who arc with it
perish. That desert is haunted hy demons; if the
tahhlf be alone, they make sport of him and disorder
his mind, so that he loses his way and perishes. For
there is no visible road or track in these parts —
nothing but s.and blown hither and thither by the wind.
You see hills of sand in one place, and afterwards you
will see them moved to quite another place. The guide
there is one who has made the journey frequently in
both direftions, and who is gifted with a quick intel-
ligence. I remarked, as a dirangc thing, that the guide
whom we had was blind in one eye, and diseased in
the other, yet he had the bc^ knowledge of the road
of any man. We hired the tahhlf on this journey for
a hundred gold mithqdls\ he was a man of the Massiifi.
On the night of the seventh day [from Tdsarahli]
we saw with joy the fires of the party who had come
out to meet us.

Thus we reached the town of Iwdldtan [WalataJ
after a journey from Sijilmdsa of two months to a
day.® Iwdldtan is the northernmodl province of the
negroes, and the sultan’s representative there was one
Farbd Husayn, farbd meaning deputy [in their lan-
guage]. When we arrived there, the merchants
deposited their goods in an open square, where the
blacks undertook to guard them, and went to the

319



SELECTIONS FROM THE

Jarhd, He was sitting on a carpet under , an archway,
with his guards before him carrying lances and bows
in their hands, and the headmen of the Massdfa behind
him. The merchants remained landing in front of
him while he spoke to them through an interpreter,
although they were close to him, to show his contempt
for them. It was then that I repented of having come
to their country, because of their lack of manners and
their contempt for the whites.

I went to visit Ibn Badda, a worthy man of Sala
[Sallee, Rabat], to whom I had written requesting
him to hire a house for me, and who had done so.
Later on the mtishrif [inspedtor] of Iwalatan, whose
name was Mansha Jd, invited all those who had come
with the caravan to partake of his hospitality. At
firSt I refused to attend, but my companions urged
me very Strongly, so I went with the reSt. The repaSt
was served — some pounded millet mixed with a little
honey and milk, put in a half calabash shaped like a
large bowl. The gueSts drank and retired. I said
to them “ Was it for this that the black invited us
They answered “Yes; and it is in their opinion the
highest form of hospitality.” This convinced me that
there was no good to be hoped for from these people,
and I made up my mind to travel [back to Morocco
at once] with the pilgrim caravan from Iwalatan.
Afterwards, however, I thought it beSt to go to see
the capital of their king [at Mali!].

My Stay at Iwalatan laSted about fifty days; and I
was shown honour and entertained by its inhabitants.
It is an excessively hot place, and boaSts a few small
date-palms, in the shade of which they sow water-
melons. Its water comes from underground water-
beds at that point, and there is plenty of mutton to
be had. The garments of its inhabitants, moSl of
whom belong to the Massfifa tribe, are of fine Egyptian
fabrics. Their women are of surpassing beauty, and

320



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

are shown more respeft than the men. The ^late of
affairs among^l these people is indeed extraordinary.
Their men show no signs of jealousy whatever; no
one claims descent from his father, but on the contrary
from his mother’s brother. A ^rson's heirs arc his
sifter’s sons, not his own sons. This is a thing which
1 have seen nowhere in the world except among the
Indians of Malabar. But those are heathens; these
people arc Muslims, punctilious in observing the hours
of prayer, studying books of law, and memorizing
the Koran. Yet their women show no bashfulness
before men and do not veil themselves, though they
arc assiduous in attending the prayers. Any man
who wishes to marry one of them may do so, but they
do not travel with their husbands, and even if one
desired to do so her family would not allow her to go.

The women there have “ friends " and “ com-
panions ” amongft the men outside their own families,
and the men in the same way have “ companions ”
amongfl the women of other families. A man may
go into his house and find his wife entertaining her
“companion” but he takes no objcClion to it. One
day at Iwdldtan I went into the qddi’s house, after
asking his permission Co enter, and found with him
a young woman of remarkable beauty. When I saw
her I was shocked and turned to go out, but she
laughed at me, inflead of being overcome by shame,
and the qddf said to me “ Why are you going out ?
She is my companion.” I was amazed at their con-
duct, for he was a theologian and a pilgrim to boot.

I was told that he had asked the sultan’s permission
to make the pilgrimage that year with his “com-
panion ” (whether this one or not I cannot say) but
the sultan would not grant it.

When I decided to make the journey to MdlH,
which is reached in twenty*four days from Iwalatan
if the traveller pushes on rapidly, I hired a guide from

32 1 y



SELECTIONS FROM THE

the Massiifa (for there is no necessity to travel in a
company on account of the safety of that road), and
set out with three of my companions. On the way
there are many trees, and these trees are of great age
and girth; a whole caravan may shelter in the shade
of one of them. There are trees which have neither
branches nor leaves, yet the shade ca^t by their trunks
is sujfHcient to shelter a man. Some of these trees are
rotted in the interior and the rain-water colledls in
them, so that they serve as wells and the people drink
of the water inside them."^ In others there are bees
and honey, which is colledled by the people. I was
surprised to find inside one tree, by which I passed,
a man, a weaver, who had set up his loom in it and
was aftually weaving.

A traveller in this country carries no provisions,
whether plain food or seasonings, and neither gold
nor silver. He takes nothing but pieces of salt and
glass ornaments, which the people call beads, and some
aromatic goods. When he comes to a village the
womenfolk of the blacks bring out millet, milk,
chickens, pulped lotus fruit, rice, funi. (a grain re-
sembling mu^ard seed, from which kuskusu^ and gruel
are made), and pounded haricot beans. The traveller
buys what of these he wants, but their rice causes
sickness to whites when it is eaten, and the funi is
preferable to it.

Ten days after leaving Iwalatan we came to the
village of Zaghari, a large village,® inhabited by negro
traders called wanjardtaf^ along with whom live a
community of whites of the ‘Ibadite It is

from this village that millet is carried to Iwalatan.
After leaving Zaghari we came to the great river, that
is the Nile, on which ^ands the town of Karsakhii.^
The Nile flows from there down to Kabara, and thence
to Zagha.^^ In both Kabara and Zagha there are
sultans who owe allegiance to the king of Malli. The

322




SELECTIONS FROM THE

I flopped at the cemetery and went to the quarter
occupied by the whites, where I asked for Muhammad
ibn al-Faqih. I found that he had hired a house for
me and went there. His son-in-law brought me
candles and food, and next day Ibn al-Faqih himself
came to visit me, with other prominent residents. I
met the qadi of Malli, ‘Abd ar-Rahman, who came to
see me; he is a negro, a pilgrim, and a man of fine
character. I met also the interpreter Diagha, who is
one of the principal men among the blacks.^® All
these persons sent me hospitality-gifts of food and
treated me with the utmo^ generosity — ^may God
reward them for their kindnesses ! Ten days after
our arrival we ate a gruel made of a root resembling
colocasia, which is preferred by them to all other
dishes. We all fell ill — there were six of us — and
one of our number died. I for my part went to the
morning prayer and fainted there. I asked a certain
Egyptian for a loosening remedy and he gave me a
thing called baydar^ made of vegetable roots, which he
mixed with aniseed and sugar, and birred in water.
I drank it off and vomited what I had eaten, together
with a large quantity of bile. God preserved me
from death but I was ill for two months.

The sultan of MalH is Mansa Sulayman, mansd
meaning [in Mande] sultan, and Sulayman being his
proper name.^^ He is a miserly king, not a man
from whom one might hope for a rich present. It
happened that I spent these two months without
seeing him, on account of my illness. Later on he
held a banquet in commemoration of our master [the
late sultan of Morocco] Abu’l-Hasan, to which the
commanders, dodlors, qadi and preacher were invited,
and I went along with them. Reading-desks were
brought in, and th^e Koran was read through, then they
prayed for our ma^er Abu’l-Hasan and also for Mansa
Sulayman. When the ceremony was over I went

324



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

forward and saluted Mansi Sulaymdn. The qddf,
the preacher, and Ibn al-Faqlh told him who I was,
and he answered them in their tongue. They said
to me “ The sultan says to you * Give thanks to God,* ”
so I said “Praise be to God and thanks under all
circumstances.’’^

When I withdrew the [sultan’s] hospitality gift was
sent to me. It was taken firSt to the qidf’s house, and
the qddi sent it on with his men to Ibn at-Faqih’s
house. Ibn al-Faqih came hurrying out of his house
bare-footed, and entered my room saying “ Stand up;
here comes the sultan’s ituff and gift to you.’’ So I
dlood up thinking [since he had called it “ dtuff ’’]
that it considled of robes of honour and money, and
lol it was three cakes of bread, and a piece of beef
fried in native oil, and a calabash of sour curds. When
I saw this 1 burii out laughing, and thought it a modi
amazing thing that they could be so foolish and make
so much of such a paltry matter.

For two months after this hospitality gift was sent
to me I received nothing further from the sultan,
and then followed the month of Ramaddn. Mean-
while I used to go frequently to the palace where I
would salute him and sit alongside the qddi and
the preacher. I had a conversation with Dughd
the interpreter, and he said “ Speak in his presence,
and I sh^l express on your behalf what is necessary.”
When the sultan held an audience early in Ramaddn,
I rose and dlood before him and said to him: “ I have
travelled through the countries of the world and have
met their kings. Here have I been four months in
your country, yet you have neither shown me hospi-
tality, nor given me anything. What am I to say
of you before [other] rulers ?” The sultan replied
“ I have not seen you, and have not been told about
you.” The qddf and Ibn al-Faqfh rose and replied
to him, saying “ He has already saluted you, and you
3^S



SELECTIONS FROM THE

have sent him food.” Thereupon he gave orders to
set apart a house for my lodging and to pay me a
daily sum for my expenses. Later on, on the night
of the 27th Ramadan, he distributed a sum of money
which they call the Zakdh [alms] between the qadi,
the preachers, and the doctors He gave me a
portion along with them of thirty-three and a third
mithqalsj and on my departure from Malli he beStowed
on me a gift of a hundred gold mithqdls.

On certain days the sultan holds audiences in the
palace yard, where there is a platform under a tree,
with three Steps; this they call the pempi^^ It is
carpeted with silk and has cushions placed on it.
[Over it] is raised the umbrella, which is a sort of
pavilion made of silk, surmounted by a bird in gold,
about the size of a falcon. The sultan comes out of
a door in a corner of the palace, carrying a bow in
his hand and a quiver on his back. On his head he
has a golden skull-cap, bound with a gold band which
has narrow ends shaped like .knives, more than a
span in length. His usual dress is a velvety red
tunic, made of the European fabrics called mutanfas.
The sultan is preceded by his musicians, who carry
gold and silver guimbris [two-^ringed guitars], and
behind him come three hundred armed slaves. He
walks in a leisurely fashion, affedting a very slow move-
ment, and even ^ops from time to time. On reaching
the pempi he ^ops and looks round the assembly, then
ascends it in the sedate manner of a preacher ascending
a mosque-pulpit. As he takes his seat the drums,
trumpets, and bugles are sounded. Three slaves go
out at a run to summon the sovereign’s deputy and
the military commanders, who enter and sit down.
Two saddled and bridled horses are brought, along with
two goats, which they hold’ to serve as a proteftion
againft the evil eye. Ddgha ^ands at the gate and the
re^ of the people remain in the ^reet, under the trees.

326



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

The negroes arc of all people the moil submissive
to their king and the moil aojcfl in their behaviour
before him. They swear by his name, saying Mausd
SuUymdn It he summons any of them while
he is holding an audience in his pavilion, the person
summoned takes oiT his clothes and puts on worn
garments, removes his turban and dons a dirty skull-
cap, and enters with his garments and trousers raised
knee-high. He goes forward in an attitude of humility
and deje^ion, and knocks the ground hard with his
elbows, then ilands with bowed head and bent back
liAcning to what he says. If anyone addresses the
king and receives a reply from him, he uncovers his
back and throws duR over his head and back, for all
the world like a bather splashing himself with water.
I used to wonder how it was they did not blind them-
selves. If the sultan deUvers any remarks durinc his
audience, those present take off their turbans and put
them down, and liAen in silence to what he says.
Sometimes one of them Aands up before him and recalls
his deeds in the sultan's service, saying “ I did so-and-
so on such a day ” or ** I killed so-and-so on such a
day,” Those who have knowledge of this confirm
his words, which they do by plucking the cord of the
bow and releasing it [with a twang], ju^l as an archer
docs when shooting an arrow. If the sultan says
** Truly spoken ” or thanks him, he removes his
clothes and “ du5ls.” That is their idea of good
manners.

Ibn Juzayy adds: ” I have been told that when the
pilgrim Miisd al-Wanjardtl [the Mandingo] came to
our madlcr Abu’l-Hasan as envoy from Mansd Sulay-
mdn, one of his suite carried with him a basketful of
duil when he entered the noble audience-hall, and
the envoy ‘ dueled * whenever our mailer spoke a
gracious word to him, juH as he would do in his own
country.”





SELECTIONS FROM THE

I was at Main during the two fe^ivals of the sacri-
fice and the fa^-breaking. On these days the sultan
takes his seat on the pempi after the midafternoon
prayer. The armour-bearers bring in magnificent
arms — quivers of gold and silver, swords ornamented
with gold and with golden scabbards, gold and silver
lances, and crystal maces. At his head ^land four
amirs driving off the flies, having in their hands silver
ornaments resembling saddle-^irrups. The com-
manders, qadi, and preacher sit in their usual places.
The interpreter Ddgha comes with his four wives and
his slave-girls, who are about a hundred in number.
They are wearing beautiful robes, and on their heads
they have gold and silver fillets, with gold and silver
balls attached. A chair is placed for Diagha to sit
on. He plays on an in^rument made of reeds, with
some small calabashes at its lower end, and chants a
poem in praise of the sultan, recalling his battles and
deeds of valour. The women and girls sing along
with him and play with bows. Accompanying them
are about thirty youths, wearing red woollen tunics
and white skull-caps ; each of them has his drum slung
from his shoulder and beats it. Afterwards come his
boy pupils who play and turn wheels in the air, like
the natives of Sind. They show a marvellous nimble-
ness and agility in these exercises and play mo^l
cleverly with swords. Dfigha also makes a fine play
with the sword. Thereupon the sultan orders a gift
to be presented to Dfigha and he is given a purse
containing two hundred mithqdls of gold du^, and is
informed of the contents of the purse before all the
people. The commanders rise and twang their bows
in thanks to the sultan. The next day each one of
them gives Dfigha a gift, every man according to his
rank. Every Friday after the ^asr prayer, Dfigha
carries out a similar ceremony to this that we have
described.


328



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

On fcaR>days, after Dughd has finished his display^
the poets come in. Each of them is inside a figure
resembling a thrush) made of featherS) and provided
with a wooden head with a red beak, to look like a
thrush's head. They fland in front of the sultan in
this ridiculous make-up and recite their poems. I
was told that their poetry ts a kind of sermonizing
in which they say to the sultan: “ Tliis pempi which
pu occupy was that whereon sat this king and that
King, and such and such w*crc this one’s noble af^ions
and such and such the other's. So do you too do good
deeds whose memory will outlive you.” After that,
the chief of the poets mounts the Aeps of the pempi
and lays his head on the sultan's lap, then climbs to
the top of the pempi and lays his head firA on the
sultanas right shoulder and then on his left, speaking
all the while in their tongue, and finally he comes
down again* I was told that this praflice is a very
old cuAom amongil them, prior to the introduiflion
of Islim, and that they have kept it up.“

The negroes disliked Mansd Sulaymdn because of
his avarice. His predecessor was Mansd Maghd, and
before him reigned Mansd Mdsd, a generous and
virtuous prince, who loved the whites and made gifts
to them.” It w’as he who gave Abii Ishdq as-SdhiII“
four thousand mithaJls in the course of a single day.

I heard from a trURworthy source that he gave three
thousand mith^dh on one day to Mudrik ibn Faqqds,
by whose grandfather his own grandfather, Sdraq
Jdta, had been converted to Isidm.

The negroes possess some admirable qualities.
They arc seldom unjufl, and have a greater abhorrence
of injuflicc than any other people. Their sultan
shows no mercy to anyone who is guilty of the Ica^l
aft of it. There is complete security in their country.
Neither traveller nor inhabitant in it has anything to
fear from robbers or men of violence. They do not

329



SELECTIONS FROM THE.

confiscate the property of any white man who dies
in their country, even if it be uncounted wealth. On
the contrary, they give it into the charge of some
tru^worthy person among the whites, until the rightful
heir takes possession of it. They are careful to observe
the hours of prayer, and assiduous in attending them
in congregations, and in bringing up their children
to them. On Fridays, if a man does not go early
to the mosque, he cannot find a corner to pray in, on
account of the crowd. It is a cuilom of theirs to
send each man his boy [to the mosque] with his
prayer-mat; the boy spreads it out for his ma^er in
a place befitting him [and remains on it] until he comes
to the mosque. Their prayer-mats are made of the
leaves of a tree resembling a date-palm, but without
fruit.

Another of their good qualities is their habit of
wearing clean white garments on Fridays. Even if
a man has nothing but an old worn shirt, he washes
it and cleans it, and wears it to the Friday service.
Yet another is their zeal for learning the Koran by
heart. They put their children in chains if they show
any backwardness in memorizing it, and they are not
set free until they have it by heart. I visited the qadi
in his house on the day of the festival. His children
were chained up, so I said to him “ Will you not let
them loose ?’* He replied I shall not do so until
they learn the Koran by heart.” Among their bad
qualities are the following. The women servants,
slave-girls, and young girls go about in front of every-
one naked, without a ^itch of clothing on them.
Women go into the sultan’s presence naked and without
coverings, and his daughters also go about naked.
Then there is their cu^om of putting du^ and ashes
on their heads, as a mark of respeft, and the grotesque
ceremonies we have described when the poets recite
their verses. Another reprehensible pradlice among

330



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

many of them is the eating of carrion, dogs, and
asses.

The date of my arrival at MdlH was 14th Jumdda I.,
[seven hundred and] fifty-three [28th June 1352] and
of my departure from it 22nd Muharram of the year
fifty-four [27th February 1353], I was accompanied
by a merchant called Abii Bakr ibn Ya'qdb, We took
the Mima road. I had a camel which I was riding,
because horses are expensive, and coft a hundred
mlthqdh each. We came to a wide channel which
flows out of the Nile and can only be crossed in boats.
The place is infedled with mosquitoes, and no one can
pass that way except by night. We reached the
channel three or four hout^ after nightfall on a moon-
lit night. On reaching it I saw sixteen beails with
enormous bodies, and marvelled at them, taking them
to be elephants, of which there are many in that
country. Afterwards I saw that they had gone into
the river, so I said to Abd Bakr “What kind of
animals are these ?” He replied “ They are hippo-
potami which have come out to pasture ashore.” They
are bulkier than horses, have manes and tails, and
their heads are like horses* heads, but their feet like
elephants’ feet. I saw these hippopotami again when
we sailed down the Nile from Tumbuktii to Gawgaw.
They were swimming in the water, and lifting their
heads and blowing. The men in the boat were afraid
of them and kept close to the bank in case the hippo-
potami should sink them.

They have a cunning method of catching these
hippopotami. They use spears with a hole bored
in them, through which strong cords are passed. The
spear is thrown at one of the animals, and if it trikes
its leg or neck it goes right through it. Then they
pull on the rope until the beaft is brought to the bank,
kill it and eat its flesh. Along the bank there are
quantities of hippopotamus bones.

331



SELECTIONS FROM THE

We halted near this channel at a large village,
which had as governor a negro, a pilgrim, and man
of fine charafter, named Farba Magha. He was
one of the negroes who made the pilgrimage in the
company of Sultan Mansa Mfisa. Farba Maghd
told me that when Mansa Mdsa came to this channel,
he had with him a qadi, a white man. This qadf
attempted to make away with four thousand mithqdls
and the sultan, on learning of it, was enraged at him
and exiled him to the country of the heathen cannibals.
He lived among them for four years, at the end of
which the sultan sent him back to his own country.
The reason why the heathens did not eat him was
that he was white, for they say that the white is in-
dige^ible because he is not “ ripe,’* whereas the black
man is “ ripe ” in their opinion.

Sultan Mansa Sulayman was visited by a party of
these negro cannibals, including one of their amirs.
They have a cullom of wearing in their ears large
pendants, each pendant having an opening of half
a span. They wrap themselves in silk mantles, and
in their country there is a gold mine. The sultan
received them with honour, and gave them as his
hospitality-gift a servant, a negress. They killed and
ate her, and having smeared their faces and hands
with her blood came to the sultan to thank him. I
was informed that this is their regular cu^om whenever
they visit his court. Someone told me about them
that they say that the choicest parts of women’s flesh
are the palm of the hand and the breast.

We continued our journey from this village which
is by the channel, and came to the town of Quri
Mansa.^® At this point the camel which I was riding
died. Its keeper informed me of its death, but when
I went out to see it, I found that the blacks had already
eaten it, according to their usual custom of eating
carrion. I sent two lads whom I had hired for my

332



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

service to buy me a camel at Zagharl, and waited at
Qurf Mansd for six days till they returned with it.

I travelled next to the town of Mima and halted
by some wells in its outskirts,^ Thence we went
on to Tumbuktd, which stands four miles from the
river. Mo^ of its inhabitants are of the Massdfa
tribe, wearers of the face-veil. Its governor is called
Farbd Mdsd. I was present with him one day when
he had ju5l appointed one of the Massdfa to be amir
of a seftion. He assigned to him a robe, a turban,
and trousers, all of them of dyed cloth, and bade him
sit upon a shield, and the chiefs of his tribe raised him
on their heads. In this town is the grave of the
meritorious poet Abd Ishdq as-Sdhill, of Gharndta
[Granada], who is known in his own land as at-Tu-
wagin [“ Little Saucepan ”].®*

rrom Tumbuktd I sailed down the Nile on a small
boat, hollowed out of a single piece of wood. We
used to go ashore every night at the villages and buy
whatever we needed in the way of meat and butter
in exchange for salt, spices, and glass beads. I then
came to a place the name of which I have forgotten,
where there was an excellent governor, a pilgrim,
called Farbd Sulayman. He is famous for his courage
and strength, and none ventures to pluck his bow.

1 have not seen anyone among the blacks taller or
bulkier than him. At this town I was in need of some
millet, so I visited him (it was on the Prophet’s birth-
day) and saluted him. He took me by the hand, and
led me into his audience hall. We were served with
a drink of theirs called daqnu^ which is water con-
taining some pounded millet mixed with a little honey
or milk. They drink this in place of water, because
if they drink plain water it upsets them. If they have
no millet they mix the water with honey or milk.
Afterwards a green melon was brought in and we ate
some of it.


333



SELECTIONS FROM THE

A young boy, not yet full-grown, came in, and Farba
Sulayman, calling him, said to me “ Here is your
hospitality-gift ; keep an eye on him in case he escapes.”
So I took the boy and prepared to withdraw, but he
said “ Wait till the food comes.” A slave-girl of his
joined us; she was an Arab girl, of Damascus, and she
spoke to me in Arabic. While this was going on
we heard cries in his house, so he sent the girl to find
out what had happened. She returned to him and
told him that a daughter of his had ju^ died. He
said “ I do not like crying, come, we shall walk to
the river,” meaning the Nile, on which he has some
houses. A horse was brought, and he told me to
ride, but I said “ I shall not ride if you are walking,”
so we walked together. We came to his houses by
the Nile, where food was served, and after we had
eaten I took leave of him and withdrew. I met no
one among the blacks more generous or upright than
him. The boy whom he gave me is ^ill with me.

I went on from there to Gawgaw [Gogo], which is
a large city on the Nile, and one of the fine^ towns
in the Negrolands.^^ It is also one of their bigge^
and be^-provisioned towns, with rice in plenty, milk,
and fish, and there is a species of cucumber there called
'‘indni which has no equal. The buying and selling
of its inhabitants is done with cowry-shells, and the
same is the case at MalH.®^ I ^ayed there about
a month, and then set out in the direftion of Tagadda
by land with a large caravan of merchants from
Ghadamas. Their guide and leader was the pilgrim
Wuchm, which means “wolf” in the language of the
blacks. I had a riding-camel and a she-camel to
carry my provisions, but when we had travelled the
fir^ ^age, the she-camel could go no farther. So the
pilgrim Wuchin took what was on it and diftributed
it among^ his party, each of whom undertook to carry
a part of it. There was in the company a Maghrabin

334



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

belonging to TadaU, who refused to carry any of it
at all, as the re^l had done. My boy was thir^ one
day, and I asked this man for water, but he would
not give it.

We now entered the territory of the Barddma, who
are a tribe of Berbers. No caravan can travel [through
their country] without a guarantee of their proteftion,
"and for this purpose a woman’s guarantee is of more
value than a man's. Their women are the modf
perfect in beauty and the mo^ shapely in figure of
all women, of a pure white colour and very dlout;
nowhere in the world have I seen any who equal them
in dloutness.®^ I fell ill in this country on account
of the extreme heat, and a surplus of bile. We pushed
on rapidly with our journey until we reached Tagadda,
The houses at Tagaddd arc built of red ilone, and its
water runs by the copper mines, so that both its colour
and tadle are affe^ea. There are no grain crops there
except a little wheat, which is consumed by merchants
and dlrangers. The inhabitants of Tagaddd have no
occupation except trade, Th^ travel to Egypt every
year, and import quantities of all the fine fabrics to
be had there and of other Egyptian wares. They live
in luxury and ease, and vie with one another in regard
to the number of their slaves and serving-women.
The people of Malh' and Iwdlatan do the same. They
never sell the educated female slaves, or but rarely
and at a high price.®®

When I arrived at Tagadda I wished to buy an
educated female slave, but could not find one. After
a while the qddf sent me one who belonged to a friend
of his, and I bought her for twenty-five mithgdis.
Later on her mailer repented [of having sold her]
and wished to have the sale rescinded, so I said to
him “ If you can show me where to find another, I
shall cancel it for you.” He suggested a servant
belonging to ‘AU AghyijI, who was that very Maghrabin
335



SELECTIONS FROM THE

from Tadala who had refused to carry any of my
effedls when my camel broke down, and to give my
boy water when he was thirty. So I bought her
from him (she was better than the former one) and
cancelled the sale with the fir^ man. Afterwards this
Maghrabin too repented of having sold the servant
and wished to have the sale cancelled. He was very
insi^ent about it but I refused, simply to pay him
back for his vile conduct. He was like to go mad
or die of grief, but afterwards I cancelled his bargain
for him.

The copper mine is in the outskirts of Tagadda.
They dig the ore out of the ground, bring it to the
town, and ca^ it in their houses. This work is done
by their male and female slaves. When they obtain
the red copper, they make it into bars a span and a
half in length, some thin and others thick. The thick
bars are sold at the rate of four hundred for a mithqdl
of gold, and the thin at the rate of six or seven hundred
to the mithqdl. They serve also as their medium of
exchange; with the thin bars they buy meat and fire-
wood, with the thick, slaves, male and female, millet,
butter, and wheat. The copper is exported from
Tagadda to the town of Kiibar, in the regions of the
heathens, to Zaghay,®® and to the country of Barmi,
which is forty days’ journey from Tagadda. The
people of Barmi are Muslims, and have a king called
Idris, who never shows himself to his people nor talks
to them, except from behind a curtain.®"^ From this
country come excellent slave-girls, eunuchs, and fabrics
dyed with saffron. The copper from Tagadda is
carried also to Jawjawa, the country of the Muwar-
tabian, and elsewhere.®®

During my ^ay at Tagadda I wished to meet the
sultan, who is a Berber called Izar, and was then at
a place a day’s journey from the town. So I hired
a guide, and set out thither. He was informed of

336



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTOTA

my coming and came to see me, riding a horse without
a saddle, as is their custom. In place of a saddle he
had a gorgeous saddle-cloth, and he was wearing a
cloak, trousers, and turban, all in blue. With him
were his sixer’s sons, who arc the heirs to his kingdom.
We rose at his approach, and shook his hand, then he
asked about me and my arrival, and was told my
Aory. He had me lodged in one of the tents of the
Yandtibun, who arc like the wusfdn in our country,®
and he sent me a sheep roamed on a spit and a wooden
bowl of cows* milk. Near us was the tent of his
mother and his siAcr; they came to visit us and saluted
us, and his mother used to send us milk after the time
of evening-prayer, which is their milking time. They
drink it at that time and again in early morning, but
of cereal foods they neither eat nor know. I Aayed
with them six days, and every day received from the
sultan two roaAcd rams, one in the morning and one
in the evening. He also presented me with a she-
camel and with ten mitkqdu of gold, and I took leave
of him and returned to Tagaddd,

After my return to Tagaddd, a messenger arrived
with a command from our maAcr bidding me proceed
to his sublime capital. I kissed the order and con-
formed to its inAruilions. I bought two riding-
camels for thirty-seven and a third mithqdh and pre-
pared for the journey to Tawdt. I took with me
provisions for seventy days, for there is no corn to
be had between Tagaddd and Tawdt, only fleshmeat,
milk, and butter, which arc paid for with pieces of
cloth.

I left Tagaddd on Thursday nth Sha'ban of the
year [seven hundred and] fifty-four [nth September
1353] with a large caravan which included six hundred
women slaves. We came to Kdhir, where there are
abundant paAurages, and thence entered an unin-
habited and waterless desert, extending for three days^
337 z



SELECTIONS FROM THE

march.^° We journeyed next for fifteen days through
a desert which, though uninhabited, contains water-
points, and reached the place at which the Ghat road,
leading to Egypt, and the Tawdt road divide. Here
there are subterranean water-beds which flow over,
iron; if a piece of white cloth is washed in this water
it turns black.

Ten days after leaving this point we came to the
country of Haggar, who are a tribe of Berbers ; they
wear face veils and are a rascally lot.*^^ We en-
countered one of their chiefs, who held up the caravan
until they paid him an indemnity of pieces of cloth
and other goods. Our arrival in their country fell
in the month of Ramadan, during which they make
no raiding expeditions and do not moleif caravans.
Even their robbers, if they find goods on the road
during Ramadan, do not touch them. This is the
cu^om of all the Berbers along this route. We
continued to travel through the country of Haggar
for a month; it has few plants, is very ^tony, and the
road through it is bad. On the fe^ival of the Fa^t-
breaking we reached the country of some Berbers,
who wear the face-veils, like these others.

We came next to Bdda, one of the principal villages
of Tawat. The soil there is all sand and saltmarsh;
there are quantities of dates, but they are not good,
though the local inhabitants prefer them to the dates
of Sijilmasa. There are no crops there, nor butter,
nor olive oil ; all these things have to be imported from
the Maghrib. The food of its inhabitants consi^s of
dates and locu^s, for there are quantities of locu^s
in their country; they ^ore them ju^t like dates and
use them as food. They go out to catch the locu^s
before sunrise, for at that hour they cannot fly on
account of the cold.^

We ^ayed at Bdda for some days, and then joined
a caravan and in the middle of Dhu’l-qa‘da reached

338



TRAVELS OF IBN BATTUTA

the city of Sijilmdsa. I set out thence on the second
of Dhu'I-hijja [29th December], at a time of intense
cold, and snow fell very heavily on the way* I have
in my life seen bad roads and quantities of snow, at
Bukhird and Samarqand, in Khurdsdn, and the lands
of the Turks, but never have I seen anything worse
than the road of Umm Junayba. On the eve of the
Feilival we reached Dir at-Tama*. I i^ayed there
during the day of the fcail and then went on. So
I arrived at the royal city of Fa’s [Fez], the capital
of our madder the Commander of the Faithful (may
God Arcngthcn him), where I kissed his beneficent
hand and was privileged to behold his gracious coun-
tenance. [Here] I settled down under the wing of
his bounty after long journeying. May God Moil
High recompense him for the abundant favours and
ample benefits which he has bcAowed on me; may He
prolong his days and spare him to the Muslims for
many years to come.

Here ends the travel-narrative entitled A Donation
to those interested in the Curiosities oj the Cities and
Marvels oj the IVays, Its diflation was finished on
3rd Dhu’l-hijja 756 [9th December 1355]. Praise
be to God, and peace to His creatures whom He hath
chosen.

Ibn Juzayy adds: “Here ends the narrative which
I have abridged from the di€lation of the Shaykh Abii
*Abdallih Muhammad ibn Battfita (may God ennoble
him). It is plain to any man of intelligence that
this shaykh is the traveller of the age: and if one were
to say “ the traveller par excellence of this our Muslim
community ” he would be guilty of no exaggeration.


339




NOTES


CHAPTER I

* Corresponding to 3 1 solar yean and four months

* Abu Tishifln 1 (ragned 1318-1348) of the Zi>intd dynafty
of Tlemscn, whose authonty teaehed at this time as far as Algiers
(then a pUce of minor importance) About this same year (132;)
Abd Tisbfin opened a campaign againA the sultan of Tunis

* There wxre vinous meth^ in use for this purpose One i^-as
to reate a speaal litany and anaii the issue in a dream , another, which
v.as frequently pradis^ by Ibn Battdta, was to take an augury from
the Koran after some preliminary recitations

* The fertile plain lying behind AJgicn

* Then the IronUcr diftrid of the sultanate of Ifrlc^lya (Tunis) ,
but on several occasions Bougie formed a separate prinapahty, either
alone or with CooRantinc

* Tunisia and the eaflem part of Algeria had been overrun m the
middle of the eleventh century by nomad Arabs, despatched by the
Fitimid Caliph of Egypt to purush a rebel governor, and only behmd
the alb of the aties were life and property secure

^ Under the Hafsid dynai^, which ruled Tunma from 1228 undl
the advent of the ** Barbary Corsairs '* in the sixteenth century,
Turns was the chief cultural centre of KorthweA Africa, and many
Mooruh famihes from Spain settled there Abu Yahyi II ragned
from 1318 to 1346, when Tunis was temporarily captured by the
Marinid sultan of Morocco

* The fcAival following the annual fail observed during the month
of Ramadio, known as */</ a/ Ftir or Bayram m the Bail In 725 it
fell on 9th September A special plot of ground, called the MusalU,
usually outside the walb, was set aside for the ceremonial prayers
on f^val days It u cuilomary to wear new garments on this
occasion

* The omission of the party to v«it (^ayrawin, the site of the moil
famous san&uary m Northw^ Afnca, is explained by the diilurbcd
ilate of the interior

The names of the four gates of Alexandria (Weil Gate, Sea Gate,
Rosetta Gate, and Green Gate) were until recently preserved in the
ilreet names of the city It js perhaps worth noting m this connexion
that Alexandria is apparently the only m the Bail which has paid
Ibn Battuta the tribute of naming a ilreet after him

341



NOTES


Ibn Battuta’s estimate of three miles between the Pharos and
the city is an evident exaggeration, though Idrfsl also says that the
lighthouse was three miles distant by land and one mile by sea. A
later writer, al-Qalqashandf, puts the diilance at a mile. The same
author Elates that the Pharos was partially destroyed by the Greeks in
the early part of the eighth century, and fell gradually into decay
“ until in the middle of the fourteenth century it had become a total
ruin, only a fragment of it remaining.”

“ Pompey’s Pillar ” is a red granite column from Assuan, which
is supposed to have been erefted in late Roman times on the site of the
ancient temple of Serapis.

I.e. brother by spiritual affiliation, as the term usually signifies
in the language of the saints and mystics.

The phrase seems to be used here as a polite manner of depre-
cating the preference shovm by the shaykh to the traveller.

A species of muUet from which the Itah’an caviare {bottargo)
is obtained.

Ibn Battuta is in error here ; the city was deilroyed by the
Egyptian government after the Crusade of St. Louis in 1249-50,
to prevent its recapture by the Franks.

The rhetorical description in the text is an example (very much
abridged) of the florid ^le of composition in balanced and rhymed
sentences commonly found in such passages, and possibly intended to
convey the emotions of admiration and astonishment. It is not all
mere verbiage, however ; the laSl sentence is confirmed by the Itahan
Frescobaldi, who visited Cairo in 1384, and remarks that a hundred
thousand persons slept at night outside the city because of the shortage
of houses. This too after the ravages of the two “ Black Deaths ”
of 1348 and 1381.

Ar-Rawda, now the island of Roda. The amenities of Roda are
frequently mentioned in contemporary Arabic literature, and also
in the Arabian Nigbts,

■ Only the fa9ade, entrance hall (with minaret), and some frag-
ments of this magnificent hospital, built by Sultan QaM’iin (1279-90),
now remain. The sultan’s mausoleum, now partially restored, is one
of the mofl: exquisite monuments of medieval Saracenic architedhire
and ornament. Part of the ibreet ^till retains the name of “ Between
the two Cattles,” a name derived in aU probability from the Fitimid
palaces erefted in this quarter in the tenth and eleventh centuries.

The main Qardfa lies to the south of modern Cairo, between
Old Cairo and the Muqattam hills. In extent and in appearance it
resembles a town, owing to the peculiar Egyptian custom here referred ■
to of building chambers and houses over the tombs.

On the night following the 14th Sha'b^n (the eighth month of
the Muslim year) special services are held in all mosques. The tradi-
tional reason is that “ on this night the Lote-tree of Paradise, on the

342



NOTES

lu\cs of \^bjch are imcnbcd the names of all living persons, is shaken,
and the leaf of any moftU\sho is ptcdcfhncd to die anting ^e ensuing
year falls wibcnng to the ground” (MichcU, Egyptian CalenJjr fer
/U Kepttc Ytar 1617 (1900*1901 a . d )

/\I Huu}t), the younger son of the Caliph 'All, and grandson of
the Prophet, u-at kiU^ vMth cno^l of hii fanuly at Karbali m ‘Iriq,
uhile leading a ret olt againA the Uou^'yad Caliph of Damascus m 681
The death of the Prophet's grandson m this fashion caused a revulsion
again^l the rcigmng house, and to this day the episode is commemorated
by both Sunmi and Shi itcs on the toth Muharram, the anniversary
of the c\cnt The mosque of I{zi/» (to be carefully dis*

UQguuhcd from the more famous college mosque of Sulun Hasan, not
yet built) IS an imposing ediSce near the casern boundary of the aty
So called m cont/aA to the ** Sudanese Nile,” the Niger

* Thu diviuon u found m other /Uabic geographers The third
branch u moA probably cither the Ibyir (Thermutue) branch, which
flows into Lake Burlui and out through the Sebennyuc mouth, or the
Tanaiue branch flowing into Lake Menzaleh.

” This was the name gwen to the ancient Egyptun temples, round
which, as round the PyTimidj, many fantaAiC legends grew up Their
conArudion was popularly ascribed to Hermes * the /Vnoent,” who
was idenufled with Enoch The temple of Ikhmim seems to have
been the one aouauity which attraSed Ibn Baltuu’s notice m Egypt,
except the Pyramids

* It u noteivorthy that our trascUer uyi not a word of the temples
of Luxor, although the tomb of Abu’l Hayjii (a famous saint who
died here in 1244) is actually in the prcancts of the temple of i\fflmon

In the twelf^, thirteenth, and fourteenth centuries Aydhib was
the terminal port of the Yemen and Indun trade, and a place of great
imporunce It was dcAroycd m t 432 by the sultan of Egypt, and its
place taken by the rival port of Sawikin Its rums have been idenuflcd
* on a flat and watcrlcu mound ” on the Red Sea coaA, t z miles to
the north of Halayb, at zz zo N, yz £ (G W Murray, m
Ctographical Journal 68 (1926*), 235 40, where the longitude is
given as 36* 9' 3a', which docs not agree with the map)

The Hudrubis were Arabs, not Bejas

® A hoAcIry (/ae^af, khSn, or karatointariy\ is psually a square
walled building enclosing a courty^ard, beaAs and baggage are lodged
m the lower Aotcy and travellers m chambers in the upper Aorey If
there is no upper Aorey all muA lodge together

Now a Aation on the Sinai Mihtary railway, about thirty miles
eaA by north of Qantara

The Jin'* (gcmi) arc a sub-celcAial category of creatures akm to
men, but acalcd of fire, who are cr«iitcd with superhuman powers
According to the Koran they were subjeAcd to Solomon, and “ made
for him whatsoever he pleased, of lofty halls, and images, and dishes

343



NOTES

like tanks, and great cooking-vessels.” In a later passage Ibn Battiita
refers to the legend that it was by the aid of the jinn that Solomon built
Palmyra {cf. i Kings ix. 1 8).

The mosque at Hebron is a Crusaders’ church built on much
older (probably pre-Roman) foundations, some of whose Clones fully
bear out Ibn Battuta’s statement. The cave is now blocked up, but
cenotaphs of the Patriarchs and their wives ^liU ^tand in small chapels
on either side of the nave. The (putative) tomb of Joseph is in a
separate exterior chapel. The tomb of Lot lies several miles to the ea^l.

The reference is to the miraculous •“ night-journey ” or “ ascen-
sion ” {mi'Tdj) in which Muhammad was given a vision of heaven.
Though living at the time in Mecca, he was, according to the tradition,
firft transported to “ the farthest mosque ” {al-masjid al-aqsa) in
Jerusalem, and thence ascended on the celeilial ^eed Buriq.

The present walls were built by the Ottoman sultan Sulayman
“ the Magnificent” (1520-1566).

The “ royal ” cubit measured about 26 inches.

This railing was ereded by the Franks during the Crusaders’
occupation of Jerusalem.

The mosque of the Ascension, on the brow of the Mount of
Olives, on the farther side of the Valley of Jehoshaphat, not the Valley
of Hinnom (Gehenna).

This seems to be a confusion between Jerusalem and Bethlehem,
where the crypt of the Church of the Nativity contains the shrine of
the Manger as well as the shrine of the Birthplace.

Aj^iin, now Qal‘at ar-Rabad, was a fortress in a conspicuous
position on the eastern ridge of the Ghawr (the Jordan valley), 1 2 miles
N.W. of Jerash.

Ibn Battuta has obviously confused the details of three separate
journeys in Syria — see below pp. 123 and 305.

A village close to Zahla, formerly reputed to possess the tomb
of Noah. Until the middle of the fourteenth century the floor of the
Biqd‘ (Coele-Syria) was covered by a lake or marsh at this point, and
there was a tradition that the Ark came to reft on the spur of Anjar
on the opposite side to and S.E. of Zahla.

Tripoli was recovered by Sultan ^ald’un in 1289.

A similar ftory is told of Muhammad the Daftarddr during the
Turko-Egyptian campaign in KordoHn in 1821. A complaint was
preferred by a woman againft a soldier, and the commander had the
man cut open alive “ on the woman agreeing to suffer the same fate if
the milk was not found in the man’s ftomach ” {Journal of the African
Soc., No. 98, Jan. 1926, p. 170).

The “Ten” were the moft prominent members of Muhammad’s
entourage, and are greatly revered by the orthodox ; the Shi‘ites on the
other hand, regard them much as Judas Iscariot is regarded in the
Chriftian tradition. Their especial hatred is reserved for ‘Omar, who

344



NOTES

un rapontible for the clc&on of the Caliph and ^*05 himself the
second, and whom they bUme accordingly for the exclusion of *A 1 I
from the tucccuicn to uhich he veas doigoated (as they aver, in defiance
of all hi^orical argument) by the Prophet

** Several pges of the onginal are devoted to an elaborate desenp*
tion of rMeppo, consifbng chieily m quotations of ornate prose passages
from Ibn jubayr, and short extrads from eulogies of the aty by famous
poets

** Tizin u situated aS miles W of Aleppo

In 1268 See hu letter to Boemund describing the sack of the
aty, in Yule's /’e/a (jrd cd Cordier),! 24. note
*• The fortress of Pagrae, called by the Crusader\Gaftonor GaAin,
uhich defended the entry through the Baylan Pass, betucen Alexan*
dretta and Antioch It uas recaptured by m 1188

** Better known in Europe as the Jttatiisi They uere series
of an ofishoot of the Fitimid branch of the Shi'ites, founded in the
eleventh century

Ibrihim ibn Adham, a famous ascetic and saint, originally from
Balkh, uho u said to have died during a naval expediuon againA the
Greeb about 780 Little u known of hii life, except that Syna was
the pnnapal centre of hu rdigtous a&ivmes, but be afterwards became
the central figure in several c>des of SuH legend, evidently derived
from the legends of the Buddlu

Son in law and couun of the Prophet Muhammad, and the
central figure m the doSnnes of the Shi'itcs

Here follow s a lengthy extrad from Ibn Jubayr in rhyming prose
In order that the reader may apprecutc the rbetoncal ^le employed
m such passages, the firA few sentences may be translated hterally as
foUows “ As for Damascus, she is the Paradise of the Orient, and
dawning place of her rapicndenc hgbt , the seal of the lands of Islim
whose hcupitahty vve have eDjo>cd, and bride of the aties which we
have unveiled She u adorned with flowers of sweet scented plants,
and appeon amidA brocaded gardens , she has occupied an exalted
position m the place of beauty, and u moA richly bedecked m her bndal
chair " Several paga of other quotations follow before the editor
resumes the thread of Ibn Battuta's narrative

Thu u a popular tradition, intended to account for the fad that
the Church of St John was not converted into a mosque until seventy
years after the Arab conqueA of Damascus The church was not
demohsbed, but merely Aripped of its ChnAian furnishings and refitted
as a mosque Ibn Battuta goes on to give a detailed description of the
mosque as it exiAcd m hu day This edifice was dcAroyed by fire
during Tamerlane’s occupation of Damascus in 1400, and has since
been rcconArudcd more than once The present building dates only
from 1893, and preserves httle trace of its former magmficence, except
the three hne minarets


345



NOTES


The founder of the Umayyad dynasty of Caliphs, which reigned
at Damascus from 660 to 749, and was supplanted by the ‘Abbdsid
dynafty, who made their capital at Baghdad. The bazaar of the
coppersmiths ^Hll occupies the same position, but is by no means “ one
of the fineft in Damascus ” at the present day.

This was originally a mechanical water-clock, which was ilill
in working order when Ibn Jubayr visited Damascus in 1184 (see
le Strange, Palefline under the Moslems^ p. 250), but had fallen
out of repair in the interval. Though the galleries have long since
disappeared, the spouting fountain (a relic of Byzantine days) still
exists.

As being contrary to the orthodox do&ine that no activity or
quality in God is to be compared with the corresponding human
activity or quality. The Hanbalite scliool, the most conservative of
the four orthodox schools (see In trod., p. 23), disallowed the rationaliz-
ing interpretations of the other schools.

The wearing of silk is contrary to ilri£t Muhammadan law.

On Ibn Taynuya, who died in 1328, see Introd., p. 38. His
name is now held in great respect as the forerunner of the Wahhabi
and other modem reform movements in Islam.

A Muhammadan fail is limited to the hours of daylight, but
is absolute during that time, even water-drinking being proHbited.

It is probably this chara£leriiHc that has earned for Damascus
the nickname of al-matbakh, “ the kitchen.”

Leaving his wife, or one of his wives, behind him, as he relates
below (p. 304). This wife bore him a son, but the boy died in child-
hood.

‘Aqabat as-Sawdn, now ‘Aqabat al-Hij^zfya, a ^tion on the
Hijaz railway. On Prof. Alois Musil’s map of the Northern Hijaz
(1927) it is situated at 29.50 N., 35.48 E.

DMt al-Hajj, a Elation at 29.05 N., 36.08 E.

Baldah is identified by Musil {Northern Hejaz, p. 329) with the
valley of al-Bazw 4 , about fifty kilometres south of Dhit al-Hajj and
near the Elation of al-Hazm at 28.41 N., 36.14 E.

63 “'Pile halting-place of al-Ukhaydir (al-Akhzar) lies in a deep
valley enclosed by high slopes, in places covered with lava. Ibn
Battuta rightly compares this to a valley of hell ” (Musil, ih. 329).
Al-Akhzar, the name of which (“ The little green place ”) is obviously
ironical, is situated at 28.08 N., 37.01 E.

The ^lory of the impious tribe of Thamud, who were annihilated
for their disobedience, is frequently related in the Koran. It arose
in all probability from the exigence of these tombs, which belonged to
an early South-Arabian trading community settled on the trade-route
between the Yemen and the marts of Syria, and afterwards confused
with the ancient North-Arabian tribe of Thamud.

From al-Hijr (Madd’in Sdlih) to al-‘Ela is a distance of about

346



NOTES

tS English miles. Al*HlJr Is situated at 2649 N., 37.56 £., al**£Ii at
26.36 N., 38.04. E.

** The ^ttle at Badr in 63} a.o.( in which the pagan Meccans were
defeated b/ a much smaller force of Muslims, was &e first important
success of the new communitjr, and one of the tuming'pomts of
Muhammad's career.

According to the Arabic geographer HamdinI (pp. 184*5) the
Nation of Jubfa was situated 103 (Arabic) miles from^whi’, which
>\-as the second Nation from Madina and 47 miles diilant from the
city. An ^\rabic mile measured 1921 metres, as compared as 1609 in
an English mile.

Khulayt, described by the Arabic geographer Yiqfit as a fortified
enceinte between Mecca and Madina, teems to have taken the place
of the older ^tion of Qudayd, 24 miles from Juhfa and 23 from the
next flation of 'Usfin.

'Usfin and Marr lor Marr a£*Zuhrin) Hill cxiH, the latter 23 miles
from 'Usfin and 13 from Mecca.

*'* The descriptions of Mecca and the Pilgrimage which follow in the
original are abriaged from the work of Ibn jubayr, and have been very
fully annotated by Burton in his Per$osal Narrative e/ a Pilsrimage to
at-Maiiaah aaJMeeeah. So many accounts of the Pilgrimage are now
available in English in addiuon to this, that it is unnecessary to repeat
all these details here.


CHAPTER II

^ The pilgrim road from Bagbdid and Najaf to Madina is known
as the Darh Zuhajia, after the wife of Caliph Hirtin ar*Rashld, who
built reservoirs aU along the route and provided endowments from
her property for their upkeep. The route, consequently, has scarcely
changed for twelve hundred years. According to Hamdinf, the
nations from Madina to Fayd were: Taraf (24 Arabic miles), Batn
Nakhl (20 m.), 'Usayla (28 m.), Ma'dia an*Naqira (26 m.), al-Hijir
(28 m.), Sanxlri (23 m.), T6z (25 m.), Fayd (24 m.) : total, 196
Arabic miles or 234 English miles. Ibn Battuta, evidently travelling
by half'Hages, takes six days to reach 'Usayla (I cannot find his Widi’l-
'Anis), then takes the alternative road through Naqira inHead of Ma'din
an-Naqira, rejoins the main route at Qlriira (between Ma'din an-
Naqira and al-Hijir, and 12 miles from the latter), and thence follows
it without variation. Al-Makhniqa — the perforated hill — is shown on
Musil's I ; 1,000,000 map 27 English miles S.W.ofFayd.at 26.50 N.,
41.36 E., and Fayd itself at 27.08 N., 41.53 E.

’ Yiqfit adds that a portion of the provisions and heavy baggage is
given in remuneradon to the parries in whose care they are left.

347



NOTES

^ The various Plages on the journey between Fayd and Kufa,
totalling 277 Arabic miles or 330 English miles, need not be detailed
here. “ Devil’s Pass ” is probably the pass marked ash-She eb on
Musil’s map, at. 30.11 N., 4342 E. W^qisa is shown at 30.38 N.,
43.51 E., Lawza’lies 16 Engh'sh miles N. by E. of W^qisa, al-Masijid
or al-Musayjid 56 m. S. by W. of Najaf, Man^rat al-Qurun appears
as Ummu Qurun, a sanduary 30 m. S. by W. of Najaf. Qddisiya is
fifteen miles due south of Najaf. The battle to which Ibn Battuta
refers was fought in 637, five years after Muhammad’s death, and
resulted in the complete rout of the Persian army and the occupation
of ‘Ir£q by the Arabs.

* The son-in-law of the Prophet, and fourth Caliph, assassinated
in 661. His tomb is held in peculiar reverence by the Shi‘ites, along
with that of his son Husayn at KarbaM (see Ch. I, note 22). For the
meaning of qaysartya see note 29 below.

® The eve on the 27 th Rajab is known as L^iylat al-Mi^rdj, or
Night of the Prophet’s Ascension. See Ch. I, note 30.

® Ahmad ar-Rafd‘l, died 1182 and buried at Umm ‘Ubayda, was
the nephew of Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qidir al-Jilinl, and founder of the
Rifd‘iya order of darw/shes, a sub-group of the Qidiriya. order, and one
of the principal orders in Egypt at the present day. The name of
Ahmad! darwishes, which Ibn Battuta gives to the order, is now usually
given to the sub-group founded by Shaykh Ahmad al-Badawf, who was
a disciple of the convent of Umm ‘Ubayda and died at Tanta in Egypt,
in 1276.

The apparent shrinkage of Basra was due not entirely to decay,
but to a gradual eastward shifting of the city : c/. note 10.

® The ftujra was an Egyptian silver coin worth about fivepence ;
see Chap. XII, note 18.

® Ibn Battuta’s audience would aU, of course, be familiar with the
faft that it was at Basra that the rules of Arabic grammar were systema-
tized in the second century after Muhammad, the “ leader ” referred
to below being Sibawayh, the author of the firSt large systematic
grammar of Arabic.

U bulla occupied the site of the present town of Basra, the medieval
city of Basra lying on a canal to the weSt of the Shatt al-‘Arab, and a
mile or two eaSt of the modem town of Zubair,

Now Bandar Mashur, on Khor Musa, an inlet eaSt of the delta.

The petty Hazdraspid dynaSty, founded in the mountains of
LuriStan in the twelfth century, maintained itself throughout the
Mongol period. Their capital Idhaj, on the Dujayl river, is now
called Mdlamir. The title Atdbeg (“ regent ”) was adopted by all
the minor dynaSties which established themselves after the break-up
of the Saljuq empire in the twelfth century.

The beauties of Rukn Abid have been immortalized by the
famous poet Hdfiz of Shiraz, a younger contemporary of our traveller.

348



NOTES

“ Better known as tlljiytti (reigned I305*i3i6), the eighth and
penultimate of the line of Mongol l^hina of Persia (not to be confused
with his contemporary grandson of Qiibiliy Khin, Mongol

Emperor of China, 1294-1307). As a child tJljiytii ^d been
baptized into the ChriAian Church.

** Qaribigh was in the mountainous diftrift N. of Tabriz, across
the Aras river (see Clavijo in this series. Map II and p. 362). The
Mongol sultans maintained the nomadic habit of migrating to the
highlands in the summer.

^ Ibn Battdta appears to have confused his fir^ visit to Shfriz with
his second, on his return journey in t347> As related a few lines
below, Shaykh Abti Ishiq, of the house of injti, did not obtain
possession of Shfriz undt after 1 53 3, when his reladve and predecessor
Sharaf ad-Din Shih Mahmdd injd was put to death by the Mongols.
In 1347 he was iUU at the height of his power, and in 1356 or 1357
he was captured and put to death by the rival house of the
MuzaBarids.

The great palace of the pre-Islamic Sisimd kings of Persia at
Ctesiphon, the ruins of which are Aill to be seen a few miles below
Baghdid.

The author of the famous Rote Garden {Gulifidn) and other
poedcal works, died in 1291.

Zaydin is defined as a vilbge between Arrajin (now Bihbihan)
and Dawraq (now Fallihlya), one day’s march from the latter and
less than three days from Anajin (Schwarz, Iran, IV, 384).

Huwayza is the modem Hawiza, seventy miles N. of Muhammarah.

Kdfa (a few miles north of Najaf) was, with Basra, one of the
garrison cities founded by the Arabs in 638, on their conqueft of ‘Ir£q.
Dunng the short reign of ’AU (see note 4) it was the seat of the
Caliphate.

For the explanation of tlus title and the following ceremony see
Introdu^on, p. 38.

See Clup. I, note 22.

A&ually at this time (and until 1918) Baghdad was no more
than a proitincial town. Its high title was derived from the prestige
it enjoyed as the seat of the Caliphate from 756 to 1258, when it was
sacked and largely decoyed by the Mongols.

^ -In the baths at Damascus the bather receives anything from six
to ten toweb at successive ^ges.

The lail of the line of Mongol or Tatar Ilkhins of Persia.

Dilshdd was the daughter of Dimashq Kwijah, the son of Jdbin
(Chtibin) whom Abd Sa'id had put to dea^.

A mahalla was the mobile camp, consisting of the royal retinue
and troops, which accompanied the sultan on his marches.

Tabriz— the Tauris of Marco Polo and other weSlera writers —
was the capital of the Mongols in Penia. At this period It had taken

349



NOTES

the place of Baghddd as the principal commercial centre in Weftern
Asia, and was frequented by large numbers of European merchants.

Between 836 and 883 Simarrd was the seat of the Caliphs, and
was adorned by them with many magnificent palaces and public build-
ings, of which veib'ges ^lill remain. The fort of Ma'shuq probably
occupied the site of the palace of the same name {al-ma’shuq means
“ the Beloved ”) erefted by the Caliph Mu‘tamid (reigned 870-892).

The word qaysarlya is defined variously as “ a public place in
which the market is held ” or “ a square building containing chambers,
^orerooms, and flails for merchants.” The name is evidently derived
from the Latin or Greek, and was used orginally only by the Arabs of
Syria and North Africa, but its origin is obscure. Of various theories
which have been advanced the mo^l probable is that it means a market
building, privileged or authorized by the ruler (originally in these
countries, of course, the Csesar) in return for a certain fixed payment,
but no corresponding term has been found in the Byzantine histories.
It is now applied to the principal market of a town, and I have heard
the term used in North Africa (Tlemsen) for the main shopping ^Ireet.
The provision of gates for bazaars was, and ildll is, quite common.
(Dozy s,v. ; le Strange, of the EaSlem Caliphate, p. 89).

Sinjar is evidently misplaced. It is moil probable that it was
visited on the way back from M^rfdin to Mosul.

Dixi, “ the rampart of the Roman Empire,” was built by Juilinian
as the frontier fortress over againil the Persian territories.

The fortress of Maridin was assigned in 1108 by the Saljuq
ruler of Baghdad to Il-Ghdz{ “ one of the moil redoubtable of Muslim
warriors againil the Crusaders ” (Lane-Poole), whose descendants,
known as the Ortuqids of Miridfn, retained possession of the city and
its environs until after the death of Tamerlane. Al-Malik as-Sdlih,
the twelfth of the line, reigned from 1312 to 1363.

The ritual “ hastening to and fro ” between the hillocks of
Safi and Marwa, said to be in commemoration of Hagar’s search
for water for her son Ishmael, though usually performed on foot, is
frequently carried out by pilgrims on donkeys or camels. It has been
left for the present ruler of Najd, Sultan ‘Abd al-‘Azfz Al-Sa‘iid, to
perform it in an automobile.


CHAPTER IIP

^ Ra’s Dawi’ir, which is said to mean “ The Cape of Whirlwinds
(or Whirlpools),” is not mentioned in any work which I have consulted.
It can hardly be other than the headland now called Ra’s Raweiya

^ The passages in this chapter dealing with the Ea^l Coaft of Africa
have been annotated by L. M. Devic, Le Pays des Zendjs, Paris, 1883.

350



NOTES

* N ), and it is quite possible that Dawi’ir is m fad a wrong
scnption of this name

H di, properly “ Haly (with consonantal y) of the Son of Ya'qub,”
a large town on the highroad from San‘d to Mecca some thirty
inland, and forty miles S £ of Qunfuda, in a diArid sufficiently
lie to produce three crops a year The port of Hah is a small
tered anchorage in the di^nd now called Asfr, at 1 8 36 N , 41 19 £
Jus time Hall ^^as subordinate to the sultan of Yemen (Hamdinl
, Redhousc, HtSJery of the Retultyy DynalJy I, 307 , III, 169 ,
Ubook of Arabia 136, 144)

A place named ^ja is mentioned as a halt on the San'i Mecca
1 , ten ^Qons before Haly (Hamdinl t88), but Ibn Battuta’s port
call was Sharja, an anchorage m the neighbourhood of Luhayya
be diAinguished from Shirja m Trucial 'Omin) (Qalqashandl V,
, Redbouse op cit III, 148)

Zabfd was the winter residence of the sultan, Ta'izz being the
imcr capital Zabfd lay fifteen (Arabic) miles from the coafl,
:ch IS called in the Arabic authors GhaJifiqa, and its port was
Lhwib (not al Abw 4 b, as in the printed text) (Qalqashandf V,
o , Redbouse III, 149 )

The iubut an nakhl, literally '* Palm Saturdays,” were a well*
iwn /eature of the social life of Zabld According to Redbouse ” it
1 a local Satumaita, and perhaps originated m the pagan times
ore the advent of Islam ” {op at III, 186, 197)

Yemen, the Arabic name for Arabia Feh*, consiAs of a high
tral table-land dropping abruptly to the coailal plain on the south
1 wcA The mountams intercept the summer monsoon rains
[ the country, being m consequence predominantly agricultural,
always enjoyed a greater measure of culture than the reit of the
unsula San'i, the ancient and present capital, hes in the mountams
Jie interior , Ta'izz lies closer to the edge of the hills at a height of

00 feet The Rasfihd dynaAy, of which ‘Ali (reigned 1321 63)

1 the fifth sovereign, m^e themselves mdependent of Egypt m
29, and continued to govern Yemen until the middle of the fifteenth
,tury

' It was the prafiice of Musbm rulers to provide accommodation
ambassadors and visitors of quah^ and to supply them with pro-
ion or a daily sum of money in lieu thereof Chardin, m his Travels
Persia, in the seventeenth century, relates that the Sh 4 h had “ above
ee hundred houses in Ispahan which are properly his own
ley are all large and fine, are almoft always empty, and run to rum
want of being kept up in sufficient repair These they give to
bassadors and persons of consideration that come to Ispahan ’
lernatively accommodation might be provided in some of the
merous regions eilabhshments See also C/tfS’ytf, p 122
’ It was cuAomary m Islamic laitds for the sovereign to pray m

351



NOTES


a part of the mosque railed off with a carved wooden screen, called
the maqsura or “ enclosure.” This praffice was adopted partly as a
measure againff assassination.

® From as-Sawdhil (“ The coaff lands ”), the name given by the
Arabs to part of the coa^l of what is now Kenya and Tanganyika
Territory, is derived the name of the Swahili language. 7 , 071 ] is a word
of unknown origin, employed in medieval times to denote the negroes
of Faff Africa, and ffill preserved in the name of Zanzibar.

This appears to mean, not that the island is two days’ journey
from the mainland (from which it is separated only by a narrow ffrait),
but that the Sawihil country began two days’ journey to the south-
ward.

See note 1 5 to Chapter XIV.

In^ead of including them in the ordinary revenue and using them
for the general expenses of government, as was more often done.

Dhof^r is backed by a high ridge which receives the summer
monsoon rains, and is covered in consequence with tropical vegetation.
The outlying population is not Arab, but of a Sudanic type.

A small island in the Kuria-Muria group.

According to Muhammadan law, no animal is lawful for food
unless its throat has been cut before death.

“ Masira Island, the Sarapis of the unknown author of the
Periplus, famous even in those days for its tortoises, and inhabited, then
as now, by ‘ settlements of Fish Eaters, a villainous lot, who use the
Arabian language and wear girdles of palm-leaves ’ ” (Sir A. T. Wilson,
Geog. J., 6g, 236-7, quoting from Schoff, Periplus).

Sur and Qalhdt owed their importance to their position at the
southern end of ‘Omdn, juff north of Ra’s al-Hadd, the firft point in
Arabia reached by ships coming from India. Qalhit is Marco Polo’s
“ Calatu ... a noble city. . . . The haven is very large and good,
and is frequented by numerous ships with goods from India.” It also
played an important part during the Portuguese period.

‘Omdn Proper lies inland, on the slopes of Jebel Akhdar.

According to the local hifforians the succession of Azdite imams
of ‘Omfe reigning at Nazwa was broken between 1154. and 1406,
during which period a rival tribe, the Banu Nabhdn, whose seat was at
Makniyit in the Dhdhira, became overlords of the country. From
Ibn Battuta’s account, however, it is clear that the Azdite imamate
at Nazwa continued to exiff, or was restored before 1332. (G. P.

Badger, Imams and Seiyids of Oman^ 37, 41 ; Wellffed, Travels in
Arabia, I, 215.)

The island of Ormuz, S.E. of Bandar Abbas. The island was
captured by the Portuguese in 1512, and held by them until 1622,
when it was recovered by the Persians with English aid.

.1 They call these deadly peffiferous Storms Bad Sammoun, that
is to say, the Winds of Poison. . . . It rises only between the 1 5th of

352



NOTES

June and the 1 5th of Auguft, which Is the rime of the excessive Heats
near that Gulpb. That Wind runs whirling through the Air, it
appears red and inflamM, and kills and blaAs the People ; it Arikes
in a manner, as if it AiBed them, particularly in the Day dmc. Its
surprizing HHeds is not the Death It self, which it causes ; what’s mo^
a m a zi ng is, that the Bodies of those who die by it, are, as it were,
dissolved, but without losing their Figure and Contour ; insomuch that
one would only take them to be asleep ; but if you take hold of any piece
of them, the Part remains in your Hand ” (Chardin, Travels in Persia
(1027), 139.

This 18 taken by Schwarz (Iran ia Mittelaltert III, 133) to be
the same as Khawriilin (otherwise call^ SarviAin), about Bf^ miles
S.E. of Shlrdz. If so, the insertion of the town here is an error due to
Ibn Batnlta’s faulty recoUedion of his route on the return journey from
India in 1347 (see note 3 to Chap. XII), when he muit have passed
through KhawrifUn on his way to Shfriz. It is very unlikely, however,
that an Arab should reproduce KhawriiUn as Kawr^tio, unless the
name was pronounced so locally.

^ Ui Ucs about 1 20 miles N.W. of Bandar Abbas.

8* The ” hospitality gift ” constAed of food or gifts in kind supplied
to dlAinguished visitors ^see note 7 above).

“ Khuojubil is proMbly a double name. The second part is
mentioned by Yiqilt as Fil, and described as a large village, verging
on a town, at the southern extremis of the province of Fin, near the
seacoaA. He adds that it lay on the route between Hormuz and
Huzii (a fort 00 the mainland opposite Kish island, now Qal*at al-
‘Ubayd). The BrA part of the name appean on our maps as Hunj
or Hunju, 27.04 N., 54-02 £. (Schwarz, Iran HI, 132; II, 80;
Z.DM.G., 68, 533).

Ibn Battuta has fallen into a considerable error here. The
ancient port of Sirif, once the entrepot of the Persian Gulf, was situated
near the present Tahiri. i^ays or Kish is an island some seventy miles
further south, which in the twelfth century supplanted Sirif, and was
itself supplanted by Hormuz about 1300, Hormuz in turn being
supplanted by Bandar *Abbis in the seventeenth century.

The more exaft Chardin says : “ The divers that fish for pearls
are sometimes near half a quarter of an hour under water.”

The underground waterbearing beds of eailem Arabia discharge
into the sea at Bahrayn. During the Turkish occupation, the sailors
used to dive into the sea and bring up fresh water in a leather sack for
the use of the commander, and the Portuguese supplied themselves in
the same way by pumps. There is a Aory that a camel once fell into
a spring at al-Hasi, and was never seen again until it came up in the
sea near Bahrayn.

A full description of the oaris of al-Hasi or Hajar (the former
meaning Pebbles and the latter Ssonei), of which the chief town is now

353, aa



NOTES


called Hoftif, will be found in the Geog. Journal, 63 (i924)> pp* 189-
207. It appears from this article that at Hasa there is ^lill a “ con-
siderable sprinkling of Shi‘ahs, mostly descendants of Bahdrina (Bahrayn
Shi'ahs), who settled in the oasis long ago.”

Formerly the chief town of Najd, the sand-buried remains of
which lie 58 miles S.E. of the present capital Riydd, at 24.07 N.,
47.25 E. (see Philby, Heart of Arabia, II, 31-4).


CHAPTER IV^

^ Bildd ar-Rtim, literally “ the land of the Greeks,” though used
of the Byzantine territories generally, was naturally applied more
specially to the frontier province of Anatolia. After some temporary
conquers in earlier centuries, it had been finally overrun by the Saljuq
Turks between 1071 and 1081. Down to the end of the thirteenth
century, the whole peninsula, except those se6lions which were held
by the Christians (Byzantium, Trebizond, and Armenia) or the ruler
of ‘Irdq, owed allegiance to the Saljuq sultan of Konia, but from a
little before 1 300 it was parcelled out between a score of local chiefs,
whose territories were gradually absorbed into the Ottoman Empire.

^ The port of ‘Alayi was constructed by one of the greateSt of the
Saljuq sultans of Rum, ‘AH ad-Dln Kay-(^ubad I (1219-37), and was
renamed after him. To the WeStern merchants it was known as
Candelor (from its Byzantine name kalon oros). Egypt, being notori-
ously deficient in wood, has always needed to import large quantities
of it for the building of fleets, etc.

® Adaliya, known to the WeStern merchants as Satalia, was the
moSt important trading Station on the south coaSt of Anatolia, the
Egyptian and Cypriote trade being the moSt aCtive. The .lemon is
Still called Adaliya in Egypt.

^ The closing of the city gates and exclusion of Christians at night
and during the hours of the Friday service was observed until quite
recently in a number of places on the Mediterranean seaboard, such as
Sfax, probably as a measure of precaution againSt surprise attacks.

^ The history of the organizations called by the name of Futuwa is
Still obscure. They appear firSt in the twelfth century in several
divergent forms, which can probably all be traced to the Sufis, or
darwlsh orders. The word futuwa, “ manliness,” had long been
applied amongSt the latter in a moral sense, defined as “ to abstain from

The section relating to Anatolia has been translated and annotated
by Defremery in Nouvelles Annales des Voyages, Dec. 1850-April
1851, and that relating to the Crimea and Qipchaq by the same in
Journal Asiatique, July-Sept. 1850.

354



NOTES


injury, to give without ^nt» and to make no complaint,” and the
patched ro^, the mark of a SuH, waa called by them hb 6 s al fuiu<ea,
“ the garment of manhnes) ’* It was apphed m a more aggressive
sense among the guilds of ” Wamors for the Faith,” espeaally as the
latter degenerated into robber bands, and it is in reference to the
ceremony of admission into one such band at Baghdid in the middle
of the tvv elfth century that trousers are firA mentioned as the symbohe
IibJs al ftttivsa (Ibn al Athir XI, 41) A few years later Ibn Jubayr
found at Damascus an organization called the Nuiuya, which was
engaged in combating the fanatical Shi'ite seSs m Syria The
members of this warrior guild, whose rule it was that no member
should call for assiflance m any misfortune that might befall him,
cledcd suitable persons and similarly inveAccl them with trousers on
their admission

In 1 1 82 the Cahph an Nisir, having been mve^ed with the Itids
or trousers by a Sufi shaykb, conceived the idea of organizing the
Fututca on the hnes of an order of Chivalry (probably on the Frankish
model), conAituted himself soveragn of the order, and bellowed the
libit as Its insigma on the ruling princes and other personages of Kis
time The ceremony of milallation included the solemn putting on
of the trousers and drinking from the * cup of manhood ” {ka*s aA
/tttuaa), which contained not wine, but salt and water The order
took over from its Sdfl progenitors a liditious genealogy back to the
Cahph *Ali (see Chap II, note 4), and continued to eziA for some
time after the reign of Nisir m a languishing ^te The Brotherhood
which Ibn Battuta found in Koma, and which was difbnguished from
the other guilds in Anatoha by its special insignia of the trousers and
Its claim to spiritual descent from *A 1 /, was probably a rehc of the order
founded by the romantic Cahph The remaining Anatohan organiza
tions seem to have been local trade guilds with a very ^ong infusion
of Suhsm, oddly combined with a pohtical tendency towards local
self government and the keeping in check of the tyranny of the Turkish
sultans (See generally Thorning, Turkmhe Bibliotbekt Band XVI
(Berhn, 1913), and Wacyf Boutros Ghah, La Tradition Chevateresque
dtt Arabtt (Pans, 1919), pp t-33)

® This passage seems to mean that by taking boats across Egerdir-
Gul and Kirih Gul (the lake of Beyshahr, which Ibn Battuta apparently
regarded as joined to Egerdir Gul) Akshahr and Beyshahr could be
reached m two days Defr^mery thinks that this Aqshahr is not
Akshahr, but the town of Oushar or Akshar, near Egerdir Gul

^ Gul Hisir, according to Defrimeiy, was a small fortress, after-
wards deilroyed, on the edge of the lake of Buldur , le Strange on the
other hand places it on Sugud Gul, weil of lilanoz

® See note 5 above

® This IS the well known Mevlevi fraternity, or “ dancing dar
wishes,” which was inftituted by Jalil ad Din in memory of his mafter

355



NOTES

Shams! Tabriz (the sweetmeat-seller of Ibn Battuta’s ^lory). Jalil
ad-DIn, who died at Konia in 1273, is generally held to be the greatest
of the Persian mystical poets. (See R. A. Nicholson, Selcded Poems
from the Divdni Shamsi Tabriz, Introduction.)

BirgI is the ancient Pyrgion, in the /alley of the Cay^ler. There
is an obvious gap in Ibn Battuta’s narrative at this point, since he can
hardly have crossed the entire breadth of Anatolia without touching
some town or another, even if he went by the direft road from Sivas
through the central plateau. It is more likely that he retraced his
route to some extent towards Konia and thence through Egerdir.

This refers to the capture of Smyrna in 1344 (many years after
Ibn Battuta’s visit) by a crusading force, with the assiitance of the
Knights of St. John.

Fiija (Fuggia, the ancient Phocaea), which had been ceded by
the Palaelogi to the Genoese family of Zaccaria, was an important
trading Elation, the Zaccaria family having sole control of the alum-
mines there and of the ma^Hc trade of Chios (which they had seized in
1304). It is not quite certain whether the Fiija of this period was
Old Phocaea (Eski Foja) or New Phocasa (Yeni Foja).

Ibn Battuta’s account is one of the few firsthand accounts we
possess of the early days of the Ottoman Empire. Brusa is said to
have surrendered to the Turks in 1326, the year of ‘Othmdn’s d^th,
and Niesa fell in 1329, but hostilities againSl both cities had begun
very much earlier (see H. A. Gibbons, Foundations of the Ottoman
Empire, 46-8). With regard to the name ‘Othmin Chiik, given to
‘Othmin, Prof. Kramers has suggested that it was derived not direftly
from the Arabic name ‘Othmin, but from the fortress of Osmanjik
on the Kizil Armak {Z.DM.G,, 81, LXII f.).

I prefer this, the reading of the beSt MS. to the reading “ We
treated her kindly,” which is adopted in the text.

Burlu is identified by Defr^mery with Boyalu, S.W. of KaStamuni.

More commonly called Solghdt, now Stary-Krim, in the interior
of the Crimea. At this time it was the residence of the Mongol governor
of the Crimea, and later on the seat of an independent K^nate.

The Khanate of Qipchaq or the Golden Horde was the weSlern-
moSl of the four great Mongol Khanates established in the thirteenth
century, and was itself at this time divided into the Blue Horde and
the White Horde. Though the latter held a . titular suzerainty, the
Blue Horde, whose appanage was on the Don and Volga, was aiElually
the more powerful, and their territories extended from Kiev and the
Caucasus to the Aral Sea and Khiva. Sultan Muhammad tjzbeg,
who reigned from 1312 to 1340, was one of the greateSl of the Khans
of the Blue Horde.

Caffa, now Feodosia, was rebuilt by the Genoese towards the
end of the thirteenth century as their principal trading station on the
northern coaSl of the Black Sea.

356



NOTES

** Muslinu hold the ringing of bells m the grcatcA abhorrence, and
attribute to the Prophet the saying : ” The angels will not enter any
house wherein bells are rung.”

** I take this to be^e eiiuary of the Miuss river, weft of Taganrog.

The legal alms or ** tithe ” amounts to tw’o and a half per cent.

The ruins of Mdjar (now Burgomadzhary) lie on the Kuma
river S.W. of Aftrakhan, no kilometres N.E, of Georgiewsk, at
44.50 N., 44.27 E.

Beshtaw, one.of the foothills of the Caucasus, is a wooded hill
rising to a height of nearly 1,400 metres, juft north of Pyatigorsk,
about 35 kilometres S.W. of Georgiewsk.

There appears to be no record in the Byzantine hiftorians of
the ma^ge ofa daughter of Andronicus III (who was thirty-five years
of age iu 1331) to a Khan of the Golden Horde, but there are at leaft
two inftances before this of baftard daughters of the Emperor being
pven in marriage to Tarur chiefs.

^ Bulghir, the ruins of which lie on the left bank of the Volga
juft below the junftion of the Kama, was the capital of the medixval
kingdom of Great Bulgaria, annexed by the Mongols in the thirteenth
century. It possessed great commercial importance as the diftributing
cen^e for Russian and Siberian produfts. It is difficult to underftand,
however, how Ibn Battfita could have made the journey from Mijar
to Bulgh^, some 800 miles, in ten days 1

^ This term apparently designates Northern Siberia t see Yule’s
Marc 9 Polo^, II, 484-fi.

It has been pointed out in a note to Yule’s Marco Polo (II, 488)
that this Ukak is not the well-known town of that name frequently
mentfoned by the medixval writers, which was situated on the Volga
about six miles below Saratov, but a small place mentioned in the
portolans as Locachi or Locaq, on the Sea of Azof. The silver mines
of which Ibn Battdta speaks are” ceiuiin mines of argentiferous lead-ore
near the river Miuss (a river falling into the ^ of Azof, about
22 miles weftof Taganrog). . , . It was these mines wluch furnished
the ancient Russian rubles or ingots.”

^ Surdiq or Soldaia, now Sudak, in the Crimea, was until the rise
' of Cafia (see note 18) the principal trading port on the northern coaft
of the Euiinc. It is not clear why the parly should have made a detour
through the Crimea ; possibly Ibn Battuta has confused the details of
the route, and visited Surdiq during his ftay at Stary Krim.

” There seems to be no clue to the position of ^s sanfhsary, but
from Ibn Battfita’s descriptioa it was somewhere between the Dni^pr
and the Crimea. It has been suggefted that from this Bibi Saltfiq
(transported to Baba Dagh in Moldavia in 1389) arose the cult of
Sari Saltik associated with the Bektashi order (see F. W. Hasluck,
Jnn. Brit. SeA. Athens XIX, 203-6 ; XX, 107, note i).

Ibn Battuta’s route throu^ Thrace to Conftantinople is totally

357



NOTES

unrecognizable from his account of it. Here, as again in China, the
unfamiliarity of the names has led to sTirange perversions, especially
when reproduced from memory after a lapse of twenty years. The
frontier city of the Empire in 133 1-2 (the date which muft be assigned
to this journey in spite of Ibn Battuta’s chronology) was Diampolis,
otherwise Kavuli (now Jamboli), for which “ MahtuH ” may perhaps
pass. The “canal” is evidently a tidal river or eiluary, and one
naturally thinks of the Danube, though this involves a serious mis-
placing. But Fanfka is probably Agathonlk^, where the main road
from Diampolis crossed the Tunja (Tontzos) river, at or near Kizil
Agach. The “ Fortress of Maslama ibn ‘Abd al-Malik ” belongs to
the legendary accretions to the history of the Arab expedition againft
Constantinople in 716-7, of which Maslama was the commader-in-chief.

Kifdli is a transliteration of the Greek kephale, head, chief.

The Emperor at this time was Andronicus III, grandson of
Andronicus II. The title Takfur (from Armenian tagavor=d^ king ”)
was applied by the Muhammadan writers to the Emperor and the
other Christian kings in Asia Minor, probably as a riming jingle
with the title given to the Emperor of China, Fagkfur (for Bagh-pur,
the Persian translation of the Chinese title “ Son of Heaven ”). There
is some difficulty in explaining how Ibn Battiita came to call the retired
Emperor Andronicus II (who had abdicated in 1328, become a monk,
and died on February 1 3, 1 332) by the name of George.

The ceremonial here described is in accordance with the practice
of the Byzantine court, afterwards adopted by the Ottoman sultans
when they captured Constantinople.

The Muslims believe that Jesus was not crucified but carried up
to Heaven, and that a figure resembling him was crucified in his Stead.

The number of monks and churches in Constantinople seems to
have Struck moSt travellers at this time. Bertrandon de la Bloquiere,
who spent the winter of 1432-3 there, estimates the number of
churches at 3,000, and implies that the greater number of the inhabi-
tants lived in monasteries. See also Clavijo, p. 88.

Barbara is a transcription of hyperpyron, the debased dinar of the
Palsologues.

There were two cities of “ Sarray in the land of Tartarye,” which *
were successively the capital of the Khans of the Golden Horde ;
Old Sarai, situated near the modern village of Selitrennoe, 74 miles
above Astrakhan, and New Sarai, which embraced the modem town of
Tsarev, 225 miles above Astrakhan. Sultan Muhammad Uzbeg
moved the capital from Old Sarai to New Sarai about this period, moSl
probably a few^ years before. Ibn Battuta’s description agrees beSl
with New Sarai, the ruins of which extend over a distance of more
foan forty rniles, and cover an area of over twenty square miles. (See
F. Balodis, in Latvijas Universitates RakHi (JHa Universitatis Latvi-
ensis, XIII (Riga, 1926), pp. 3-82.)

358



NOTES


CHAPTER

^ The rums of Sardchtik or Saraijik lie a short di^nce from the
shore of the Caspian Sea, near Guryev, at the mouth of the Ural river

* The name Khwirizm %N*a3 apphed throughout the middle ages
to the pnnapal town for the time ^ing of Khorezmia, the diilnft now
known as Kluva At this time it was the town of Kunya Urgench

^ The glass vessels and wooden spoons were for the use of those
whose religious susceptibilities debarred them from using the gold
utensils, which are reprobated by And Muhammadans

* Almahq or Almahgh rose suddenly into prominence at the begm>
ning of the thirteenth century, and was ruined in the avil wars between
the successors of Tarmashfrln m the Jaghatiy Khanate (see note 7),
whose capital it was It was situated in the v^ey of the Ih river, some
diiUnce N W of the modem town of Kulja

‘ Kit or Kith, a former capital of Khorezmia, ^ood near the modern
town of Shaykh Abbas Wall

" The force of this indidment lies m the fa& that Bukhdri was
formerly one of the prmapal centres of theological ^dy m the Islamic
world

’ “ TufkiAan and the lands beyond the Oxus,” whose sultan has
been included in a previous passage among the seven great sovereigns
of the world, was one of the four Mongol Khanates into which the
empire of Chingiz Khin and his suc^ssors was divided Its rulers
were known as the Jaghatiy Khins, after Jaghatiy, the son of Chingiz
Khin to whom this country was assigned as an appanage Ibn Battuta
relates a cunous ilory of the fate of Tarmashirln His conversion to
Islam roused the ill will of the nobles, who charged him wnth violating
the precepts of Chingiz Khin, and m 1355 or 1336 rose m revolt
Tarmashirln fled across the Oxus, but was captured and reported to
have been put to death Later on a man arrived m India, claiming
to be Tarmashirln, but though his claim is said to have been sub^n
tuted, the sultan, for pohtical reasons, rejefted it and had him expelled
He eventually found a refuge at Shlriz, where he was ibll living in
honourable confinement when Ibn Battuta revisited the tovra in

1347

® Now known as SiJA T.trda The mausoleum is ibll one of the
principal edifices of Samarqand

® From 1245 Hcrit was ruled by the local dynally of the Karts,
which under tLs king Husayn (commonly called Mu‘izz ad Din,
reigned 1331 70) became an important power m Khurisin As he
was ibll a chid at the time of Ibn Battuta’s visit the following anecdote

^ This chapter has been annotated by Defremery m Nouveiles
Annales dei Forages, January-July 1848

359



NOTES

probably relates to a period some nine or ten years later. Husayn’s
son Ghiyith ad-Dln Plr Shdh became a vassal of Tamerlane in 1381,
and on his death in 1389 the dynaily was extinguished.^

The penalty prescribed by Islamic Law for wine-drinking is
forty ilripes.

The town, which lies S.E. of Meshhed, is now known as Shaykh
Jdm. The province of Khurdsdn, which Ibn Battuta had now entered,
was at this time ^11 under the rule of the Mongol sultan of Persia and
‘Ir^q, at leail nominally.

The name of Mashhad means literally Mausoleum of ar-Ridd,
ar-Ridd being the tide by which the Imdms of the Shi‘ites are known.
The Imdm buried here is the eighth of the line, ‘AH ibn Musd, who
died in 818 a.d. Caliph Hdriin ar-RasWd died at Tus in 809 while
leading an expedition to the frontiers of Khurdsdn.

Now Turbat-i Haydari, south of Meshhed. The order in
which these towns are mentioned seems to be thoroughly confused, and
Sarakhs in particular should come either between Jdm and Tds, or
else on the return journey from Bidldm.

Bistdm lies S.E. of Adterabad, at the S.E. angle of the Caspian

Sea.

Here again there is a gap in the narrative, since from the Caspian
Ibn BattiSta leaps across to northern Afghanistan, where Qundiiz lies
on the river of the same name, and Baghldn on the same river some way
to the south. The eadtem half of Afghanidlan as far south as Ghazna
was at this time subject to the Jaghatdy-Khdns.

Ibn Battuta followed the route across the Khdwak Pass (13,000
feet high), N.E. of Kdbul.

Mahmud of Ghazna, who reigned from 998 to 1030, paved the
way for the establishment of Muhammadan rule in Nor^em India
by his merciless raids into Sind, Pan jab, and the neighbouring provinces.

It is impossible to determine, on the basis of this description, the
aftual route by which Ibn Battuta entered India. The tale about the
Afghan highwaymen indicates a regular road, and Shdshnaghdr has
been identified with Hashtnagar, near Peshawar ; these Statements
together would point to the Khyber Pass. On the other hand the
mention of a desert extending for fifteen days, together vwth Ibn
Battuta’s visit to Ghazna (erroneously inserted before Kdbul) indicates
some more obscure route through the Sulayman mountains, leading
out to the lower course of the Indus.


360



NOTES


CHAPTER VI‘

^ The po/kJ service (iariJ) in Muhamm^dsn countnes, as in
classical times, was purely an official organization for the rapid trans-
mission ofAate business, and could not, of course, be utilized by pnvate
atizens

^ The cuiloms of the Sdmira so clearly indicate their Hmdu origin
that their idenuhcation with the Arab ^mira muA be regarded as a
fi&itious genealogy datmg from their conversion to Islam It appears
that these Sdmtra are the Rajput Sammis, who about this time made
themselves makers of Lower Smd JaninI therefore lay probably
halRvay between Rohri and Schwan

^ The summer heats m Smd fall in the months of June and July,
and as Ibn Battdta reached the Indus in September there would appear
to be a gap of some nine months m the narrative It u more probable,
however, that his chronology is slightly out, or else that the party
ezpenenced an unusual spell of heat.

* Ibn Battdta explains below that the title king was given m India
to governors of provinces and other lugh offiaals

* The ruins of Lihari (“ Larrybunder ”) be on the northern side
of the Riho channel, some 28 miles 5 E of Karachi, by which it was
supplanted about 1800 owing to the shoaling of its entrance The
expression “ on the coail ” muft not be uken too literally, as the shore
IS umnhabitable to a depth of several miles owing to the conAant
inundations during the S W monsoons

“ The rums described by Ibn Battista have not been identified with
certainty Haig suggested that they might be those of Mora mart,
eight miles N E of Liharf, and it has ^ been suggefled (firil by
Cunmngham) that they were the ruins of Daybul or Debal, a former
port on the Indus 45 miles E S E of Karachi, which was captured and
burned by the Arabs on their invasion of Sind m 7 1 0-7 1 5

' Bakhar (Bukkur m the Indian Gaxetteer) is a fortified island in
the Indus, lying between the towns of Sukkur and Rohri

® This Aream was the old channel of the Raw^, which at this time
joined the umted Jhelum and Chinab below Multan

” Ajudahan should have come before Abohar

Kusdy can hardly represent Krishna, as the French tr^slation
suggefls , more probably it Elands forgB/rfV, “ rehgious teacher ” (“ also
name of deity ’’—Platt’s HindufUm Di&ionary)


* Ibn Battuta’s travels m Smd are discussed by M R Haig m
Journal of the Ro^al Asiatte Soaetyt 1887, pp 393 4*2 The entire
travels m India and China (covenng Chapters VI to XI) have been
translated and annotated by H von Mzik, Die Retse der Arabers Ibn
Batuta durck Indien und China, Hamburg, 1911

361



NOTES

The ruins of Mas‘uddbid lie a mile eail of Najafgarh, and six
miles W. by N. of Palem Clarion.

The ruins of medieval Delhi lie some ten miles south of the
present city, Delhi proper, Jahdn Pandh, and Sir! in a continuous line
N.E. from Mahrauh, Tughlaqdbdd four miles eail of Delhi proper and
two miles eaft of modern Tuglakabad. This group of towns never
recovered from the loss inflicted on it by Sultan Muhammad, as related
below by Ibn Battuta, and again suffered severely from Tfmur (Tamer-
lane) in 1398. New Delhi was the creation of the Mogul sultan
Shdh Jahdn (1627-58).

Some account of the early Muhammadan sultans of Delhi will be
found in the Introdu£Hon, pp. 22-24.

Here, as also in his description of the Kutub Mindr and ‘Ald’f
Mindr below, Ibn Battuta’s figures are exaggerated. The iron pillar
of Chandragupta, which was brought from Muttra and set up at Delhi
by its Hindu founder in the eleventh century, is 1 6 inches in diameter
and 23 feet in height. The Kutub Mindr is 238 feet high, the
unfinished portion of the ‘Ald’f Minar (wrongly attributed by Ibn
Battuta to Qutb ad-Dfn) 70 feet high, and neither is so wide as he
represents it to be.

The charader of Sultan Muhammad ibn Tughlaq portrayed in
this passage is frrifHy hifrorical ; see Introdu£Hon, p. 23.

Dawlatdbdd or Deogiri lies in the N.W. corner of the frate of
Hyderabad (Deccan). Sultan Muhammad decided to make it his
capital, in view of its importance as a base for military operations in
Southern India, and twice (or thrice) attempted to remove thither the
whole population of Delhi. By the irony of fortune, however, it was
captured during his lifetime by the founder of the Muhammadan
Bahmanf dynadty of the Deccan. See also Chap. VII, note 7.

In a previous se£Hon, omitted in this edition, Ibn Battuta relates
at length the hifrory of Shaykh Shihdb ad-Dfn. He had incurred the
sultan’s displeasure firdl by refusing to take office under him, and spent
some years in an underground dwelling he dug for himself near Delhi,
and which contained several rooms, frore-rooms, an oven and a bath.
On being summoned again to the court he openly branded Muhammad
Shdh as a traitor, and when he refused to retraft his fratement, was
executed.


CHAPTER VII

^ Yule has suggested that this is Sambhal in Rohilkhand, some
eighty miles eafr of Delhi {Cathay y IV, 18).

JaM is a small place 1 1 miles S.E. of Aligarh. The fa<ft that
the country within a hundred miles of Delhi was in so difrurbed a frate
throws a curious light on the nature of Sultan Muhammad’s “ empire.”

362



NOTES

* Maun u pombly Umri, near Bhind Marli is not known, but
cvjdcnti/ lay caft of Gualior

* Thcrcaa village of vUapur a few mild S n of Guabor Janbil
»J probably the same name as the nver Chambal, and the infidel sultan
the Rajah of Dholpur

‘ Paruin is almoA certainly Naruar m Guabor ihtc (Ibn Battuta
here as ebcuhcrc rendering a Brange name by one more familiar,
namely Paruin in /VfghanifLan), which uas, according to the Indian
Gazetteer^ ** once a flouruhing place on a route betueen Delhi and the
Deccan” Modem maps show also a place called Parssai, 25 miles
NE of Naruar and 30 S of Guabor

As regards Kajarri, there can be no queibon that this is Khajunho,
aymilcsE ofChhatarpurand ijNW ofPanna,m spite of the detour
which It insolicj on the journey The descripuon given by Ibn
Battuta is m complete agreement with the description of the site
contained in Sir Alciindcr Cunnmgham*s Reports {Archteological
Sarcey ef India, Re f^rtsfcriiCi 5, Vol II»pp 412+39)

* If, as 11 probable, this is Dl^ m M^ua, it should come after
Ujiain

’ The fortress of Deogiri u described os follows in the Indian
Gazetteer ” The fortress is built upon a conical rock, scarped from
a haght of 1 50 feet from the base The hiU upon uhich it ^ands rises
almoA perpendicularly from the plain to a height of about 600 feet ”
It was firA captured by the Muhammadans in 1294, and Sultan
Muhammad ibn Tughlaq, recognizing its importance as a base for
operations m Southern India, renamed it Daulatabad, and conceived
the idea of making it his capital Even before his death, however, it
had been sazed by a rebel governor, and it remained independent of
Delhi until the reign of Akbar

" Cambay, at the head of the Gulf of Cambay, uas at this time
one of the principal seaports of India Its deebne uas due to the
silting up of the Gulf, and the bore of ns tides, and it is now used
on^ by small craft.

® Kiui, a small place on the opposite side of the bay from Cambay

*** Qandahir is certainly an Arabiazaiion of Gandhar or Gundhar,
knouTi to medieval seamen as Gandar, on the eAuary of the small
nver Dhandar a short diAance south of Kawa

The name Jalansi probably represents the Rajput tribal name
Jhalas, All! preserved m the name of the diAn A of Jhalau ar or Gohelwar
in Kathiawar

** The small island of Penm or Piram, near the mouth of the Gulf
of Cambay, which was a notonous pirate Aronghold until shortly before
this time, when it was captured by the Muhammadans and deserted
Sandabur or Smdabiir was the name by which the island and
bay of Goa were known to the early Muslim traders, and taken from
them by the firA European travellers The older name Goa did not

363



NOTES

come into general use until the sixteenth century. It was captured by
the Muhammadans for the firft time in 1312, and was subsequently
taken and retaken more than once.

The sites of these medieval ports, many of which no longer exifl,
are discussed by Yule, Cathay y IV, 72-79;

The name of this kingdom, Ili or Eli, has left a trace in Mount
Delly. The medieval port is probably now represented by the village
of Nileshwar, a few miles north of the promontory.

Calicut, which Ibn Battuta has already ranked (p. 46), as one
of the great seaports of the world, decayed rapidly after the eilablish-
ment of the Portuguese trading stations in the sixteenth century. The
title of its ruler, c^ed by Ibn Batt6ta the Sdmarf (which is an adapta-
tion to Muslim ears of a foreign name, Simari being a word familiar
to theologians as the legendary anceitor of the Samaritans), is the
Malayalam word Sdmtitiri or Bimuri meaning “ Sea-king,” more
familiar to European readers in its Portuguese form Zamorin.

The purpose of these was to tow the junk in calm weather, as
Ibn Battiita explains below (p. 278).

Although a considerable part of the distance between Calicut
and Quilon may be traversed by inland waterways, it does not seem
possible to go the whole way by water. Ibn Batttita here, as again in
the description of his travels in China, neglefts the land Plages.

Quilon, ranked by Ibn Batttita with Calicut, was from very early
times the transhipment port for the Chinese trade. It is mentioned
by the Arab and Persian sailors of the ninth century under the name of
Kawlam-Malay, and fell* into decay, like its rival Calicut, in the
sixteenth century. Yule suggests that the title Tirazvarl given by Ibn
Battiita to its ruler may be the Tamil-Sanskrit compound Tiru-pati
“ Holy Lord ” {Cathay, IV, 40).

19 “ Always a sign that things were going badly with Ibn Battuta ”
(Yule).

Shdliy^t, the Portuguese Chiliate or Chale, now Beypore, 61 -
miles south of Calicut. The fabrics manufaftured here were of various
kinds, and the name shall is ^tiU used for a soft cotton fabric. It is
possible that the name of this town is the origin of the French chale,
and hence our shawl.


CHAPTER VIII

^ Although the Maidive Islands had long been knovm to sailors
and travellers, and had become Islamized in the twelfth centujy, Ibn
Battuta’s narrative is the earliedl descriptive account we possess of the
islands and their inhabitants. Many of his names can ftill be traced
on the map.

^ Maidive kalu-bili-mas, black bonito fish, from its black appearance
after smoking.

364



NOTES

* The “ mountain of Sercndfb” is Adam’s Peak. Screndlb is the
old Arabic and Persian name of Ceylon (commonly derived from the
Sanskrit Bimhala^dvipct Lidn*dwelling~island)> which was gradually
replaced by the Pali form Sihalam=Saylan=(^ylon.

* The old Sinhalese kingdom of Ceylon was invaded about 1314
by the Pandyas, whose own kingdom at Madura in Ma'bar, which had
eii^d since at IcaA the third century s.c.» was now in the hands of
the Muhammadans. The leader of the invaders was Arya Chakra*
varti, but Ibn Battuta’s patron was more probably a later general of
the same name, who in 1371 creSlcd forts at Colombo and elsewhere.
The seat of the Pandyas was in the island of Jadha.

‘ The hollow on the summit of Adam’s Peak, venerated by the
Muslims as the imprint of Adam’s foot, was equally venerated by the
Brahmans and the BuddhBb, as the mark of Siva’s and Buddha’s foot
respeflivciy.

* KunakXr is certainly Komegalle (Kurunagala), the residence of the
old dynaily of Sinhalese kings dt Um period. The name Kunar is
cxplamed as Sanskrit Kunaatt ** Prince.”

* These chains are ^ in exiAence.

‘ Dlrut^-ar (which is properly dte name of 4 medieval town in
KurdiAan, to the N.E. of Kirmansbah) here Aands for Dewandera,
the site of a famous temple of Vishnu (deAioyed by the Portuguese in
1587), near Dondra Head, the southermoA j^iot of Ceylon.

CHAPTER IX'

' Harkdtu cannot be the modem town of Arcot, which lies too far
north. As it was only a fort its location is very doubtful, though the
name is probably connefied with the diArid of Arcot (Tamil aru^kadu,
six foreAs).

* Jalil ad-Dfn, who had been appointed by Sultan Muhammad of
Delhi to the poA of mili tary governor of Ma'bar (which had been
occupied by the Muhammadans in 1311), made himself independent
about 1338, and was murdered five years later. The throne was then
occupied by a succession of generals, of whom Ghiyith ad-Dfn was
the third.

® Of the man y -fatans and -palams of the Coromandel coaA, it
is difficult to determine exaAIy the original of this Fattan. The
principal port of medieval Ma'bar was Kaveripattanam, at one of the
mouths of the Kavcri,-s«d to have been deAroyed by an inundation
about 1300. If this was Ibn Battuta’s Fattan, its deAruiBon muA

' The se£Uons dealing with Bengal, the Archipelago, and China
have been annotated by Sir Henry Yule in Cathay and the IVay Thither ,
new edition revised by H. Cordler, Vol, IV, Hakluyt Society, London,
1916.

365



NOTES


be dated nearer 1350 (see Marco Polo^ II, 335 "^)* Fattan may,
however, have been Negapatam, which was an important harbour in
after centuries. Yule’s conje6hire that the place mu^l be farther south,
in the neighbourhood of Ramnad, is unlikely if the name Hark^tu has
anything to do with Arcot (see note i). At some time during his visit
to Ma'bar, on the other hand, or else on his journey from Fattan to
Kawlam, Ibn Battuta mu^ have called at the small port of Kaylukan',
10 miles S. of Ramnad, which he afterwards transported to somewhere
in the China Sea (see Chap. X, note 9). It is Grange that Ibn Battiita
does not mention the port of K^yal, Marco Polo’s Call, situated in the
delta of the Tamraparni river, south of Tuticorin, which was a very
important trading Elation at this time (see Marco Polo, II, 370-4).

* This is identified, following Yule, with the Pigeon Island, 35 miles
south of Onore (Hinawr).

® This ^latement is impossible to reconcile with any chronology
of Ibn Battuta’s travels in the Far Eail. Judging by the course of the
narrative, this second visit cannot have been made later than a year
after his departure from the Maidive Islands.

® Sudkdwdn is identified by some authorities with Satgaon (Satganw),
a ruined town on the Hooghly lying N.W. of Hooghly town, which
was the mercantile capital of Bengal from the days of Hindu rule
until the foundation of Hooghly by the Portuguese. Yule, with more
probability, identified it with Chittagong (Chatganw), which was
a more convenient port than Satgaon, and is “ on the shores of the
Great Sea,” as described by Ibn Battuta. There seems, however, to
be some uncertainty whether Sultan Fakhr ad-Din had any connection
with Chittagong (Jf. Book of Duarte Barbosa, II, 139).

" Jun, which is Ibn Battuta’s transcription for the Jumna, here
obviously represents the Brahmaputra {cf. p. 52).

® Lakhnaoti (Lakshmanawati), the ancient name of the town of
Gawr, long the capital of the Muhammadan governors of Bengal
after its conquest in 1 204, the ruins of which are situated near Maldah.
The name was retained for one of the three diilriCts of Bengal (see
note ri), covering the area between the Ganges and the Brahmaputra.

^ It has been fully established by Yule {Cathay, IV, i5i-5)> that
the diSlriCt visited by Ibn Battuta was Sylhet, where the tomb of Shah
Jelal (=Shaykh JaJil ad-Dfn) is Still venerated. The name Kdmrii,
more correftly Kdmrub (for Kdmarupa), was applied to the diStriCi
roughly corresponding to Assam, whose Indo-Chinese population
(Khasis, etc.) present the usual Mongolian characteristics.

The Blue River can only be the Meghna, and on the left bank of
the Barak, one of its headwaters, there is Still a tillah, or low hill, called
Habang, a little to the south of Habiganj.

“ Sonargaon (Sunarganw), 15 miles S.E. of Dacca, was one of the
old Muhammadan capitals of Bengal, and gave its name to one of the
three districts of Bengal, the third being Satganw.

366



NOTES


CHAinER V

^ Bsrah Nakir» formerly ]dei^ufic(I» on account of the description
given by Ibn Battiita of the natives, with the Andaman or Nicobar
Islands, has been shown by Yule to have been more probably on the
mainland of iVralan, m Burma, neat the island of Ncgrais But the
text of Ibn Battista appears to male Barah Nalir the name of the

n ople rather than that of the country {Cai^ay, IV, 92 , Marco Po/o,
, 309- j a)

^ The name Jivva was applied generally to the Malay Archipelago,
Jiwa“ the lesi” being tbe island of Sumatra, and ]iwa“ the greater ”
or Jivva proper the island now called Java Ihe introdu&on of
Islam into Sumatra was clTc^ed gradually by traders and missionaries
from Southern India during the thirteenth century The beginnings
of Muslim rule m the island date from the lail decade of the same
century, probably a few > cars before the foundation of the town of
Sumatra A 1 Malik az Zihir was a title borne by several of the
Muslim rulen

* On the jack tree see Yule and Burnell, lioison Jchion
* The jamun is a small fruit resembbng an olive but sweet, as Ibn
Baittlu explains m an earlier passage U is not the same as the jambu
or rose apple See Hobten^J obton under both entries

' 1 susped the word translated '* houses ** to refer to some kind of
ofncul cAablishmcnts In And grammar the word /arbJ may be taken
to refer to the ** houses ” (as m the translation), but is more probably
the lume of the poet

* Mul Jiwa has usually been taken to mean the island of Java, but
Yule adduces several cogent reasons for identifying it with the Malay
Peninsula In accordance with this view the port and city of Qiqula
are to be placed on the caA coail of the Malay Peninsula, m the neigh
bourbood of Kelanlan

Qamirz is alraoA certainly Khmer, the anaent name of Cambodia,
on the opposite side of the gulf of Siam (Ca/baj, IV, 155)

’ Thu somewhat aggressive phrase was the regular formula of
greeting to non Muslims (c/" p 214), the words a/ Salim 'Jlaykum
(“ Peace be upon you ”) being flndly applicable only to true believers,
although, as we have seen, Ibn Battuta occasionally took the liberty of
infringing this rule (p 159)

* The “ motionless sea,” which m this passage Ibn Battuta calls
by the Arabo-Persian name al bakr a! iibil, is referred to by other

^ Ibn Battuta’s travels m the Indian Archipelago have been anno-
tated also by E Dulauricr, in Journal Astattque, February March,

1 847, and by G Ferrand, in Textts arabes, etc , relatifs a I Extrlmc
Orient, t II (Pans, 1914), pp 436 455

367




NOTES

contemporary writers under varying names the pitchy sea, the sea
of darkness) as lying in the extreme ea^. It seems therefore to corres-
pond to our China Sea or some of the neighbouring waters. The
following words in Ibn Battuta’s narrative show that it was on the
regular route.

® The problem of identifying the king Tawdlisi -and his city of
Kayliikarl is one that has exercised the ingenuity of all Ibn Battuta’s
commentators. Celebes, Tonkin, Cambodia, Cochin-China, the
province of Kwan-si, the Philippine Islands, and the Sulu Archipelago
have all been suggested. Y ule accepts the la^l solution as more probable
than any other, but only after confessing to “ a faint suspicion . . .
that Tawdlisf is reaUy to be looked for in that part of the atlas which
contains the marine surveys of the late Captain Gulliver.” The moil
surprising detail in the narrative is not the existence of the princess of
amazonian charafteriilics, but her Turkish name (already given by
Ibn Battuta as the name of Sultan Uzbeg-Khdn’s fourth queen, see
above p. 148) and Turkish speech. Yule, followed by Dr. von Mzik,
suggests that the details of her prowess may be derived from the ^lory
of Kaydu-Kh^’s valiant daughter Aijaruc, which Ibn Battiita may
have heard from some of the ship’s folL Aijaruc is in faft a Turkish
name, and it is quite probable that Ibn Battuta, whose memory, for
Grange names was not of the be^, confused it with the similar-sounding
Urduj^. In the same way KayMkarf was really the name of a seaport
in S.E. India (see Chap. IX, note 3), which Ibn Battiita has confused
with the name of king “ Taydlisi’s ” port {Cathay^ IV, 157-60 ; Marco
Palo, II, 465 ; G. Ferrand, Textes relatifs d P Extrime-Orient, 43 r-3).

CHAPTER XI

^ The description of this great river, traversing China from north
to south and flowing into the sea at Canton, has sometimes been taken
to prove that Ibn Battuta’s journey to China, or at leafl: in China, is
a pure fidtion. It muil, however, be borne in mind that he knew no
more of China than the fringe which he himself visited, supplemented
by what he could gather from various (and doubtless not always reliable)
informants, and in this passage he is merely reproducing the common
view of his time. The “ River of Life ” is, in its firfl: sedtion, the
Grand Canal, between Peking and the Yang-tsi. The merchants
on the coafl: knew vaguely of the inland water system connedling
Hang-chow and the Yang-tsi with the Weft River and Canton, prob-
ably by way of the Siang-kiang, and consequently regarded the eftuary
of the Pei-kiang as that of the entire syftem. There is greater difficulty
in explaining Ibn Battuta’s ftatements that Zaytun (Ts’wan-chow-fu)
was linked by inland waterways with both Canton and Hang-chow,
where presumably he was speaking from personal experience. As



NOTES

wc luve seen above, however, in connedion with his knd journey
between Ciliciit and Quilon (Chap. VII, note 17), Ibn Battfita simply
omits all reference to the land dages as secondary, or he may possibly
have forgotten about them in the ten years that intervened between
his visit to China and the dldadon of his travels. It is not irrelevant
to note that other writers, including even some Chinese sources, also
spealc of Zayt6n as being on the same water sydem as Hang-chow
(Khansi or Quinsay). (See in addition to Yule and von M2ik,
R. Hartmann in Der hlem^ IV, 434.)

* Friar Odoric of Pordenone also remarks, in connedion with

Fuchow, “ Here be seen the bigged cocks in the woild ” ; but he says
of the geese at Canton that they are “ bigger and finer and cheaper
than anywhere in the world ” II, 181, 185).

* duManhand arahe Sula^man . . . <n
85 1, tr. G. Ferrand, p. 5 5) tells us that the Chinese buried their dead,
as they do at the present day. Marco Polo, however, condantly
refers to the pradice of cremation, which mud therefore have been
a common cuAom in China at this period.

* The hiUsht or bilUht originally an ingot of metal weighing
about 4 J lbs., was the currency of the deppes at the beginning of the
thirteenth century. The term was probably brought into China
by the Mongols. On Chinese paper-money see Marto Pe/e, 3 , 423^.

* According to Marco Polo, the owner of used notes paid three
per cent, on the value on receiving new pieces (1, 42 5).

® Cathay a term employed fird by the Muhammadans

and from them by European travellers and missionaries from the
lUrtcenth to the sixteenth centuries, denoted the northern part of
China, in conlrad to Sin or China proper in the south. The name was
certainly derived from the Kitiy or Khiliy Turks, who founded a
dynady (the Liao) which reigned at Peking during the tenth and
eleventh .centuries. The name Sfn or Chfn (China) is, in all prob-
ability, to be derived similarly from the Tiin dynady (255-209 b.c.).

In this passage Ibn Baltiita obviously confuses coal and porcelain
clay, possibly owing to a cudom followed in China of powdering the
coal and mixing it with clay to form ” patent fuel ” (see Marco Polo,
1,442-3).

® It is generally admitted that the city known to all Muham-
madan and Chridian travellers in the Middle Ages as Zayiijn is Ts’wan-
chow-fu (ChQan-chow-fu, 24.53 N., 118.33 E.). The arguments
in favour of this identification, togciher'with an examination of the
claims of Chang-chow-fu (Amoy), will be found in extenso in Marco
Polo, II, 237^. , .

® Yule adduces some drong arguments for the derivation of satin
from zayttini through medieval Italian zettani {Cathay, IV, 1 18).

• Sijilmisa was in the neighbourhood of Tafilelt, in Southern
Morocco ; see below. Chap. XIV, note i.

369



NOTES

I take the diwdn mentioned in this passage to be, not the
“ Council ” (whatever organization that may have been), but the
institution commonly known by that name in North Africa and Egypt
in all ports open to foreign commerce, from which originated the
Italian dogane and French douane. It was at one and the same time
cuStom-house, warehouse, lodging house and bourse for foreign
merchants (for which reason Ibn Battuta is lodged in it), and its con-
troller was one of the principal officers of the realm (see Mas Latrie,
Relations et Commerce de RJfrique Septentrionale, Z'iSff')' ^ similar
organization appears to be indicated in the Chinese ports. A few
lines below Ibn Battuta says of Canton that it was “ in the province ”
of the controller of the diwdn, probably in the sense that the trading
Station there was also under his jurisdiftion.

The sense of this passage is quite clear. According to the Koran,
the legal alms are to be given to “ parents, kindred, orphans, the poor,
and the wayfarer.” The Muhammadan community at Zaytiin was
so wealthy that the only one of these five classes to which the alms were
of any value was the laSl.

The Arabic and Persian writers (like Marco Polo) conventionally
use the term Q^dn or Qa’dn for the “ Great Khan ” of the Mongols.
It is not, however, as Yule considered, a different title from the ordinary
Turkish title Khdqdn (see Shiratori, Memoirs of Research Dept, of the
Toyo Bunko, No. i, Tokyo, 1926, pp. 19-26).

Sfn-kaldn is an Arabicized form of the Persian Chm-kaMn, for
Sanscrit Mahdc{na= Great China, which is also the meaning of the
Arabic name Sfn as-Sfn.

The text is defective at this point, due either to the miswriting
of a word, or to the omission of another word.

Ibn Battuta’s route “ up the river ” from Ts’wan-chow to Canton
is, in the nature of things, uncertain. Yule thinks of a route up the
Min from Foochow, and down the upper reaches of the Kan to the
Pei-kiang via the Mei-ling Pass. It seems a peculiarly roundabout
journey, when much more direft communication is offered by the
Mei and the Tung, if these are navigable.

This temple has not been identified with any certainty. Yule
suggeffs that it is the Temple of Glory and Filial Duty, near the N.W.
corner of the modern city.

The site of the Rampart of Gog and Magog, the building of
which is described in the Koran and attributed to Alexander the Great,
was a landing problem to the Arabic geographers. It was generally
regarded as lying at the north-eaffem end of the habitable world, and
was vaguely confused with the Great Wall of China. But Ibn Battuta
could have had no idea that China was within the Wall, and his queffion
appears to have been put at random, perhaps on hearing some chance
reference to the Great Wall.

Marco Polo also speaks of a race of cannibals in the mountains

370



NOTES

bcuvcan FuLicn and Kiang $i or Che kiang (II, 225 , cf H Schmidt
thenner m ZeitscJtn/t der Get fUr Erdkunde zu Berlin^ 1927, p 388)
The identification of Qan jan fu is AiIl uncertain If Ibn
Battuta IS correft m placing it beu^een Zaytun and Khansi, its position
wU depend on the route which he followed Yule identified it with
Kicn-chang fu on the Fu ho m the province of Kiang si, and the next
sudon Baywam QutJd with the Po-yang Sea The obje^ons to this
idcnuficadon are that (i) it involves a very roundabout journey to
Hang-chow, and would indeed cut out Hang chow altogether ,
(2) there is no evidence for the cxiilcnce of a frequented trade
route (such as Ibn Battuta’s route is represented to be) through Kien-
chang fu

Since Ibn Battuta took 31 days for the journey to Hangchow,
while Marco Polo took 27, travelling in the reverse dirc£bon, there are
very good grounds for assuming that their routes were subAandaUy
the Mme In this case the mofl natural idcntificauon for Qan jan fu
IS Fuchow In favour of this arc (i) the size of the city, with
a governor of its own and a large garrison (which corresponds very
well with Marco Polo’s desenpuon) , (2) the arrival of “ a very large
wssel at the port, since Marco Polo expressly flatcs that “From
Zayton ships come this way right up to the city of Fuju by the nver
1 have told you of, and ’tis in this way that the preaous wares of India
come hither ” The name which Marco Polo gives to the diflnfi of
Fuchow, Chonka or Concha (the proper name of the city being Chin
wang), may possibly explain the transformation into Qan jan fu.
On the other hand, Marco Polo allows only five days from Fuchow
to Zaytun, which would suggcfl some place further up the Mm river
ttivigabihty of the Min sec Marco Boh, II, 234)

Dulauner sugg^ed that Qan jan fu may ^and for Chm kiang fu
at the jun&on of the Yang tsi and the Grand Canal, in which case
It should come between Khansi and Khin bihq (Peking) Similar
inflances of misplacing are, as will have been noticed, not infrequent
wth Ibn Battuta, but Chin kiang fu scarcely seems large enough to
fit his dcscnption M Fcrrand takes Qan jan fu to be Marco Polo’s
Kenjanfu, the old capital of China, now Si an fu on the Wei nver m
Shen SI, which was called Khumdin by the Arabic geographers This
identification, however, hangs together with M Ferrand’s thesis that
Ibn Battuta did not go to China at all It is safefl to assume ather
^t Qan jan fu was a name used by the Muslim merchants for Fuchow
(hke Zaytun for Ts’wan-chow), or that Ibn Battuta has confused two
similar sounding names

The GhiJta is the name given to the wide plain covered with
fruit trees around Damascus

It would be a wafte of time to search for anything corresponding
to this name on a modern map of China, and its position can be deter
nuned only by reference to the other towns mentioned It is quite

371



NOTES

possible that it was not a place-name at all, but the name of some
Turko-Tatar commander (? Baydn Qutlugli=“ Bayan the Lucky ”)
which Ibn Battuta erroneously took to be the name of a town.

It is agreed by all travellers, both Christian and Muslim, that
what Marco Polo calls “ the mo^ noble city of Kinsay . . . beyond
dispute the fineil and nobleft in the world ” was indeed the largest
city in the world in the fourteenth century. The admiration it aroused
lent itself to exaggeration, and when even Marco Polo avers that
“ it hath an hundred miles of compass. And there are in it twelve
thousand bridges of ^lone, for the moft part so lofty that a great fleet
could pass beneath them,” it is not to be wondered at that in Ibn.
Battuta’s account there are, in Yule’s phrase, “ several very questionable
statements.” The name Khansd is an Arabic modification (to accord
with the name of a famous Arabic poetess), as Kinsay, Cansay, Cassay,
etc., are European modifications, of the Chinese King-sxe “ Capital,”
Hang-chow having been the capital of the Sung synaSly from 1127 to
1276.

“ The word translated citadel means “ inner city occupied by the
ruler or governor.” The viceroy’s palace was not in the centre of
Hang-chow, however, but at the southern end.

In the Chain of HiHories we are told that “ On reaching the age
of eighty a man is exempted from paying the poll-tax, and receives
a grant from the imperial treasury. The Chinese say of this “We made
him pay the tax when he was young ; now that he is old we will give
him a pension ’ ” (Ferrand, Voyage du marchand Sulayman, p. 63).

Qurtay appears to be a contradtion of Qajitiy, a common
Turkish title, but no governor of this name is mentioned in Chinese
works, so far as is known. It is probable that it was the title given to
the commander by the Turkish troops, like many other of the terms
employed by Ibn Battiita in this sedlion, which are not Chinese but
Turkish or Persian. In the same way he gives as the name of the
Emperor his Perso-Turkish title of “ king ” ; see below, note 32.

Tozoa or tuwi is a Turkish word meaning feaft or festival.

Yule, remarking that the “ pretty cadence ” is precisely that of

t won’t go home till mornings
gives a “ somewhat free ” rendering :

My heart given up to emotions.

Was o’erwhelmed in waves like the ocean’s ;

But betaking me to my devotions.

My troubles were gone from me !

The laik line of the poem, however, neither reads nor scans properly.

Marco Polo also speaks at length of pleasure parties on the lake,
but does not mention mimic battles (II, 205).

This statement is jufliifiably challenged by Yule, who regards

372



NOTES

It as so contrary to fafi, that one's doubts arise %vhcthcr Ibn Battuta
could ha>c iravcBcd beyond Hang<hau ” {CaiAay, IV, 137)

* Pebng, caUed by the Mongols Khin-Biliq, “ City of the Khin,”
the Cambalu and Cambuluc of Wc^cm writers. The name Kkintau
hu been explained as an adjcdive, “(City) of the Khin” (Journal
Jsiatijue, May 1913, p. 701).

See Chap. IJ, note ij.

” Probably a corrupuon of the Pcnian fMJh, “ Ling ” (see note
* 5 ^ The reigning Emperor wu Togon Timur (reigned 1333*71)

C^dqorum, the firft capital of the Mongols, the site of which
IS now occupied by the moniUlcry of Erdcni uo, lay above the right
bank of the Orkhon river, about 200 miles W S.W, of Urga and
20 miles S E. of Karabalgasun, m Outer Mongolia,

Blshbihq was situated on or near the present Guchen, to the cafi
of Urumtsi in Dzungana.

Ibn Battiita here gives an accurate account of the ceremonial
observed at the burial of a Tatar chief, but it is obvious that it cannot
have been the Emperor’s bunal which he witnessed, if indeed the
uarrauve is at firflhand.

As this FfnSz appears to be totally unknown, and as the seat of
Khins was not removed to Qariqorum until after the death
ofTogon Timur m 1371 (ifthe Chinese records arc true), iheexiflencc
of this passage in a b<»k of which a copy written m i J56 is ftiU exunt
|» a problem better suited for laveAigation by the Psychic Society than
by the matier-of*fad hiflonan.


CHAPTER XII

* The rukh is sufficiently well known m Europe, thanks to Smdbad
the Sailor, to need no explanation. Yule has written in connexion
with Marco Polo’s account (11,415*20) a long note discussing possible
originals for this gigantic bird. One or two Arabic writers had already
shown some sceptiasm on the subjed, and Ibn Battuta, it will be
noticed, is prudently non*committal His narrative certainly suggefls
the part played by mirage or abnormal rcfradion in giving currency to
this widespread dory. ,

* Qurayydt (Quryit) dill appears on our maps , Shabba and Kalba
arc not shown, at lead under these names, but arc probably dill in
evidence, as there is an aimed continuous belt of villages along the coad
of ‘Omin.

* Kirzl or Kirzfn lay on the right bank of the Sakkin (Mund)
river, a little above its eadward bend Ibn Battuta’s route lay up the
valley of the river from this point to Shfrdz On the mam road
between Bassd (Fas 4 ) and Shlriz was the town of Khawridin, which
may possibly be Ibn Battuta’s Kawrldia (see Chap III, note 22)

373



NOTES

* In 1340 the Moorish Sultan Abu’l-Hasan led an army into Spain,
which was totally defeated by Alphonso XI of Cailile at the Rio Salado,
near Tarifa, on 30th Oftober of the same year. Alphonso followed up
his viftory by the capture of Algeciras in 1 342, but died in 135° while
attempting to retake Gibraltar. The siege of Gibraltar on that
occasion is referred to by Ibn Battuta in the following chapter.

® The relations between Shaykh Hasan and Sultan Abii Sa‘ld have
already been explained by Ibn Battuta (above, p. 100). This Shaykh
Hasan “ the Great,” after an eight-years’ struggle with his rival Shaykh
Hasan “ the Little,” grandson of the Amir Chubin, founded the
JaM’ir or llkanl dyna^ly, which continued to rule in ‘Iriq and Adhar-
bayjan until the early years of the fifteenth century.

® Hit and Ana ^lill appear on our maps, on the Euphrates to the
N.W. of Baghdad. Hadltha, now called Qal'at Habulia, was about
3 5 miles below Ana, and AnWr, formerly one of the principal cities
of ‘Ir^q, some di^ance below Hit, at the head of the Isi canal, the fir^
of the great navigable canals uniting the Euphrates with the Tigris.
The diftrifl of Hit was especially remarkable for its immense quantities
of fruit and its dense population.

^ Rahba lay some eighteen miles below the junftion of the Khibur
river with the Euphrates and we^l of the river, on a loop canal.

® Sukhna is an important Elation on the routes between the Middle
Euphrates and Palmyra, about 35 miles N.E. of the latter.

" See note 28 to Chap. I.

''' A large town now in Turkey, 55 miles N. by E. of Aleppo.

This plague was the famous “ Black Death,” which wrought
indescribable havoc in the Muslim lands during this year, and is
probably to be accounted a catastrophe no less^ overwhelming than
the invasions of the Mongols and Tamerlane. Ibn Battuta’s figures ,
are not greatly exaggerated ; indeed some eSlimates are much higher.
The historian Ibn Khaldun, whose father was one of the viftims at
Tunis, speaks of it as “ the devouring peStilence which ravaged the
nations and carried off the men of this generation, which destroyed
and effaced many of the fair fruits of civilization. . . . Cities and
palaces were laid in ruins, roads and waymarks were obliterated. . . •

It was as though the "voice of creation itself had summoned the world
to abasement and contraftion, and the earth had hastened to obey.”

The Marinid dynaSty of Morocco. See Introduftion, p. 19.

13 u enemy ” unquestionably means the Christians, but the
phrase does not, in all probability, refer to any organized maritime
warfare. The only Christian State which was not at this time on
friendly terms with Tunis was Sicily, whose admiral Roger Doria
had captured Jerba about 1289. In 1335 it, along with the other
islands, was recovered by the Muslims, and some ineffedtual attempts
upon it were made in the succeeding decades by the Sicilians. It is
more likely that the vessel fell into the hands of Christian pirates, whose

374



NOTES

ravs^u m ihc Mcducrraatin dunng these ccnturici were (m Mas
Lairic** >icw) even greater than those of the Barbary piraica {Relaitont
Je V.ifnjue sefUMinenjU^ pp 404-7).

** Bul^Iaa docj not appear in any medieval or modern works that
1 have bwa able to consult. 1 should hazard that the place meant
IS Nibcuh a small Mil 30 miles S E. ofTuniif where, according to
Idrld, there was a lortrcss

The description of the harbour makes it certain that the port
was Caghan, which, as it belonged at this time to Aragon, was a natural
port of call for Catalan vessels It is described in the Ilizzo Poriolan
as *‘ bon porto fato per forza dc palangadc ” The fear felt by Ibn
Battiita for his ufety is explained by the piratical aAivitics of us
inhabitants (“Lea faubourgs dc Cagliari scrvaient dc rcpaire aux
forbans '* : Mas Latrie, t&tJ , 405).

*• The village of al*‘Ubbid, usually ca|lcd Sfdl Bd Madln after
the sanSuary, lies a mile caA of Tlcmien The mosque, built in
U 39 i the £ncA example of Moorish architcdure m Algeria
“The ^Vzghanghin (Azgangan m Leo Afneanus) were a Berber
inbe settled near the coaA ^tween Mclilla and the Muluya riser

Thu Aaiemcnt is confirmed by the geographer ‘Omar/, who
relates that the nitijJ/ (sdmar) of gold contained 120 dirhams,
equal to Co full dirhams, and that three full dirhams were equal to
one dirham of good money m Lg>pt and S>na The word

“ dirham “ used mihout qualificauon, be adds, means “ small dirham *’
The large gold dinar of the Mar/mds weighed 87 grams, salued at
14 50 francs , the small gold dinar of the /Umoravids 65 grams, valued
at 10 93 francs Ibn Battdu conAantly refers to the Indian gold
tangah, which contained 175 grams, as worth 2J Moroccan dinars,
a proportion which fits the small dinar much better than the large
The small dirham at 120 to the gold dinar of the Mar/mds had an
absolute value of 12 centimes, if the lUmoravid dinar is meant it
would be worth nine centimes The highcA cAimate of the value of
the dirham nu^ra of Egypt w m the neighbourhood of 75 centimes,
and It IS more usually put at between 50 and 60 centimes (Yule,
Ca/^ay, IV, 54 ^ , hlassignon, Le hianc Jans Us premiires annies Ju
XVIe stieU (Alger, 1906), loi-z , al-*Offlar/, MasJltk al AbsJr^ tr.
Dcmombyncs (Pans, 1927), I, 173)

The phrase is again a remmisccnce of Solomon , see Chap I,
note 28

1 take this to refer to the popular mulukhl^a (Corekorus ohtonus)

ofEgj^t

The Imimate in this sense is the Caliphate Ibn Battuta means
that the dignity of the WcA has been enhanced by the assumption of
the Cahph’s title CommanJer of the Faithful by the rulers of Morocco,
and in particular by Abii *Indn For the same reason he gives him,
a few lines back, the throne title al-Mutatoakkil, adopted by the sultan

375




NOTES


CHAH ER X1V»

‘ IklMCcn tbe eighth and the mtceoth centunea Sijilmiu uai
the pnaapl trading flaiion wuth of the Ailaa njountaini. The ruini
of the iflciMt town lie on the W 4 JI Ziz» o^er a iAance of five milci,
*** o*^6l>hourhood of the xaodem Tafilelc.
f. of Taghiza lici to the N.W, of TaodcnI. On account

*\ formed an important outpoR of the negro crupirei.

Wadi Dra, which drains the southern slopes of the Anti-

The nainc Ma^ifa appears to have been given at this time to the
who, with the Lamifina, have been from time immcmonal
From ]bnBaiifita*i account
c MMsufa occupied tlie entire central Sahara from Taghiza to
cailvv ards as far os Air and the Hoggar.

1 he phrase used in the text (which may be rendered caniars
Koran, where it means “ untold wealth.”
lamahll probably corresponds to Idrlsl*s well of T/sar, in the
desert ofAzawwad (Cooley, 14-15).


Ibn Baituu’s travels in the Sahara and Niger territories were firil
Ttxry^. rmperfeS text) by W. D. Cooley,

Is* 0/ the Jrait, London, 1841. The full text was trans-

wed and annouted by dc Slanc in Journal Atiatique, March 1843.
1 he matenal is very fully rehandled by M. Dclafossc, Uaut^SMgal’
^ ^ 1 ? (quotcd In ihc followlngnotcs as J/.S.N . ; an abridged

1 of ibn Batnita is contained in tome II, pp. 194-203), and by
/ 'j *^* 1 ^^/* the Introdudion to Die Bentn-Sanmlu/iP . . . tn
Lwrff, Leiden, 1913.


377



NOTES

Iwalatan is the plural of Walata, the place consisting, according
to Leo Africanus, of three hamlets. Modern maps show two places
called Walata ; Ibn Battuta’s fwalatan is the southern one at 17.02 N.,
6.44 W. It took the place of Ghana as the southern terminus of the
trans-Saharan trade-route in the thirteenth century (see note 21 below),
being built (according to Hartmann, Mit. Sem. Or. Stud., XV^, 162)
on the site of the old Berber town of Audaghusht.

^ The baobab tree {^Adansonia digitafa), which rapidly attains a
very great girth, is frequently artificially hollowed for the Storage of
water, and thus enables settlements to be made in places where there
are no weUs. These trees were introduced for that purpose into the
Eastern Sudan (Kordofan) from WeSt Africa in the eighteenth century,
but from Ibn Battuta’s description it would appear that artificial hollow-
ing was not yet pratftised there.

® Kuskusu (in French couss-couss), the ordinary cereal dish in
N.W. Africa, is made by Steaming coarsely-ground flour, and is served
up with savoury or sweet condiments.

“ Zdghari, identified by Delafosse with Dioura, has been shown by
Lippert to be identical with the village called by Barth Ture-ssangha,
S.S.E. of Ba-ssikunnu or Bacikounou {Barthes Travels, Engl, ed.,
1857-8, V, 481 ; Mil. Sem. Or. Si., IIP, 198-9).

Wangara (Wankore, Wakore) is one of the names given by the
Peuls (Fulani) and Songhay to the people called the Soninke (called
by the Portuguese Sarakole), and used by extension to mean both'
Soninke and Malinke, thus being equivalent to the modern use of the
term Mande or Mandingo, which is properly the name of the Malinke.
Both Malinke and Soninke belong to the same family, the latter to its
northern eroUD and the former to it<; renrml amnn ^T^elnfosse. H.S.H..



NOTES

It was m Takrtr that Islam obtained its firil foothold in the Sudan m
the early part of the elcventli century (Marquart, Benin Sammlung,
Intr , 150-1, 154, 241)

Muli was m all probability the diilri^l later called Murf, on the
left bank of the Niger about Niamey^ the opposite bank being occupied
by the Qumburi (perhaps Ibn BattuU*s Qanbuml)

** Thei// 7 /yttaofIbnBaitutaare.takcnby Dclafosse and Marquart
to be the mhabitants of the Kebbe (Kiba) diArxfl There is, however,
a great deal to be said in favour of CooIcy*s view that the Lfmfs are
identical with the Lamlam mentioned by other Arabic geographers,
and placed by the geographer Bakrf (who calls them Damdam) on the
Niger below Gaogao The latter word unqueilionably means “ Canni
bals,” and is not the name of a speahe tribe In the Fulbe language

It became n;jam n^am (from Fulbe »y<//77=eai), which is variously
reproduced as nam nam and yam in Arabic script The term was
current also on the cail coah of Africa in both forms Ibn Battuta
(above, p 112) beard at Kilwa that gold duA was brought to Sofdla
from “ Yuflin the country of the Lfmfs” (see next note), which was
diAant a month’s journey from there For this iTans<ontmental
trade see note 33 below The word Nyam nyam finally became
particulanxcd as the name of a cannibal tribe m Belgian Congo
Meanwhile it had passed into Mediterranean folklore , F W Hasluck
heard from an Albanian muleteer of “an entirely new kmd of vampire
called Num Niam soi, which he has seen You know it because
(1) It IS excessively fond ofhverand (a) has donkey’s teeth and (3) large
feet” (Cooley, 1 12 , Hartmann in Af 5 0 5 , XV 172, Hasluck,

Letters on Religion and Folklore, 9)

Cooley’s identification (p 93) of Yuff with Nupe, on the left
bank of the Niger between Jebba and Lokoja, has been accepted by
all later authorities

In thus hnking the Niger on to the Nile (probably by way of the
Bahr al Ghazdl) Ibn Battuta is at leaA professing the less erroneous
of two wrong views commonly held before the discoveries of Mungo
Park Idrisf, followed by Leo Africanus and many early European
geographers, imagined the Niger to flow weA, and identified it with
the Senegal river

The ChriAian kingdom of Nubia was invaded by the sultans of
Egypt on several occasions between 1272 and 13^3 These eipedi
tions, which were produAive of no advantage to Egypt, haAened the
^eak up of the Nubian kingdom, and early in the fourteenth century
f^ongola fell into the hands of the Arab tribe of Kanz or Kanz ad Dawla,
formerly the hereditary amirs of Aswdn It is the chief of this tribe
whom Ibn Battuta calls by the name of Ibn Kanz ad Dfn, and who,
though not himself a convert, may be reckoned quite fairly as the firA
Muslim king of Nubia (Marquart, 252 4)

The name Millf is the Fulam pronuncution of Mande or

379



NOTES

Manding, and was the name of the ruling tribe, not of the town.

The site of the latter has long been a matter of controversy. Cooley
(pp. 81-2) placed it near Segu, at a village called Binni “seven miles
above Samee,” and took the Sansara river to be a channel of the Niger .
Dehfosse' {H.S.N., II, 181) accepts the view that the site of MaUi
was “ a place situated on the left bank of the Niger, S.W. of Niamina
and S.S.W. of Moribugu, level with the villages of Konina and Kondu.
. . . Malli lay therefore a little to the weil of the present road from
Niamina to Kulikoro.” The name Sansara, given by Ibn Battuta to
the ^ream ten miles north of M^lh, was found by Barth to be ^HU
applied to the small tributary which joins the Niger ju^l below Niamina.
Marquart (105, igi) prefers Cooley’s view, but puts M^IM a little
lower down the river, a day’s march above SiUe (Sele), and identifies
it with Kugha or Juga, the Quioquia of the Portuguese.

[Since the writing of this note and preparation of the map, I find
that MM .Vidal and Gaillard claim to have definitely e^blished that
the name of Malli was Nyani, and that it was situated “ near the present
village of Nyani, on the left bank of the Sankarani, a little to the north
of Balandugu and to the south of Jeliba (Dieliba), the other capital of
the same empire,” t.e. at 11.22 N., 8.18 W., about 150 miles S.W.
of the position shown on' the map. See Demombynes, trans. of
al-‘Omari’s Masalik al-Absar, p. 52, note 2.]

Delafosse remarks that “ D6gM is the name of a kind of vulture
and also that of a demon among the Banmana and the Malinke, and
is often given as a name to men.”

The following is a brief account of the early negro empires.

The earliest Sudanic empire was that of Ghtoa (which was really
the title of its later Soninke rulers). This empire was founded about
the fourth century, apparently by some white immigrants.. The site
of its capital seems to have changed more than once. From the ninth
to the eleventh century the Soninke of Kumbi were mailers of the
Ghana empire, until its deftru£tion by the Almoravids of Morocco in
1076. A number of small Elates were constituted on its ruins, and
one of these, the Soninke dynaSly of the Kannte, whose capital was at
Sosso (to the weSl of Sansanding), recaptured Ghdna in 1^03 and
restored the Soninke empire. To this was due also the foundation
of WaMta, as the Muslim inhabitants of GhSna, refusing to live under
infidel rule, established themselves at the water-point of Walata or
Bird (see note 6). The conqueror, Sumanguru, was killed in battle
in 1235 with the Malinke, whose king SunjSta or Marf jSta annexed
the Soninke empire, was converted to Islam (see p. 329), and established
the new capital at MSlh. He captured and destroyed GhSna in 1240,
and died in 1255. After a succession of rulers, the next emperor of
importance was MusS (Ibn Battdta’s Mansa Musa), in whose reign
(1307-32) the MSlh empire reached its wideSt dimensions. Mdsa
was the grandson of a siSter of SunjSta. The reign of his son and



NOTES

successor Mansi Maghin (t 332-<S) marks a brief retrogression, but
under Mfisd’s brother Sulaymin (1336-59), the Mill! regained mucli
of their power and preiUge. "With his death there set in a sharp
decline, accentuated by civil wars. The Milll kingdom, however,
iHlI remained the moft powerful of the Niger stales until the rise of
the Songhay kingdom (see note 32), and did not finally disappear
until 1670.

The addition of “ under all circumihinces ” is a gentle hint that
things are not so well as they might be.

“ The eve of the 27th ^madin is known as the Lay/at a/~QaJr,
the “ Night of Power ” referred to in the Koran. It is befieved that
on this night the gates of Heaven are opened, and all prayers of the truly
devout are favourably received.

** Be/nl( in Mandingo means “ platform.” AJ-‘Omari describes
the as an ivory bench surmounted by an arch of tusks.

“ The Emperor Sulayman has commanded,” in Mandingo.

pelafosse remarks that this cuilom, like almoA all those described
by Ibn Battfita, has been retained down to the present day in moft of
the countries of the Sudan.

” See note 21 above.

” See note 31 below.

Quri Mansi is placed by Delafosse near the present villages of
Kolri and Massamana, N.E. of Sansanding, and not far from Ibn
Basra’s former halting place at Kiisakhfi (see note 12),

® Mima seems to have been one of the chief towns in the diihia
which Ibn Battiita metidons above under the name of Zigha (see note
t 3 )« In later times the name wasr applied to the area above the lakes
(and^ possibly including them), corresponding to part of modern
Masina. According to Barth, the site of Mfraa is iHU in eriflence,
though now desert^, a few miles weft of Lcre (Trave/tf Enel, ed.,

V.^487).

Timbuktu was annexed by Mansi Miisi after the conqueft of
Gao in 1325. In 1333 the town was pillaged and burned In a raid
hy the Mossi from Yatenga (Upper Volta), but was rebuilt by Sulay-
min shortly after his accession. The poet as-Sihill met Mansi Mfisi
at Mecca during the Pilgrimage, and was persuaded by the sultan to
accompany him back to the Sudan. He was the architeft of the
moj^ues at Gao and Timbuktu, and died at Timbuktu in 1 346.

Gao or Gaogao (which is apparently a variant of the original
name Kflgha) was an important trading ftation at the convergence
not only of the salt route from the weft and the trans-Saharan route
pom the north-eaft, but also the trans-continental trade-route. Early
m the eleventh century it became the capital of the ftate of Songhay
(Sopghoy), on the conversion to Islam of the firft Songhay dynaity',
which is said to have been of Berber origin. The Songhay kingdom
was annexed to Milll by Mansi Musi in 1325, but in 1335 the

381



NOTES


dynafty was re-e^lablished (with the title of sorinP)^ though it ^lill
remained in at lea^l nominal subjeftion to MdlH until the reign of
Sonnf ‘All (1465-92), the la^l ruler of the original Berber line, who
enlarged his kingdom chiefly at the expense of Mdllf. He was suc-
ceeded by his Soninke general Muhammad (1493-1529), the founder
of the askia dynasty, who brought Songhay to the height of its power.
The Songhay empire was broken up and the dyna^ extinguished by
the Moroccans, who captured Gao and Timbuktu in 1591.

'''' The existence of a cowry exchange in the Mdllf empire, alongside
the salt exchange, is conclusive evidence of the commercial relations
across the African continent referred to in note 14, as cowries are found
in Africa only on the ea^t coafl: between the Equator and Mozambique
{Grande Encyclopidie s.v. Cauri). In Ibn Battuta’s time, however,
cowries were imported by merchants from the north (al-‘Omari 75-76).

T^he description of the Bard^ma tribe, and particularly of their
women, corresponds very closely with Barth’s description of the
Taghama tribe to the south and S.W. of Air.


or Takaddd was at this time the largeil town In the
Tuareg country. Its Berber sultan, who was nominally subjeft to
the Emperor of Mdllf, is probably to be regarded as the ruling chief
of the Massufa (Sanh^ja). The problem of the site of Tagaddii is
not yet cleared up. It is generally taken, on the basis of Barth’s
Identification, to be Tegidda n’Tisemt, 97 miles W.N.W. of Agades.
Barth added that although “ nothing is knovra of the exigence of copper
hereabouts, a red salt is obtained from mines there. Gautier and
hudeau {Missions au Sahara, II, 257) also remark on the absence of
copper in the Sahara except at Tamegroun in the Ougarta range
(29.15 N,, 1.40 W.), and ^late that all the copper used in Air and in
Ahaggar comes from Europe. The absence of copper at Tegidda is
confirmed by F R. Rodd, who thinks that Ibn Battfita’s Tagaddd
nmst be looked for “ at some considerable distance south of Agades ”

( eop e of the Veil, 452-6). The meaning of the word Tegidda,
accor mg to the latter, is “ a small hollow where water collefts,’* and
^e name is applied to a number of different places {Cf. H.S.N., II, 193 ;
Marquart, 98) The existence of copper mines at Tagadda is, however,
confirmed by al- Omarf on the authority of Mansd Musd (tr. Demom-
bynes, I, 80-81). ^

Kiibar is Gobir, the country north of the present Sokoto, and
bordering on Tagaddd to the south. Whether Z^ghdy
^ the diftri£t S.W. of Timbuktu, or for the central areas

^Jicertab vaguely known as Zaghdwa, is quite


^^^ds for Kanem, rather than Bornu in Nigeria. The
extended across the central Sahara
inf-n XT eastwards towards D^r Fur, as well as

Northern Nigeria. This Idris (135 3-76, not to be confused with

382



NOTES

the famous Mai Idris of Bornu in the smccntK century) was die son
of one Ibnlhfm Nikilc, wlio claimed to be of South Arabun descent
and was sulun of Kancm from 1307-16 The concealment of the
king was due to a bebcf m the magical quahtics of his oiHcc (Barth,
I, 638-9 , Meek, Nertifra Nfgenat 1 , 154)

Jawjawa, more often spelled l6i\vkaw or Kuku, the Gaogao of
Leo Afneanus, is cither Kula on Lake Fitri in Wadai, S £ of Kancm
or else Kuka m Bomu (Marquart 95 Hartmann in M S O S
XV^, 176 _/■) 1 have not been able to trace the Muwartabun or

Murtabdn

The corps of tcutfin of ” guards ** at the court of the sultan of
Morocco formed the nucleus of a landing army, asdiAinfl from the
tnbal mihtia {\teiiltk at AhtSu tr Demombyncs, Index sv)
Demombynes reads, W'lth one MS, Initiyun in place of Yanitibun
(t&iJ aro, n a)

Kihir IS a variant of the rume Air, given to the sparsely populated
hilly country lying to the south of In Azawa or /\siu, the well referred
to below at the ^int where the routes leading to Twit and Egypt
divide It IS Annge that Ibn Battuta should apparently refer to
Kdhir as separated from the mam ndge by a three da>s* march

Haggar or Hoggar, the Berber (Tuareg) tribw inhabiting the
central Saharan massif, the anoent Atlas mountains, now called Ahaggar
after its inhabitant

Buda Ues at the northern end of the Twit valley at 28 N , 0 30 E
An account of the drilrid and its hrilory is given by Gautier and
Chudeau, Muttons au Sahara (Part, 1908), 1 , 250 According to
the Arabic geographen, locu^ were also eaten by the inhabitants
of Marrikush
